Story_ID: 83348
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Chester L. Blair, first name C-H-E-S-T-E-R, L, middle initial, Blair, B-L-A-I-R.  Now I carry two middle names, but most of the time, I omit Laughton Ellison, which is a little cumbersome when you're writing it all the time, but I'm commonly referred to as Chester L. Blair.
Speaker 1: But it could be Chester Ellison--Laughton Ellison Blair?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: That's quite a name.  Is there a story around that?
Speaker 2: Well, my--I adopted my godparent's name some years--while I was in high school.  And her name was Ellison, and she's responsible for my coming to Chicago [Illinois], which is based on the fact that she had talked so much about the exposition that was here that was so significant around the world and what a great city this was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to get to that story, I think, as we go along.  But sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 2, 1928.  I was born in a little town called Streetman, Texas.  My birth certificate is registered at Corsicana, Texas, which is the largest city in that general area, where they have a county seat.
Speaker 1: Now what is that town again, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Corsicana, C-O-R-S-I-C-A-N-A, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where is Corsicana near that we would know about? I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Corsicana is about half way between Dallas, Texas and Houston, Texas.  Houston being at the south end and Dallas being more toward the central part of Texas and in between those two, if you just go straight north, is Corsicana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell me what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney at law.
Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 2, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in my office, one of my conference rooms as I'm talking to you.
Story_ID: 83349
Speaker 1: All right, now before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is something different every meal and I don't like leftovers.  Other than that I can eat just about anything, and I really don't have a single food that I eat on a regular basis that I consider my favorite.
Speaker 1: But you like something different every day?
Speaker 2: Every meal yes, and I don't like to eat the same thing tomorrow that I eat today or I just like to change--I like to change my meals and the thing that's on em.  I--for example, I don't like beef for two or three times or chicken or fish or whatever, I like a variety of food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now sir do you have a favorite color
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the spring, because things seem to become alive and I enjoy the--the change in the season at that time, most.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite vacation destination is the Freeport, Bahamas.  I go there every year in January with my wife and we spend a week there on vacation.  That's one of the vacations we take and I like it most.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying sir?
Speaker 2: I really don't recognize one that I use often.  No, I don't think I could say that I have a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 83350
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I want to ask you about your family tree.  How far can you trace your ancestors back?
Speaker 2: I can only go back to my grandparents.  Part of that may be because I have not lived within my family circle very much.  I have been pretty much outside the family circle for most of my life except for about forteen years.  And I mean by that that I have not lived in the city where they lived or I haven't had the kind of ongoing active contact that some people have had, and as a result, I don't have a lot of information that I remember about my ancestors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now as far as you know, are your ancestors from Texas, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Is that as far as you can trace them?
Speaker 2: That's as far as I can trace them, actually is from Texas.
Speaker 1: What were your grandparents like and what do they remember--I guess they remember part of the nineteenth century, I guess, at least?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, on my father--my paternal grandfather lived in a place called Cheneysboro, which is not far from Corsicana [Texas] and it's not far from Streetman [Texas].  He was a land owner and a pastor, and he spent a lot of time with the church.  He had a number of children.  He had fifteen as a matter of fact.  There were two girls and one daughter.  And as a result of the two girls, one passed away at birth, the other was able to survive and she lived a full life.  But I know very little about him other than the fact that he had a farm, he was a preacher and I visited with him from time to time when I was very small.
Speaker 1: Sir, do you know what denomination he was?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist, alright.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 83351
Speaker 1: On my mother's side, my grandmother who probably I have the most fond recollection of, was Mary Lou and she lived in Streetman [Texas] and that's where my--well sort of out in the country from Streetman.  I remember being--living with her.  But as far as going beyond that, I can't tell you anything about my earlier family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her, you know, full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Yes.  My mother's full name is Crentslean, that's the first name, C-R-E-N-T-S-L-E-A-N Thomas that was her last name.
Speaker 2: Now, is there a story around her first name?
Speaker 1: Not that I know about other than the fact that everyone called her Quick, because they didn't like having to go through this whole business of Crentslean and being able to pronounce it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: She didn't have a story about it?  She doesn't know where her name came from?
Speaker 1: No, she never told me--
Speaker 2: Did your grandmother ever tell you--she never talked about why she named your mother that?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I never got that information.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I feel that perhaps I'm not as fortunate as a number of people I know who spent a lot of time with grandparents, spent a lot of time with other relatives as you know, probably I should tell you, I was a run-a-way at fourteen, I ran away from home.
Speaker 2: We're going to get to that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now we're going to get to that, but we wanted ask you about your mother first before we went that far.
Story_ID: 83352
Speaker 1: Now, when was she [Crentslean Thomas, mother] born and what was her birthday?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you her birthdate, but I know she was born--she was eighty-nine years old when she passed away.  And she was born in January, January third, that was her birthday, but the year, I don't recall the year that she was born.
Speaker 1: When did she pass?
Speaker 2: She passed away five years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born in the 20th century, she was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what was your mother like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a house keeper and a cook.  She used to work in the homes of wealthy families, of course, white and keep house.  She did that for most of her life and as she got older then she started to work in restaurants.  One restaurant she worked in she was the salad lady, they called her the salad girl.  She brought me down once and I--I worked there for a brief period during the summer, one summer from school, and I did whatever odd things they had for me to do, cleaning floors, or dishes or things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her temperament like? You know, was she...
Speaker 2: Well her temperament was pretty even tempered.  She never was a person who was violent in her emotions as far as you know bawling you out about things.  She never did anything like that.  She did have some concerns about things around her and she was not always happy with them.  She, in my opinion probably worried a little more than I thought she should of.  But apparently it had no impact upon her life expectancy inasmuch as she lived until she was eighty-nine.  But I didn't find her thoughts about things around her to be an attitude that I thought was good.  I thought she worried a little more than she should of.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things was she worried about?
Speaker 2: Well, she'd worry about what people did in the community or she might be worried about whether or not she had sufficient money to do some of the things that she wanted to do or about what was going on at school with the kids and in the neighborhood where she lived and things like that, ordinary things nothing of any magnitude.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did she have a chance to go to school where she grew up?
Speaker 2: She did not go to school very long.  Of course she was able to read and write quite well, but she apparently dropped out of school early because she had--started having children and I think that had some impact upon her being able to go to school, plus in the country where she lived, she was not living in an urban area as a young person, she was living in a town called Streetman, Texas.  And everybody started to work early, so that had some impact as well.  And the people went to school when there was--during the season when you couldn't work in the fields, which would be primarily in the winter time.
Story_ID: 83353
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your father.  Can you give us his name and spell it for us, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's name is Benny Chester Blair, but he originally--on his birth certificate, it was B C Blair, and when he went into the military, many, many years ago, they told him he had to have a name, he couldn't use initials.  So that's when they gave him the name Benny and they asked him about his kids and he mentioned the names of his kids and they gave him my first name.  So he became Benny Chester Blair as far as the Army was concerned, but mostly he was just B C among most of his family friends.
Speaker 1: Now that's sort of a syndrome that you notice.  I guess a few years ago, a lot of black people named their children names with just two letters, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, is there any story about why he got B C?
Speaker 2: No, but I think the reason that many of them did that was because of literacy.  It was easier to do the initial, as far as the kids were concerned, and sometimes the record-keepers didn't always handle the birth certificates well because most of the children born during the time I was being born in the area where I was born, were given birth by midwives.  And the midwives, some of them didn't write very well or have knowledge of the language and the birth certificates would be applied for some time later for purposes of putting it on record with the government, and I think that had something to do with the manner in which these short names--first names, because of course most people in America are followed by their last names as opposed to their first names.  Whereas in some other countries, many of the Hispanic countries, first names sometimes have an impact on what is being kept as a record of the person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when was your father born and where?
Speaker 2: My father was born in a place called Cheneysboro, that's where my grandfather had his farm and everything.  My father died--he was eighty-eight years old.  I don't remember his year of birth, but he was born in the month of September, I believe it was the fifth of September that he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was born around the turn of the century thereabouts?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He died oh, I think it was in--around 1991, something like that.
Speaker 1: Yes, I put him right upon--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --The turn of the century.
Speaker 2: Yes, right at the turn of the century, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your father like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a person who moved around a lot.  He liked to travel.  He never stayed very long at one place.  I think early on he was one of the first children of my grandfather to leave and travel some place from where they were living at the time.  Streetman, Texas, was not too far from Cheneysboro and he used to come to that area, and that's how he met my mother [Crentslean Thomas].  And, of course, he spent time there then he would go to other parts of Texas and in later years, he would leave and go to other parts of the country.  He's lived in many, many places, California, about a half dozen towns he lived in California.  He lived in Dallas, Texas.  I believe he lived in Teague, Texas for a period of time, possibly Meharry.  Those were just a few of the ones that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't home very much?
Speaker 2: No, well, my mother and my father were not together more than a couple of years after I was born.  And as a result I never knew of them as a family unit.  And probably part of the reason why I don't know a lot about him is because he had this habit of just sort of moving on.
Speaker 1: So you didn't get very close to him?
Speaker 2: Well, not in the earlier stages.  I think I probably was closer to him during the last fifteen years of his life than I was before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said they both met there in Streetman, Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Okay.
Story_ID: 83354
Speaker 1: All right, now, I want you to reflect on your childhood and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Streetman [Texas].
Speaker 2: The things--the smells that I can remember in Streetman was that on Friday people would go to Streetman.  Now Streetman was the urban part of a place, of a city and--but there was an area called "the valley" and that's where I lived that was not too far from Streetman and the people would leave there and go into town on Fridays to buy food, groceries and things like that.  One of the significant things that would happen was that there would always be fish sandwiches bought while in Streetman on Friday.  That was the little special thing that happened.  And I remember being there and smelling the odor of that fish and being so anxious to get a chance to get my sandwich, walking around and looking, seeing what was happening but at the same time not interfering with the cook.  But that's one of the sounds.  One of the sights, of course, would be when my grandmother [Mary Lou Thomas] and my great uncle would go to a creek in the valley to get water and there was this big barrel that had to be filled with water.  And the wagon would have to be backed into the creek and once it backed in, it would create a lot of dirt and therefore it was always a problem to try to ease the wheels back close enough into the water but not so far that it would get stuck, and in a way that it would not create--stir up the dirt the bottom of the lake, of the creek rather, and so that they could get enough water into the barrel and then get it out so that there would be fresh water.  And that was a source of water except when it was a lot of rain, water would be caught in barrels but usually not enough to carry you all the time so that you have to go to the creek to do it.  And I used to remember--I used to remember seeing that.  I had an uncle who also used to make corn whiskey and one very challenging sight that I saw that I always remembered and I don't know why, but he took me into the woods with him one day and he had asked me if I wanted to go with him, I said yes.  So when I got there, he pulled up in the wagon and stopped and after he stopped, he said okay, we're there, let's get out.  So I got out and once I got out, he got down on the ground and started brushing away leaves.  And when he brushed away the leaves, there was a--you could hear him knock on something.  There was a sound.  And he lifted off the top of a barrel that had been buried in the ground, even with the surface of the ground, he stuck his hand down in there and dipped up what apparently was mash whiskey that he was making and he had--he had it sitting there, I guess, trying to do something.  I don't know how to make whiskey, but I remember there was corn in it and it was liquid mixed with it and he sort of tasted it and he said, here you want a taste?  I tasted that stuff it was the worst I've ever tasted in my life.  But that was--that was another sight that I--
Speaker 1: So he was making some kind of alcoholic beverage, with the corn up under the (unclear)--buried in the--
Speaker 2: In the ground, yes, yes.  Yeah, that was--that was one of my interesting experiences back those days.
Story_ID: 83355
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I sort of hung around the older people.  I was always trying to find out what they were doing and why they were doing it.  I'd ask a lot of questions.  I didn't spend a lot of time playing with the other kids. I was not the kind that was--that needed a lot of attention to look after me or anything like that, but I just wanted to see, I had an inquisitive eye, I wanted to find out what was going on and I'd ask a lot of questions and sometimes they'd tell me, well, that's none of your business.  But that never stopped me from asking questions.  I kept on asking questions.
Speaker 1: What kind of things were you interested in, were they political things?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  Back in those days it was just little practical things.  For example when they would smoke meat to keep it--to keep it cured--to cure it so that it could be used over a period of time without spoiling, and I'd be asking questions about that, why they did it that way and so on.  For example, the little sheds that were made kind of with a top, something like this and it would be low on the ground and inside there would be sort of a little hole dug down there in which they would put sweet potatoes and then put straw on top of the sweet potatoes in order to keep them there during the winter so that they would--they wouldn't spoil.  I would be asking questions about why did they do it that way and what effect it had on it and a lot of times they couldn't even tell me.  But I still asked the questions.  Now this is when I was very small.  That basically was it.  I always asked questions wherever I was.  And I sometimes--I would be going someplace with my mother [Crentslean Thomas] and she would say, now, remember you're not supposed to start getting into other people's business (laughter).
Story_ID: 83356
Speaker 1: Now, what were the stimuli around you that you know that kind of stirred you up.  Did you have access to radio, or newspapers, or books?
Speaker 2: Well, I had--I had access to--once I left the country, of course, I was in the country when I was very small and then of course my mother [Crentslean Thomas] moved to small towns and we had a radio and I'd listen to the radio.  But I think I spent more time reading than I did listening to the radio because seemingly, it had a little more meaning to me by the things that I was reading.  They would be books, stories that you would read kid stories and things like that.  As I got older I began to be concerned about employment, working, being able to earn money.  So I didn't have a lot of time, a lot of spare time.  If I were working during the summer and I didn't have to go to school, I would be working full time.  If I were working during the school period of course it was part time work and I didn't have a lot of time in between.  On one of the jobs I had was throwing newspapers, that was one of the early jobs that I had that sort of got me involved with the newspapers.  And I started to read newspapers quite a bit.  And I would take an arm full of newspapers and I would say to myself, I'm gon sell all these newspapers today, and I would keep going until I sold the last newspaper.  I was selling newspapers like the "Kansas City Call".  I don't know if you've ever heard of that one which is an African American Newspaper, "The Pittsburgh Courier".  I never knew of anything about the "Chicago Defender" until I came to Chicago [Illinois]. But those two were very popular in Texas and those are the ones that I used to sell.  Back in those days the Daily papers were being sold primarily by adults and they didn't spend any time having kids selling those papers unless you worked for some adult who had a route.  But I had a lot of fun selling newspapers, knocking on doors, talking to people and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 86169
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, let's talk about school.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to school in Streetman [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I went to school in Streetman, it was a one-room school, and all of the classes were--all of the grades were in the same room, of course.
Speaker 1: Now this is a segregated school?
Speaker 2: This is a segregated school.  And my teacher's name was Miss Livingston.  I don't know why I seem to remember it because I don't talk about it very much, but always whenever her name comes to mind, I remember her.  But the reason I remember Miss Livingston is the fact that when I was a little kid, you know, I guess I must have been maybe seven, maybe eight years old or less, she was teaching a class and one day I was listening to her and she said you know any of you in here, and she was talking to all of us together at that time, all the classes, can do anything you want to do.  Whatever it is that you believe that you'd like to do, you can do it.  And I want you to be able to know that.  And she said it with such a positive attitude and it seemed so unreal to me for her to say something like that, you know, and I'm the kind of kid who had been talking a lot to adults asking questions.  So, when she said that, it was a challenge, I said to her, I said, you mean me, I can do anything I want to do, she said, yes.  She says any goal or anything that you'd like to do, you could do it.  And I stood up and I pointed out the window, I said, do you mean I can have a nice car like the one you got out there if I wanted to?  She says you can do anything you want to, and that's how she answered it.  And I started testing it.  And I still am testing it all these years deciding that I can do whatever I want to do if I'm really willing to put in the effort to do it and that has pretty much guided my career.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I don't remember the name of the school, but I remember the teacher.
Speaker 1: Did the school own the building itself or was it part of the church?
Speaker 2: It was a church building.  That's where the school was, inside of a church.  And it was in an area near a road, one of the good roads.  There was kind of a fork in the road at that location.  And it was--this was down in the valley, now this was not in Streetman.  Streetman was the nearest town.  But there was enough kids to go there to have her busy looking after them.  And I always remembered her, she's a wonderful lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mrs. Livingston?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Livingston, yes. I don't remember her first name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your favorite, I guess, thing to do in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, ask questions. I would--I don't remember having any particular course or any particular thing that was going on there, part of it is due to the fact that I don't remember so much about it, I think that's the reason why I don't--I'm not able to tell you what I really liked to do at that stage anyway.
Speaker 1: Was it really tough?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That was during the '30s' [1930s] the Depression?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the thing is it was a period when it got cold, although in Texas in that area, the temperature never dropped, go down probably about thirty occasionally but most of the time, it would be between the thirties and the forties.  But it would get cold, and we had a big stove in the middle of the room that we--I would gather around if it was really a cold day, but other than that if it was comfortable then people were sitting in particular areas of the room on a basis of what grades they were in.
Speaker 1: So there's no particular subject matter?
Speaker 2: No subject matter that caught me at that stage, no not then, later on.  I had started taking interest in different things.
Speaker 1: So at this point you hadn't really even thought about law or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, not at that stage.  No, I had not.
Story_ID: 86170
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any relatives that were doing professional things?
Speaker 2: No.  The only professional person that I knew in my life was my [paternal] grandfather and he was a minister and he had a church and of course he--fairly well to do by those standards.  I don't think I ever saw him in anything but a suit.  Part of the fact is because the only time I would see him would be on weekends if my dad [Benny Chester Blair] took me over there.  I would be there for the weekend and he always wore a suit but he'd have his coat off from time to time but he had on dark pants and a white shirt and this sort of thing.  I think he preferred that as opposed to wearing work clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did that really impress you?
Speaker 2: It certainly did.  It impressed me a lot.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he was the only man that I saw who would be dressed like that.  Most of the other people that I would see would have on overalls and you know, on weekends they'd have clean shirts and pressed overalls, starched overalls.  But my grandfather he wore that blue suit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it's been said of you, or I heard that you wear suits all the time.  Even if you go to a ballgame you would have a suit on.  I don't know I can't imagine you in the Bahamas with a suit on.  It's been said that you wear suits all the time.
Speaker 2: Well, I tend to wear suits much of the time, I do.  Now I do have periods when I'm not wearing a suit.  If I'm at a ballgame, I probably have on a jacket.  I always wear jacket of some sort.  If it's warm, I wear a lightweight something that fits in with the temperature.  But I tend to most of the time not go in short sleeves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even in the Bahamas much of the time I have on some light jacket.  I feel comfortable that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--do you think it's because of your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I'm certain it has come from my grandfather.  That is one of the things that always impressed me about him.
Speaker 1: There's something about having a suit on too, I guess, it presents an image to other people that you expect to be respected.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what it was.  In the south you were always "boy" and you were always looked on with disrespect.  Nobody really cared about you and what I'm talking about now is among whites.  You were always looked upon as a threat to something or you were being told to get something, work, you know, bring me this or that or the other.  And as a result, I always wanted to feel that I could be just as important as they were.
Story_ID: 86171
Speaker 1: One of the things that I did early on was to work as a delivery boy in a drug store.  I used to deliver drugs from a drug store that was in the black neighborhood, but there would be many whites that would order prescription filled drugs from that store because it was near to a white community.  And I would ride my bicycle into the area and deliver whatever prescriptions had been ordered and I got a chance to sort of see what was going on in their homes where I normally would not be invited or be there otherwise, because I never worked in their homes.  But it sort of gave me a little peep into what was going on in the white community.  And the tendency was for you not to go into the white community because if you did, you might not fare so well, people wanted to know what are you doing, what are you doing here, so on.  As I got much older I worked--I remember one summer I worked as a letter carrier and I delivered mail in the white community and by that time it seemed to have been changed--a change had taken place because people were a little more thoughtful of you, a little more respectful of you.  And if you bring mail and put it in the box or something or if you were on your way to their house, bringing mail and somebody was on the street, particularly the ladies, the women were much more friendly to you than the men.  They would say, oh, hey boy, bring me my mail or let me have it or something like that, if they were walking down the street or they were next door talking to someone, you'd just give them the mail and you keep going.  But that was one of the sore spots of being in the south, was the manner in which people treated you and the kind of respect that was shown to you and there was none, there was none. I never found any during my childhood where I was really respected.
Story_ID: 86172
Speaker 1: About the greatest respect that I got was when I worked at a Wine Garden Grocery Store.  I guess by then I was about fourteen, thirteen or fourteen.  I used to sweep and clean up and I would clean the block where they chopped the meat.  On a particular day the butcher was mad because the person who would pick up his meat hadn't come to work.  And I was fairly large for my age.  I grew up fast and just stopped, you know, I didn't get any bigger.  But he said to me, "Boy do you know how to drive?"  I say, "Sure I know how to drive."  You know I paused before I ansered him.  And he said, and I don't know if I used the word "sure" or not, but I let him know that I knew how to drive.  And he said well somebody's got to go pick up that meat, and I can't leave here, but there's gon be real trouble if we don't have that meat here in a little while because people gonna be coming in here and they're gonna want their meat and I'm gonna be in trouble.  He says you don't have to go far.  He says we got a truck out there.  You know where the truck is don't you?  I said, oh, yes, I've seen the truck.  He says, well, here, here're the keys, you go over to the meat packing place and tell them that I sent you over there for the meat and he scribbled something on some paper.  And he had a list of stuff that I took.  I went downstairs with the keys and I said, what am I gon do?  Now how am I gonna handle this thing.  And you know, I felt real strong--now here's a person, my family didn't have a car, I had been in a car once with my father [Benny Chester Blair].  It was one of these old Model T Fords and he had driven me in it.  He took me and rode me around and so on, but I still didn't know anything about the car.  I got in this truck and I started trying to fiddle with the--with the gears.  I had seen people drive but I hadn't really been involved with it.  I backed the truck out, knocked one of these hub caps off of another car and I thought I was in trouble then and I said well I gotta get this meat.  I was just determined.  Drove the--it was one of these van types of, I don't remember what they used to call them then.  I think they used to be called vans.  And I drove down the highway and I kept trying to get the gear to go like it was supposed to, you know they had the gear on the steering wheel and it wouldn't go into place.  So I just stopped, I said this thing ought to work right.  And all of a sudden I heard this loud noise in back of me and the screeching of tires and it was a big truck in back of me and the guy jumped out of the truck around there and said you little black son of a bitch, what are you doing, stopping in the middle of the highway like this.  You better get this thing out of here.  So I was just you know a little nervous and I got back in and I pushed it into gear, first it went back and then I pushed it in another gear and it went forward and I drove.  It must have been in low gear because it was dragging along all the way to the meat place.  When I got there, I went and I got a man, I told him, I says I can't back, I know how to drive, but I can't back.  So he got one of the fellows to back the truck up for me to get the meat.  Got the meat took it back, took it upstairs and the guy patted me on the back and thanked me and that was the first time I recall any white person ever giving me credit for anything.  He was so proud that I had gotten the meat for him.
Speaker 2: That was quite a story there.  You can't drive and--?
Speaker 1: No, I couldn't drive, couldn't drive.
Speaker 2: It could have been a lot--
Speaker 1: More traumatic and tragic.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I just--I don't know how I managed to do it, but I did.  And at that stage I begin to have a little different attitude about people.  The kind of racism that exists in blacks has an impact upon how other people think about you.  And as a result of my having this kind of reaction with him cause me to begin to think differently about white people.  I started to begin to think that all people aren't bad, some people are different and I just took a more modest attitude about it. And we became great friends for the period of time that I worked there and after that I went onto something else.  But that was a very significant experience in my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how old were you at that time?
Speaker 1: I must have been thirteen or fourteen, somewhere in there because it was not long after that incident that I went someplace else.
Story_ID: 86173
Speaker 1: Now tell us about that.  Now what happened, did you finish grade school, I mean, did you go through the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: I don't recall ever graduating from grade school.  I know I went in and out of various grade schools, but I don't ever recall graduating.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you were fourteen, most people are starting their freshman year in high school, is that what you were doing then?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I think maybe I was at Jack Yates High School [Houston, Texas] at that time.  I probably was but I don't really remember whether or not I had gotten to high school or whether I was--I went to Blackshear Elementary School.  I don't remember graduating.  I do know that I ultimately graduated from Jack Yates but that was much later.  I left school during that--during the end of the year, and I started to work on a construction crew as a water boy.  And this was when I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: So you just left school?
Speaker 2: No, no, school was out.
Speaker 1: School was out. Okay.
Speaker 2: This was during the summer, and I started working on this construction crew and I met a fellow there that was older than I was and he sort of looked after me and if anybody started to yell at me or something like that, he would talk to me and tell me how to handle myself in order that I wouldn't get yelled at.  And he was doing labor work, carrying lumber and stuff like that.  He wasn't, well I guess he may have been three or four years, maybe five years older than me.  He wasn't in school anymore.  Anyway, while we were working, I had a newspaper, cause you know I had had newspaper routes and things like that that I used to throw the papers, not throw the papers, sell the black papers.  So it started me reading newspapers and I started reading the "Houston Post" the "Houston Chronicle" and various papers.  And in this particular paper I was reading in the want ad section and it had a section there that said that they were hiring people and I don't remember the amount of money but it seemed such an outstanding amount of money compared to what I was making there and what he was making.  So--and I wasn't too happy with my environment, it seems I wasn't going anywhere, I didn't see any future around there.  I had had experiences going--looking around the downtown business district when I was working at the Wine Gardens [Grocery Story] and I was looking for professional people and what they did, you know, because I didn't want to be in the farm.  And I saw black lawyers they were--they had little offices and paper all over the walls and everywhere, you know, stacks of papers, little desk in a corner and they didn't seem to have any--any real professional environment around them that bothered me.  Then I--because in school, you see the school teachers sort of keep things in order, and I'm looking at these guys and I said gee whiz, as a result, I said well I'm going to see what they do in court.  So I went to one of the courts and I sat in the back and I was watching to see what was going on and the white lawyers were walking around in their white shirts and ties, seersucker suits and they had on, cause this was during the summer you see.  And on one occasion I saw a black lawyer in the courtroom and he was seated on one of the back seats.  The white lawyers were all sitting up front.  I couldn't tell who was doing what, but I knew from time to time one would get up and go before the court and do whatever he had to do and then he'd go back get his coat and his papers and he'd leave the room.  This black guy sit there and sit there and sit there and finally he got up and it was yes sir, no sir, and he was you know, typical slave master kind of environment, as far as I was concerned.  And that bothered me cause I thought he should have--be exercising more power than what he was exercising.  So I left and I said this is a terrible place.  There must be something better environment than this, and of course, you read about it and I'd been told about how it was in the northern parts of the country by Miss Ellison, school teacher, and by some of the others.
Story_ID: 86174
Speaker 1: So when I saw this article in the paper saying that they were hiring people to go to Hanford, Washington to work to do construction work that they were building housing and things like that.  I said you know we ought to get out of here, that's what I told the other guy, he says what are you talking about?  And I showed him where they said they provide transportation, they would provide you housing when you got there and they would pay X number of dollars.  On the basis of that, I kept telling him about it because it kept running in the paper.  And finally he says well, I'm gonna go down there and check on it.  So he went down and he checked on it and he signed up, he didn't just check on it, he signed up.
Speaker 2: So he went to Washington?
Speaker 1: No, no, he hadn't gone.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --He signed up because you had to sign up in advance.
Speaker 2: Oh, he had to s--okay.
Speaker 1: And then the--then I--after he told me he had signed up, I went down there to sign up.  And they said well let me see your identification.  I pulled out a social security card.  Say we don't mean that we talking about your registration--your registration information.  I said, oh, I don't have that with me, and I left.  Well during that period, this was during--the draft had started in the United States.  It was in the '40s' [1940s] and you--everybody had to have a registration card to do almost anything.  So what I then did was to go back and I told him what happened he said, yeah, man you can't do anything around here without some type of registration.  I said, okay, I said, well, where do people register?  He told me he said, but you can't--you're supposed to register when you're eighteen.  I said, I understand.  What I did was to go--I missed work one day, I went and I registered, and I got myself a registration card.  I told em I was eighteen.  I gave em birthdates and stuff that matched eighteen, and I came back and I said I got my card and he says well what does that mean?  I said I'm going too.  And he said, I don't think you should do that.  I says, I'm going.  He says, well that's your business.  Well, he didn't know my family or anybody else, I just knew him at work.  I went and signed up and I left town.  My mother [Crentslean Thomas] doesn't know where I am and nobody else.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the summer time?
Speaker 1: This is in the summer.  This is in the summer.  And I went to Hanford, Washington, they took us on the train to Hanford, Washington.  And man that was something.
Story_ID: 86175
Speaker 1: I was just fascinated with the, you know, a whole different environment.  And the people were not treating you quite like they were treated you back in Houston [Texas].  Because even in the north where there was segregation the people did not treat you as if you were a slave or something like that because you had a whole different class of people.  Those people had not owned anything or anything.  So I worked there and I was unloading cement that was--they had five bags on one of these two-wheelers, you had to take it off of the--off of the box cars and take it and stack it.  I was able to do that.  They said one guy had fell out one day and then from to time that would happen because it was so hot in the box cars, see it was 110 degrees inside the box cars.  And one of the things that worked in my benefit it was because I was so young, I was able to go in and out, it didn't really bother me.  And the older people, this guy who passed out was forty years old, he was considered an old man, you know.  In any event I did that work and the next thing I did was continue reading the paper and I saw in the paper that they were hiring at the shipyard in Vancouver [sic, Vanport, Oregon], and I told my friend about it and so he said well we ought to go over there and get involved with this.  So then we left the Hanford [Washington] place and went to Vancouver [sic] and got hired.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you travel (unclear) from place to place?
Speaker 1: Oh, you had to ride a bus.  You had to catch a bus to go, there was no cars, unlike--people had cars but I mean, not a lot of cars on the street.
Speaker 2: I asked because so many people talk about just jumping on trains.
Speaker 1: Yes, well this was-Vancouver [sic] wasn't too far.  We could ride the bus.  So we caught the bus so we went to Vancouver and he signed up and he got them to teach him to be a welder, and I tried to get to be a welder too and they said no you're eighteen, you're gonna be drafted any day now, we can't train you--we can't invest money in training you, but you can do chipping.  So they made a chipper out of me.  They had--you know what a chipper is--they had a piece of metal that would go inside of a gun, it was made like a gun.  And when you squeeze the handle, it would push a instrument back in and back out that was used to chip out metal that had been welded that was not put in properly and then it could be re-welded.  Then you had different types of tools, some shape like a diamond, some flat and so on.  So they let me do that.  And so I started climbing around the hulls of ships chipping and I did that for a while then I became ill, very ill.
Story_ID: 86176
Speaker 1: I caught--apparently I caught pneumonia or something or the flu, I don't which, but I was in the hospital for two weeks and of course somewhere during that period of time the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came to my house, my mother's [Crentslean Thomas] house, wanted to know where I was and she said what do you mean, she says I don't know, he left here and we haven't been able to find him.  And he says well he's a draft dodger.  And she said draft dodger, my baby's no draft dodger.  This is what she told me she said, she says he's only fourteen years old.  He says well our records here says he's a draft dodger, so that's when I got a birth certificate.  My mother went to or had somebody get the information from the county seat to show what my actual age was and after that apparently they stopped looking for me, but then she started really looking for me in earnest.  And when I got sick was when--but I actually, I think it was before that, that the draft dodger thing came up because I had sent her a couple of letters and she had been telling me to come home.  And then when I got ill, I sent her a letter and told her that I was sick and so on and so she was very upset and concerned about it.  She told my father [Benny Chester Blair], asked him if he would go and see if he could locate me because he was living in some other part of the country but she knew where he was.  And believe it or not, he left where he was living, came to Vancouver [sic, Vanport, Oregon], Washington and started to live in Vancouver, Washington.  Took me out of--I got out of the hospital, started to work himself and got me back in school, and I started going to Jefferson High School in Portland, Oregon.  And I--I don't know--I don't remember what grade I started in, but in any event, I was almost a year from graduation when I left there and went back to Texas.
Story_ID: 84390
Speaker 1: We're ready to roll now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So okay, now sir, you said you were in Seattle [Washington]?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was in Vancouver--
Speaker 1: Vancouver, Washington, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Washington.  You know, I said Vancouver and that is an error, Vanport [Oregon].
Speaker 1: Vanport.
Speaker 2: Vanport.  Where I said Vancouver I should have said Vanport.  See Vanport is right near Portland, Oregon.  And I wish to correct the tape to point out that when I was talking about Vancouver, I was talking about Vanport.  Vanport is a community that was developed by the army for military people and when they weren't using certain portions of it then civilian people lived in those areas in the housing and it was right across the river from Portland, Oregon, and not too far from Hanford, Washington, where I was.
Story_ID: 84391
Speaker 1: In any event--
Speaker 2: So you got to your senior year and you said, in high school [Jefferson High School, Portland, Oregon] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I got, yeah I got to the senior year, I was coming onto my senior year in high school at Portland [Oregon].  While I was there my dad [Benny Chester Blair] paid for me to take voice lessons because I always liked to sing, and I remember he was paying two dollars and forty cents for half hour of voice lessons and that was because I had gotten into the men's or the boy's glee club at Jefferson High School [Portland, Oregon] and he had recommended to my father that I had a pretty good voice and maybe he should try to get some training for me.  And sure enough as a result of that training I sang on the radio for the rest of the time I was in Portland, I sang on the radio, on radio station "KALE" with a group.  The group was all white.  I was the only black in the group and I was the lead singer.  And we did popular songs and things like that.  That was quite an important experience for me.
Speaker 2: What were some of the songs you--
Speaker 1: You know I wish I could tell you.  I have no idea what the songs were back at that time.  It seems that I've crowded so much information in terms of experience, but I don't remember the songs.  There was an article that appeared in the "Portland Oregonian" with my picture saying that I was singing on "KALE" as a singer.  And interestingly enough the picture was taken, I had a hat on, but that was--I'm trying to remember.  I think that was back in about 1946, about 1945 or '46 [1946] is when I did that.  I have--I think I have the picture at home now from the newspaper.
Story_ID: 84392
Speaker 1: After, after I got out of the hospital and I had started to school and spent the time at Jefferson [High School, Portland, Oregon], my mother [Crentslean Thomas] kept writing my dad [Benny Chester Blair], telling him that she wanted me to come home, she didn't think I should be there, and I was too far away from the family and so on.  So finally one day he said to me he says your mother is driving me crazy with letters telling me that you should come home.  And he said do you want to go back to Houston [Texas]? I said no, I'm not interested in going back down there.  He says well, I think maybe just for the sake of your mom you should do that.  I said, okay.  So put me on a train, I went back to Houston. And when I got there, I had started in the eleventh grade at Jack Yates High School [Houston, Texas]. And I spent a year and I graduated.  I graduated in 1947 in February.  Once I graduated in 1947, February, I left again and came to Chicago in April and that was the only time I had lived in Houston since I had left and gone away to Washington.
Story_ID: 84393
Speaker 1: (Clearing throat).
Speaker 2: While you were gone your mother [Crentslean Thomas] moved from Streetman [Texas] to Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  Well no, part of the time what I'm telling you about, we had moved out of Streetman quite early.  And we had moved around in a lot of little towns there before I had gone to Washington.  And she was still living in Houston at the time.  But I remember when I left the last time, never to return as a resident, we were living at 2832 Drew Street and the house was still standing the last time I was there which was a couple of years ago at 2832 Drew Street in one of the black neighborhoods.  One of the things that happened the last year I was there before I came to Chicago [Illinois] was that I was trying to get a book from the library at the library for blacks that dealt with sign language with your hands, people who are poor sighted use.  And I kept going to the library trying to get them to give me the book and they didn't have it.  The lady said she had ordered it but it never came.  So I got my friend Spriggs (ph.), this is another friend, different person, to go with me to the white library downtown.  We got down there the lady says I'm sorry you can't use the library here, the lady who was at the desk.  I said, yeah, but I've been trying to get a book--I've been trying to get a book for weeks and I can't get it.  They keep telling me they gon bring me the book and they don't bring it.  She says well I'm sorry you can't come in here, you can't come in here, you can't use this--you can't use this library.  Now here, you know I've been in Washington and I've been in places where the only people that got real discrimination back during that period up in Washington were Indians who were not permitted to buy alcohol, and that was the only real, you know, ostentatious discrimination that I saw around Washington while I was there.  And I'm back here and this lady won't let me use the library.  The lady who was in charge came down some stairs from where her office was which overlooked the area and she got down the stairs and she says, what is the problem and she was a very nice--nice lady the way she talked and responded, you know.  And I told her.  She says well now what I'm going to do, I'm going to get this book for you, and I'm going to have you sign a card here for it and I'm going to send this card back to your library.  Now when you finish with the book, you take it in over there.  Now in the future you can't come in this library anymore.  I'm just doing this this one time.  All of the future times that you come to the library, you gonna have to go to your local library, and I thanked her, and of course I left.  But while I was in there, I'd never been in that library before.  It was just a magnificent place.  It had its wrought iron stairways and the little bannisters made of wrought iron, books all over the place, well lit, nice desk and chairs for you to sit in and read books, and you go back to the neighborhood library it was like somebody's kitchen, just had some old chairs and desks and things that you could sit there.  And they just really, it really bothered me.  And that was one of the reasons, I think, that I ultimately came to the decision I was leaving Houston, I wasn't gon' to stay there.
Story_ID: 84394
Speaker 1: So I left and came--I caught the bus, had a big trunk, and the way I got here, part of it was through my talking to the man whose the field director for the "Kansas City Call".  His name was House.  He had come from Leavenworth, Kansas, and he was my boss.  By that time I had gotten to a position of being able to write a page of news a week for the--this was during my last--during my high school--last year in high school.  I'd write a page of news for the "Kansas City Call" about things going on in Houston [Texas] and it would be printed as a special sheet in the "Call" that was distributed in Houston.  And, so he in turn--I told him I was gonna be leaving.  He said all right, he says, where you going, I says I'm going to Chicago [Illinois].  He said well what are you gonna do up there, he says--I said I'm gonna go to college and I want to be a lawyer.  He says well let me tell you something, I know a fellow up there, he says his name is Euclid Taylor, and I'm going to give you an introductory letter to Euclid Taylor.  He did it I came here, I went into Euclid Taylor's office, turns out that Euclid Taylor at that time was probably one of the most successful African American lawyers in the country.  And he was very, very successful in Chicago.  He won cases that nobody else could win and when he walked through the courtroom, people would, "hi Mr. Taylor", "hi Euclid" and he would say, "Hi cuz" you know, and there was no difference between whites and blacks, they all--they all really and truly admired him.  Well, when I was in his office there, first time, trying to--with this letter, he was supposed to help me get a job cause I'd worked at a newspaper for House and he says, he could get you a job at the "[Chicago] Defender".  Turns out he was the "Defender's" lawyer.  While I was sitting there he called up the "Defender" and said I got  a--I got a kid here who says he can write news.  He says I'm gonna send him over there, and if he can do anything, give him a job, if he can't, to hell with the son-of-a-bitch, that's the way Taylor talked.  I left, went to the "Defender" and tried out for a job and they told me that they would pay me thirty-five dollars a week.  And I started thinking, I said, now if I get thirty-five dollars a week, I gotta pay my rent, I gotta buy food and transportation and all, and that's not gon be much money left for me to save.  I wanted to save money to go to school, go to college, and I had planned to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I decided to take a job in a restaurant that I could make twenty-five dollars a week because by staying--by doing that it put me in a position where I could eat all the food that I needed at the restaurant.  I'd eat my meals there and I could save all of my money except for a little bit of transportation and as a result I did that--
Story_ID: 84395
Speaker 1: But when I first came here, I came on the bus, I had this big trunk, had it at the Trail Way Bus station up here, which they used to have up there by where the--it's the Chicago Theater, there used to be a place there that there was a bus station in back of it.  And when I got here I only had about two dollars and fifty cents.  Now I had three hundred dollars in the bank cause I had saved money like nobody's business while I was working cause I was trying to get to school.  It turns out that I felt that when I got here, I can just write a check and get some money or go in the bank and get some money.  I went to the Illinois State Bank, which is located at 310 South Michigan Avenue, where I had my office for ten years up until I moved here just recently.  And I went up to the counter, gave em my savings book, showed I had the money in the bank and asked her if she would let me draw out ten dollars from my account.  And she said to me, well, sure, sure, show me some identification, showed my security card and so on.   She said okay we'll take care of this after I filled in all the papers.  It'll be about eight to ten days.  I said eight to ten days?  She says, yes, she says we have to get in touch with them, we're gonna have to send your book down there and they gonna have to send something back here telling us it's all right for you to have this money.  I said is that right, she says yeah.  I said, well, thank you ma'am and I took my book and I left.  I said, I don't have any money, if I could make it for eight to ten days, I could make it beyond that.  So then I started looking for jobs, restaurants and places.  And I ultimately found a job in a restaurant, but not before I had gone to Van Buren and Dearborn to a cafeteria that used to be over there and the fellow told me, it was a Greek cafeteria, his son later on, but I'll tell you about that.  When I went in there I asked him for a job, he had a sign in the window saying that he wanted a porter, and I went in and he says, sorry, I don't hire blacks in here--he didn't say blacks, he said negroes, I think.  I don't hire any negroes.  So I left, didn't feel too bad about it because I felt there's probably still a little racism around here and I kept on and I finally found a job.  But the interesting thing about that man, his situation created a scar on his son that would probably never ever be erased.  His son was a public defender.  After I had become a lawyer, I established an office at the corner there near where his cafeteria was and his son worked as a public defender at 26th and California Street.  And one day a Time Magazine person interviewed him because they had heard a little bit about racism that he practiced and about what some of the people had said that he said to them that he had defended.  And he went on to talk about these blacks and I can understand why they call them niggers in the south and so on and so on and they're no good and half of em are guilty anyway and I do whatever is necessary when I go before the judge to take care of the case and I try to do the best I can for the ones that I think are innocent, but most of em are guilty and what am I gon be able to do for em anyway.  So I just stand up there with em and try to do what I can do and that's it. And he used a lot of, you know, race language.  It was printed in the Time Magazine.  They promptly fired him. I don't know whatever happened to him.  He must have left town.  But his father was the one that had me he didn't hire negroes in his restaurant.  So you can understand he must have been talking a lot of racism inside his place for his son to grow up like that.  But that was a very interesting story that developed with him. But in any event when I first came to Chicago, I had no money, so I started looking for jobs.
Story_ID: 84396
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I had to have someplace to sleep.  I went to the bus station and I said I would sleep there because it was opened all night long.  I sat down in one of the seats and the fellow came by to see me, and I told him that I had my luggage there and I was waiting for somebody to come bring me some money so I could get it out.  So he didn't bother me and I went to sleep and after it got late, nobody came by to say anything to me, but I felt a little rumbling in my pocket.  And I looked there was a guy right next to me.  I woke up, you know.  And I said what are you doing, he said, oh nothing I was just moving around.  And I moved to another seat and the same thing happened to me by somebody else.  So I said these people are trying to pick my pocket.  I don't have any money.  So what I did was to go to still a third place and I put my hands in my pockets like this and this is how I slept.  Nobody bothered me cause they knew if they pull my arm out it would wake me up.  And after I slept there that night, I think I went back to sleep again.  I looked to see if there was an opportunity to go to a movie theater or something to sleep in and I saw they had a fifteen cent movie because I still had this two and a half and I had gotten a job at a restaurant, but I hadn't been paid, so I was eating a little food.  I took and went into the fifteen cent movie that used to be over on Clark Street and when I got in there, the odor was just so stifling that I couldn't--I couldn't stay in there and I lost my fifteen cents because I just had to get out of there.  And there was a thirty-five cent movie, but I didn't want to go to that because that was just spending more money than I wanted to spend for one-night's sleep.  So I started walking around and I checked on train stations and I found the Union Station over there and I went into the Union Station.  I saw they had a guard in a blue suit, a blue outfit, it wasn't a suit.  He wore blue shirt and pants and some kind of a hat, like that and he walked around with a billy club in his hand.  And he would go over and if somebody was sleep, he would take a--take the billy club and say get up and get out of here you.  You can't sleep in here and cause the people to leave, you know, they'd be guys like me who didn't have any money.  So I came up with a plan.  I got on the bench and I layed down, had a point fairly close to where he was and when I did that, pulled my coat up over me.  I had a little gabardine coat on.  And by the way I was wearing blue (unclear) suit when I came here and I had--I wore that suit, man, for a week and a half.  But I was always able to go to the bus station and give him a few pennies, he let me get a shirt out of my wardrobe and I'd put on a clear shirt and stick the dirty one back in there.  In any event what I did was to pull my coat over my head and sooner than I laid down, I guess I was there three or four minutes, he came up, you can't sleep here, you gotta get outta here.  I said, has my train come yet, I'm waiting for my train.  He says what train are you on?  Well I had gotten one that left a four o'clock in the morning, and I told him.  He said oh, all right, you're okay.  That meant, this was something like around eleven o'clock.  This meant I got five hours of sleep uninterrupted.  And I started doing that.  And the station was so big, I could move to different parts of the station and they didn't remember me.  And I would go at different times a night and I always had my train, and I was able to do that for a week and when I got paid then I went and started to--I rented a room.  The room was so small that when I went to the door to go in the room, I had to climb over a half of one of these twin beds to get to where I could stand in the room, cause there was no other way they could put the bed in there without blocking the door, and that's the room I had, nine dollars a week.  But--at any rate it was a rather interesting experience that I had.
Story_ID: 84397
Speaker 1: Now, now you had some money saved for tuition?
Speaker 2: I had money saved for tuition, yes.  The money was back in Houston [Texas].  I had three hundred dollars and what I wanted to do was to earn enough money so that if I started that fall, because I got here in April and I'm working trying to get my money ready for September, I wanted to have enough so that I could go for a full year.  The three hundred wouldn't carry me for a full year.  I had to have enough money to keep me going until summer.  So in turn, what I did was to earn enough money to carry me through to the summer, but at the end of the summer I was broke.  In the meantime, while I was here before I left to go to school, I got my friend Spriggs to come up to Chicago and he wasn't going to school.  He said he wasn't going to go to school right away, so he started to work, got a job and worked over at the Hilton Towers.  And when I came back that following year, after having spent a year down at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], I was broke, dead broke.  He says well you might as well come on over here with me and you can stay with me until you can get enough money and get yourself set.  So I started looking for a job, looking for a job, had a hard time finding a job.  And during that period of time, I had to have something to eat.  What we used to do, I would go in the back door at the Hilton Towers, which is on Wabash Avenue, where the employees go in.  There's a cafeteria there, where they feed em, they did at that time.  And he would carry me through the line with him and there were choices of what to get and he'd say well, what do you think you want, because we were going to be splitting the meal, see they gave them meal tickets.  And one day I'd get the milk, next day he'd get the milk and we sort of split up the food in that fashion.  We'd sit down at the table and he'd get extra forks and break my part off on a small platter and that's how we shared the meal.  I did that for oh, a long time, at noon time I'd always do it. And finally I got a job and that was the last time that I had that kind of a problem.
Story_ID: 84398
Speaker 1: So it turns out that after I had spent a year and a half at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I came to conclusion I wasn't too excited about being in school there.  I thought it was going to be more diversified.  I felt that it was a good school, but at the same time I was paying too much money to go there when there were great schools here. I enrolled in the junior college, [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [currently Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I was graduated then I went to Chicago Teacher's College [currently Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and I was graduated there, and then I became a school teacher during those--
Speaker 2: I just want to stop and go back a little bit. Talk about Fisk (unclear) being a historic institution.  You said you thought it wasn't diverse enough, now what were some of your specific impressions (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well my specific impressions were that it was a segregated school, that it was all black.  You had a few teachers who were Caucasian.  One of the teachers there was Mr. House, Professor House, I think his name was.  He was--he was truly outstanding, he was white.  He was truly outstanding in the sense of causing you to want to aspire to something greater.  The thing that I was always concerned about was who is it that's gonna lift me up.  I wanted to be lifted up spiritually and pointed in a direction where I could do something that I would be proud of, and he did that.  He taught a course called CCs Contemporary Civilization and it was by a book that was written by Ediberry and Hunt, who were teachers here in Chicago [Illinois].  He talked about things that all of us could do no matter what our color was and he taught in an auditorium.  It was the Fisk Chapel, the famous chapel that you've heard about.  There were other teachers there, mostly African American, great teachers who did a lot to tell you about the subject matter. But as far as telling you about how you can break out of the shell and do what you wanted to do regardless of your color, they didn't seem to focus on that and that's what bothered me.  I had come from being in Portland [Oregon], where there was no segregated schools.  I had worked in Vancouver [sic, Vanport, Oregon] in Hanford [Washington] where there was no segregation at that period.  And it just was too much for me to be at Fisk back into the setting which I had been fighting to get out of.
Speaker 2: Get out of the rigid setting.
Speaker 1: Yeah rigid setting and there was--it was more traditional than something new and as a result I'm very happy that I did leave because it caused me to be a different person.
Story_ID: 83374
Speaker 1: Well, after I had finished going to [Chicago] Teachers College [currently Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], what I did was to enroll in Roosevelt University Graduate School [Chicago, Illinois].  I was on deferments at the time from the military.  And at the point of my finishing--well actually, I guess I'd been there for two months, and I got a letter from my draft board which had always been in Houston, Texas, believe it or not, all these years.  They said to me in this letter, it was a woman who I had sent letters to and you know I kept serenading her with my letters that I was doing this in school, and I'd tell about my grades and all and that I wanted to be able to finish my education.  Every time they'd send me a letter for the draft board, they wanted to know what I was doing.  So I was telling her all these things, and I guess she became kind of close to me in a sense.  But in this last letter that she sent to me, she said, Mr. Blair, I want you to get your affairs in order because in June regardless of what school you're in or what you're doing, you're gonna be drafted.  So I just came to the conclusion I was going to the military, which I was, they drafted me in.  Stayed in the military, came out, I was up in Beale Air Force Base in California.  Then I--
Speaker 2: Did anything significant happen there?
Speaker 1: Well, yes.  I was a photographer.  I was trained at the photo school in New Jersey which was a part of the Signal Corps.  And when I went there one of the things that was rather interesting was that Captains, Lieutenants and other ranking people were marching down the street or the parade field and I was riding in a jeep.  And that was because I was a photographer.  Photographers have a rather important role in our society because they record things and as an Army photographer, I had to carry one of those big boxes that had all of the equipment in it, and we used speed graphic equipment and as a result I had to have some means of transporting it, and I rode in a jeep.  So I used to tell the driver go around the back way, I don't want them to seeing me riding this jeep, they'll take it away from me.  Other than that that was about it.  I stayed there and I got out as quick as I could.  They started discharging people and I was able to get discharged after having done nineteen and three quarter months, and came back to Chicago, I started to law school.
Story_ID: 83375
Speaker 1: Dean Lee was dean of the law school [John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and I asked him to let me get into the class that started in February or in January.  I got here toward the end of February and he says well you missed so many classes, he says how many--how you gonna--I said if you just let me in, Dean, I'll make it.  So sure enough he did.  And I was able to pass the courses.  And ultimately I was finished in 1959 in February.  And once I finished I started to practice law.  Started out with a small law office over on the west side and I had been out of law school less than a year when Ben [Benjamin] Lewis asked me to be the financial secretary of the 24th Ward Democratic Organization, and it was not too many months after that he was shot and killed by somebody in his office, and I was the third person to see him in that position.  He had handcuffs on and he had been shot with a very small caliber weapon right through the forehead.
Speaker 2: Now, sir, who was Ben Lewis?
Speaker 1: Ben Lewis.
Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Ben Lewis was a politician who had been Alderman of the 24th Ward, but he had come from back around the Maxwell Street area when he went there, and he became the alderman.  After he became the alderman, ultimately he wanted to be the ward committeeman because the ward committeeman is the person who really has the political power in the wards.  Much of the time the ward committeeman and the alderman are the same person.  In any event he wanted to run for ward committeeman.  I'm told that he was told by powerful persons in the area that he could not run for ward committeeman, they didn't want him to be the ward committeeman they wanted somebody else to be the ward committeeman.  Despite that fact he ran and was elected and after he was elected, within a very short time after election, he was killed.
Speaker 2: You were describing how he was--
Speaker 1: And at the time that he was killed he was killed in his office.  I came to my office which was in the same building where he was located at 3600 West Roosevelt Road, which is an old bank building at the corner of Central Park and Roosevelt Road.  His offices were upstairs, mine were upstairs too, but you had to get upstairs by different stairways and there was a heavy concrete wall between certain offices and other offices.  In any event when I came to the office that morning, just as I got there a lady started, she just burst out of the door as I'm about to open the door, who was his secretary, saying Ben's been killed, Ben's been killed.  And when I said what's wrong with you, cause I couldn't understand what she was talking about, it sounded to me that it was so bizarre, it couldn't be Ben was killed, it was something else.  She says, no, he's dead, he's upstairs.  So I said, well let's get a policeman.  I walked out to the street and I was gonna be trying to see if I could wave down a police car because it's on Roosevelt Road and they travel back and forth.  And about that time along comes a police officer and she tells him what she'd seen.  So the three of us go into the building and go upstairs to where his offices were, and there he was laying on the floor in a sitting position that had been--apparently he had fallen, I mean, he had been sitting for a while before he had fallen over and because his legs were sort of set in that position, they couldn't pull em--pull em down.  I guess they did it at the--at the funeral home.  Anyway he had a cigarette in his hand, in his right hand, that had burned down to the point of where his fingers were and had gone out--had burned his fingers a little bit.  And he had a small bullet hole right in his forehead, right here that had caused his death.  And they looked for the killer and they looked for the killer and they never found anybody, nobody was ever arrested.
Story_ID: 83376
Speaker 1: Now, Ben [Benjamin] Lewis was a white alderman?
Speaker 2: Ben Lewis was the first black--
Speaker 1: He was the first black alderman--
Speaker 2: --First black alderman, first black ward committeeman of that ward.  And then subsequent to that we had a committee that more or less made the policy statements and took care of the ward business for a period of about six or seven months.  And during that period of time, it was ultimately decided that George Collins would be the ward committeeman for the ward, and he ultimately was elected the alderman for the ward, and he stayed in office for a considerable period of time until he was killed in a plane crash.  And interestingly enough the plane crash he was killed in E. Howard Hunt's wife was on the plane and I'm told she had a suitcase containing Ten thousand Dollars in the suitcase, now where she was going with it who knows.  But that's one of the things that happened.  Another interesting aspect though it was, and it's just coincidental, I do believe, there was a news reporter who worked for one of the, I believe television stations in Washington, D.C., who was on the plane and she had come back on that trip with the intent of trying to get an interview from E. Howard Hunt's wife.  And George Collins was on that plane because he was a friend to this woman.  She, the lady who was the news reporter, was the daughter of a man who had been at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] when I was there and he had left Fisk and moved to Cicero.  Cicero was all white, he moved into an apartment building and the people were so enraged by having a black there they set the building on fire and it literally burned to the point of where it was of no value.  The thing that I found very perplexing was the fact that all of these different people were on the same plane, but most of what happened to em had no real relationship.  But the father of her was a man by the name of Harvey and he was a--he was a student at Fisk and I had known him and he was ahead of me and he had graduated long before I left there.  Anyway, it turns out that after George Collins came into office he begin to change things somewhat in the ward and I was still the attorney for the ward and I remained the attorney for the ward during Collins' period, George Collins' period, and then he was followed by a person by the name of Walter Shumpert. He was--in fact I ran against [Walter] Shumpert for alderman, I lost the election.  But I was still Shumpert's attorney.  He said to a large gathering one day that Chester Blair, who's my lawyer before he ran against me in the ward, knew enough about me to tell you folks things that could have really embarrassed me and cause me some problems, maybe even some legal problems.  He says, but during the time that he ran against me, he never breathed a word.  And he says I want to thank him for doing that.  I was sitting in the audience when he was talking.  But he was a wonderful person.  I liked Walter [Shumpert], he was forthright, he was honest and he was very sincere.  I had probably as great a respect for him as I've had of any person because he was truly a very decent human being.
Story_ID: 83377
Speaker 1: During that period of time when I was representing the ward during George Collins' tenure was the time when there had been a effort on the part of [Charles] Percy to try and break up the Democratic strong hold on the Chicago area.  And Percy was the senator (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Senator, former senator (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: --Former senator Charles Percy who had been probably a strong Republican in this area and he felt--
Speaker 2: He was the presidential hopeful--
Speaker 1: --At one time.
Speaker 2: --Had national you know--
Speaker 1: That is correct.  And he thought that it would be good if he could get some kind of organization or group that would make some effort to find out about what was going on.  Were there crimes being committed, did the Democratic Party really have the strong hold or what was the situation.  There was an organization formed known as Operation Eagle Eye and that organization went about checking poll sheets, not poll sheets, voter records and interviewing people about what went on in various elections.  And this particular election they came up with the idea that one of the precincts, the precinct judges had not followed the law in the manner in which they had handled the election.  One of the things that troubled Percy much of the time was the fact that some of the precincts where there were three republican judges taking part with the five, they would end up with maybe one republican vote.  And it seemed that something was going on here.  In any event they came up with the theory that five judges had violated the law and they got them indicted in the federal court.  Once they were indicted there was the effort to prosecute them and send them to jail.  The case appeared before Judge Decker, who was a Federal Judge, and who had been appointed through a republican administration and of course many of us looked upon him as being a republican judge, although he was a fair person and he was not one that ruled on the basis of party line.  In any event the--while the charges were pending, I had the right to make motions, of course, which is true in cases in court.  I filed a motion to dismiss the charges.  And I raised a number of issues, but the foremost issue raised was that the people who were alleging that this had taken place, the fraud had taken place, were people who were not residence of the ward.  And I misspoke, I said that people were indicted, they actually were not indicted because what happened was it was filed as a civil case and I was thinking of another case that I was involved in.  This case involving the Operation Eagle Eye was a civil case in which they sued for so much money saying that every--for every vote that had taken place in that district there should be a dollar amount placed on it and that there should be a judgment rendered against the people who committed the fraud and that amount of money and it came to something like two point five million dollars.  And I filed a motion before there was a trial involving these charges or allegations.  Say, in effect, that the plaintiff was not a person who's a part of the district where the voting had taken place, the plaintiff did not have any standing to bring the suit, the case went to the Court of Appeals and the Court of Appeals, strike that, the case was heard by Decker.  Decker ruled that I was correct and then it was appealed to the United States Court of Appeals by Operation Eagle Eye and the Appellate Court affirmed Judge Decker's ruling that they had no standing to bring the suit and that ended the case.  Interestingly enough the strong hold of the Democratic Party continued until such time as a person by the name of Jim Thompson became governor who's a Republican and of course he did everything he could to try to strengthen the Republican Party within the Chicago area and didn't do very much for Chicago, but it did do something around the state.  As a result we've had Republican Governors for a very extended period of time up until now when we just had a recent democrat elected.
Story_ID: 83378
Speaker 1: But I did a lot of work as an attorney in the 24th Ward.  And while I was there a very unfortunate occurrence took place involving Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.].  He was killed in 1963.  It was that same year that Ben [Benjamin] Lewis had been killed a few months after that.  But in any event, strike that, a few months before that.  Ben was killed in February and Dr. King was killed in the summer.  It turns out that after Dr. King had been killed, there was this great upheaval that took place within the black community all around the country.  In the 24th Ward area which was called the Lawndale area people were setting fires, tearing up businesses, breaking store windows in buildings and the building where I had my offices, there was a drug store on the first floor, I was on the second floor, that was at 3609 West Roosevelt Road, because I had moved from across the street shortly after Ben was killed.  They damaged that building, set it afire, I came to the office the next morning and everything was charred.  No phones, second floor had fallen into the first floor, so I went across the street to the public phone booth and then proceeded to do business from the public phone.  I had a very good secretary who remembered the names of so many of my clients and remembered the--so much information about it.  It was just remarkable that she could just write all that information out and that helped to keep me from having any mishaps by not appearing in court when cases were due to appear in court and I didn't have any problems there.  But it took me a while before I got another office.  I went to--when I say a while, I only mean something like a month, because once I found the office, it had to be remodeled in order for me to operate my business there.
Story_ID: 83379
Speaker 1: I found an office at 431 South Dearborn, which is a building, the first sixteen story building built in Chicago. Many years they would never go higher than sixteen stories because they had the impression that the sand in the Chicago area from the beach or from the lake--
Speaker 2: Those landfills (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes, it created a problem with the building being able to sustain itself with such great height.  In any event I was there probably something like two maybe three weeks after my office had been completed.  And I was on my way downtown from the west side, it was about ten o'clock, eleven o'clock at night, and the restaurant had blown up across the street from that building.  The building in the place where the restaurant was there's a Amalgamated Bank--building that was built there afterwards.  But that restaurant blew up and blew out all the windows in my office.  Now this was an office I've spent probably my last quarters trying to get into shape so that I could have an office there.  After having had the tragedy on the west side and all within sixty days, I'm still out of an office again.  But fortunately this time, the landlord made the repairs because they had insurance to cover it and I finally was able to have a business there.
Speaker 2: You're losing a lot of material on these--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  Well with the windows blown out, I didn't lose too much there, it was just a matter of having to have the place redecorated and the floors cleaned and carpets and things like that.  There were just shards of glass all over the place.  All of the windows were blown out on my floor and I was on the 15th floor so it was troubling.  I had offices there and then of course I moved from office to office.
Story_ID: 83380
Speaker 1: There came a time when I started to take greater part in Bar Association activity.  One of the things that I remembered when I was about to be admitted to the Bar was that African Americans had had difficulty with the Chicago Bar Association being a member.  It was more like a private club in those days where they had various restrictions and various standards that they said that they had in order for you to be a member.  Most of it dealt with how you handled your law practice.  One of the people who had attempted to become a member had been practicing law for five or six years, and when he applied for membership they wouldn't admit him.  And he wanted to know why and they pulled up some case he had been in and said he had done something that they didn't think was appropriate and wouldn't let him join.  I had heard that other lawyers, African American, had the same problem.  So when I was admitted to the Bar in May of 1959, I think I joined the Chicago Bar Association within two days of that admission. I said well they won't be able to hold that against me and if the ethics committee of the Bar Association finds that I am sufficiently suited to take the exam and become a lawyer and qualify for my license, I certainly should be able to qualify to become a member of the Bar.  And I became a member of the Bar in 1959 and I had been a member in good standing ever since.  And if you have some--want to have some idea of what is was like back in those days compared to now, we have in the Chicago Bar Association, we have about twenty-three thousand lawyers and--I'm trying to find a card that I have here that I want to show you so that you'll get an idea of how many lawyers were members of the Chicago Bar at the time I was made a member.  My number is the same as it was when I joined.
Speaker 2: Scott Stearns: Tilt the card slightly.
Speaker 1: Tilt it?
Speaker 2: Scott Stearns: Yeah.  There, okay.
Speaker 1: There it is. He's got it.
Speaker 2: It has 594 as the number, which means at that time I was the 594th member of the Chicago Bar Association.  They had persons who would join and sometimes they'd drop out or they would be in--there would be a delinquency or something like that.  But my number was 594 and right now it's 23,000 something.  So you can see how things change over a period of years.  Of course I've been practicing law for forty-four years, so quite a bit has had an opportunity to happen.  I became a member of the Cook County Bar Association at the same time, and I have maintained my membership there consistently along with my membership to the Chicago Bar.
Story_ID: 83381
Speaker 1: In 1977 I was honored by being elected president of the Cook County Bar Association and ultimately I was elected president of the Chicago Bar [Association].  One of the judges that I know, who from time to time sees me, he says, well, you're still the only person I know who has been president of the Cook County Bar and the Chicago Bar as well.  It was a little more difficult becoming president of the Chicago Bar because as you know prior to my efforts, there had never been an African American President of the Chicago Bar.  The highest position that had been held in the Association had been held by a man known as George N. Leighton [HM], one of our very famous and outstanding judges or judicial figures in the Chicago area.  He was the librarian and beyond that the only thing African Americans had ever done with the Bar was to be on the Board of Managers.  And when I talked to people about working with the Chicago Bar, first I talked to an African American who later became a judge, he says, oh, you don't want to be bothered with that he says there not gonna want you in there anyway.  He had served on the Board of Managers and I don't know why he was trying to discourage me, but I remember what I had heard from my school teacher that you could do anything that you want to do if you're willing to work at it.  And I frequently am reminded from a spiritual point of view of her sayings.  So it didn't bother me for him to say that to me.  I did start to work with the Chicago Bar and worked with the Bar over a period of years and then one of my friends said to me that he wanted me to consider being president.
Story_ID: 84399
Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us about your election?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a friend by the name of Jack Hayes, one of the finest people I've ever known.  He's Caucasian and he was one of the truly outstanding lawyers in Chicago.  He was early on one of the lawyers getting the large verdicts in the area of medical negligence on the part of people who were injured, some who were killed and some who were maimed in such a way that they were not able to function normally.  And I kept telling Jack that I didn't really didn't want to do it at the time that he was talking to me about it because I was busy with other things.  Primarily, I was concerned about my practice and a number of things that were going on in my life that I thought were important to me.  One of them was the fact that I had two children that were getting ready to go to school and I knew that there was gonna be a need for money to pay for the tuition and that meant working longer hours and doing more.  But he kept talking to me about it and finally one day he said to me that we have two people who are running for office and they are--we've had--this is a committee, nominating committee.  And the nominating committee has not been able to agree on either one of them.  They haven't been able to get a majority of the vote in order to be elected--to be nominated as the candidate for the Association.  So he said to me wouldn't I consider doing that.  And I said well I don't know, Jack, I don't really think I want to do it and he called me up and he says hey, this was later on in the day.  First he had talked to me in the morning.  Then he called me in the early afternoon, and he said to me, look let's go have lunch.  I said lunch time is over man that was twelve o'clock.  He says no, I really want to sit down and talk to you about something.  He didn't mention the election.  So he met me at the corner and Adams, I'll always remember, and Dearborn and he--that's the corner he said he was gonna meet me.  And I walked from my office coming from the south end of the Loop and he'd come from the north.  So he says come on let's go over here and have a cup of coffee.  So I went and had a cup of coffee with him.  I said what's going on, is something wrong or something?  Cause he was my good friend and I naturally wanted to be concerned.  He says you know I think you really ought to change your mind about what you told me.  He's pretty persistent.  I can see how he used to win cases.  He says we need a good president.  We have some things that we're trying to do here.
Story_ID: 84400
Speaker 1: I had served on the Board of Managers of the Chicago Bar [Association], and while on the Board of Managers, I had taken a leadership role in trying to designate where we would have our headquarters, because we were gonna--we were gonna have a new headquarters and we were gonna build one.  We were leaving LaSalle Street and I said they should come to the south end of the Loop.  There was Dick Phelan, who was one of the outstanding lawyers and president.  He was president at the time and said yeah, I think we should move from where we are, but I'd like for us to go over to where Kent College and Lawyers, they have some space there, we could go in there.  And I love to give him credit for the fact that he ultimately changed his mind because he said Kent is not making up its mind about what it's gonna do in terms of moving its school further west.  They later did that, but at that time they hadn't given him any understanding on that.  He was a former graduate of Kent College of Law and one of the lawyers that had a fairly large firm here.  So it ended up that he says I'm not gonna be pushing Kent any longer, but I do think we should go to the south end of the Loop because that's gonna be the area where growth is gonna take place.  Well, I joined him.  My offices have been there for a number of years.  I've been there from 1963 until this period which was in 1985 or '86' (1986) that we were talking about it and it resulted in my knowing what was happening in the area.  Dick Phelan and I think maybe one or two other persons and I were persuasive enough to get the Bar to consider buying a building right next door to my law school, which is the John Marshall Law School, and we were gonna put the offices there.  It turned out that once we bought the building, had an architect go in and take a look at it, it was not structured in such a way that it would suit itself for meeting rooms because you had the elevator right in the middle and you had rooms around the sides of the elevator and that made them all very small.  And there was no way to cut through that elevator shaft without going into a very great expense.  So the decision was up in the air as to whether we were going to tear that building down or leave it there and give it back to John Marshall, go somewhere else or what was gonna to happen.  This was one of the problems that Jack [Hayes] envisioned that they had to be strong leadership on in terms of where we were gonna go and what we were gonna do.  Well, I was running for, I mean, he [Jack Hayes] wanted me to run for second vice president, which would not put me in the front position, but it would put me in the executive committee whereby whatever my views were, they could be heard.  So I finally agreed that I would consider it.  He says okay.  Well, at four o'clock this evening, I want you to come over to, and he told me where they were meeting, and I want you to say a few words to them about some of the things you could do if you would be president.  Now they've already had nominating procedures going, two guys are trying to beat each other, neither can do it.  I get over there, I give my talk.  I don't know what it is about what I said, but the current executive secretary who was employed by the Bar at that time, says it's one of the best speeches that he has ever heard by a candidate who was running for office for the Chicago Bar Association, and he tells me that to this day.  In any event he said--after I had made the talk, I left and went back to my office figuring that nothing was gonna happened, I satisfied Jack, I've given a good shot and he won't feel that I have let him down.  In turn he called me somewhere around seven o'clock in the evening, says that was a very fine speech you gave, he says I appreciate it, he says and I'll talk to you, and I said fine.  And I thought that was the end of it.  I was in the bed asleep and the phone rang, and my wife answered the phone and she says is there something wrong, she says Jack is on the phone, Jack Hayes is on the phone, cause I hadn't gone into all this with her.  I said well what's wrong with him calling?  She says it's twelve o'clock at night.  I said oh I don't know, and I picked up the phone and I said, hi, Jack.  He says hi, Chester, you're it, and hung up the phone.  I called back trying to get him, he wasn't home.  And I didn't know where the hell to get him.  So I said what is he talking about.  Well, the next morning, of course, he came over to see me.  I was in the office at nine o'clock and he says, well, you won the election.
Story_ID: 84401
Speaker 1: He [Jack Hayes] went on to tell me that they only had one ballot.  He says we had seventeen people there--eighteen people there.  I was not able to vote cause I was a chairperson.  He says of the seventeen, sixteen voted and one abstained, and you got all sixteen votes.  And I was just really shocked because I knew very few of the people there.  I guess they knew more about me than I realized.  And possibly some of the things they took into consideration was some of the work that I had previously done with the Bar and with the Supreme Court.  I had worked as a person involved in the development of the ethics rules for the State of Illinois.  I had worked on a special committee that had been set up by one of the organizations that deal with legal matters in the state, publishes books and things like that.  And then later on I was appointed by the Supreme Court to a twelve person committee to develop the rules.  Before that we did not have ethical rules that had been sanctioned by the Court in this state.  What we had were rules that had been passed by the Illinois Bar Association.  Those rules were used as guidelines.  They were just general guidelines as to what a lawyer should or should not do, but they did not have specifics.  So what we did in that Supreme Court Committee was to develop specific guidelines that had do's and don'ts so that lawyers would know what not to do and they wouldn't have to guess about it.  After having served on that committee, I was later appointed to the Review Board, which is the highest appellate body or was the highest appellate body that disciplined lawyers in the State of Illinois, and I was on that Board for something like seven or eight years, and for four of those years, I was chairman. I was the first African American chairman to serve on that particular Board.  I had done these things before I was being considered, and I guess some of those things had some impact upon them feeling that I was the person that could hold the position, but I had worked with the Board of the Chicago Bar.  I had served as chairman of the Judicial Evaluation Committee Hearing Board which convened lawyers to listen to all judges who were going for election or to be appointed a judge.
Story_ID: 84402
Speaker 1: So it was very, very interesting.  But as a candidate before--before I became--before I was elected I went to see the--one of the lawyers from a very large law firm here, because I had just simply been nominated by the nominating committee.  I hadn't been elected.  The nominating committee consisted of eighteen people that had nominated me.  So I went to see a lawyer that I thought would be fair-minded and he had a very large firm, and I figured if I could get some of those votes, it would help me get elected.  We have a procedure whereby if anyone is going to run against you, that person has to declare himself as a candidate within a short span of time after the nominating committee has made its choice, and I figured it may be something like sixty days, I don't remember the exact time.  In any event it was during this period that I wanted to talk to this lawyer because I felt that I probably would have opposition and I would need someone to be able talk to me.  So what I then did was to visit with him in his offices at one of the high floors on one of our prestigious buildings here.  And I sat down and talked to him and I said I'd like to know if you would consider supporting me in helping me get elected president of the Chicago Bar.  And he said to me he says oh no, he says we don't need any lawyer from some small firm, we want a lawyer from the large firm so that they can really do something for the Bar.  He says you come from a small law firm.  He says what--I don't know what you gonna be able to do for the Bar Association.  He said, and I'm just being frank with you, you know.  I don't mean to hurt your feelings or anything, but I just don't think that you gonna be able to do anything.  So I said well thank you very much for talking to me and I smiled and I left his office.  It turns out that the period passed for anybody to oppose me.  I did not have any opposition in the general election, and I was elected president.  This particular person was a former president of the Chicago Bar and we have what is known as a past President's Committee, he was on that committee.  And after I had done my tour of second, first then president and finally a past president, I came to the meeting and he just treated me royally.  He treated me just like I was a prince, never ever mumbled a word about what he talked to me about before.  And as you know the place I like to go on vacation is in the Bahamas and my wife and I go every January.  He said to me, he says, the last meeting, this was when I missed one of the meetings, the last meeting you weren't there.  The meeting's always held in January at various times.  I said well I was on vacation and you guys set the meeting on my vacation day and you know that was--that's the way it was.  He says well he says in the future what you do is let me know when your date is for your vacation and I will set the meeting at a time when it won't conflict.  And that's just how nice he was to me after I'd gotten the position.
Story_ID: 84403
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the Earl B. Dickerson Award, or about--and about the other, I guess, issues that you had to deal with as president of the Chicago Bar Association.
Speaker 2: The Earl B. Dickerson Award Committee, that committee was formed because it became apparent that in the Chicago Bar, there were a large number of people who did not know a great deal about the history of African Americans.  The reason being is because you had very few African Americans in the Chicago Bar for a long, long period of time.  One of the things that used to keep them out as members was the system that they used in terms of letting people in.  The other was the expensive dues, the dues were high and many African Americans did not earn the kind of money that caused them to be there.  One of the other reasons was that many African Americans were still concerned about being able to be a part of the protest and wanted to have their own organization so that the policy could be set that would always have as its agenda the furtherance of the rights of African American lawyers.
Speaker 1: All professions did that at a certain point--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --The police officers, the school teachers, a lot of professional organizations formed a black organization too.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My thought was that there should be some effort to work within the organization rather than outside the organization and bring these things to the attention of the organization from the outside, I thought, was not the strongest position to take, it was better to do it from the inside.  One of the things that I was concerned about was the history.  And there was a lawyer that talked to me and said that one of the areas that we could deal with would be African American lawyers who have done things in the Chicago area that people would recognize the name of and be able to appreciate what was achieved, and the name of Earl Dickerson was recommended as one of those persons along with others.  And I took the position that I thought Earl Dickerson represented many of the things that we were concerned about and I had an opportunity to meet him and spend time with him.  And he was quite a classic figure in terms of how he approached problems and what he did.  As a result we set up the committee or at least I appointed a committee and I appointed someone to serve as chairperson with the hope that that person would develop the kind of agenda that I had in mind and he did.  He worked at it for two years and unfortunately he passed.  The person who was appointed was a man by the name of Leonard Ring.  After that I was not in a position to make the appointment, the next president had the opportunity or responsibility of deciding who was going to chair the committee, and he talked to me about it and said he thought that I should take the position because he didn't know of anyone at the time who would probably have the knowledge that I'd have about what was going on and so he appointed me.  And I have since served as chairperson now since 1993, which is quite a while.
Story_ID: 84404
Speaker 1: In any event the committee honors what we consider to be an outstanding effort and achievement on the part of an African American lawyer who has worked in the venues and made achievements that can benefit all of us, not just blacks but whites as well.  One of the persons that has been honored is Thurgood Marshall, who was not able to come to his receipt of the award--
Speaker 2: That would have been--
Speaker 1: --his sons came.
Speaker 2: --I'm sorry, but that would have been, yeah that would have been about (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That was the year he died.
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: His son who's Marshall, I believe, in Washington came and gave a delightful speech and then after that we've honored such people as Harold Washington who was Mayor, Jim [James] Montgomery [HM] who happens to be a very good friend of mine but who has been very much in the venue at working for improvement of things as far as the relationships of people are concerned, both legally and otherwise, he was the first African American corporation counsel.  And there have been others that have been honored.  This year, the person who is scheduled to be honored next week on the ninth of April at a luncheon at the Standard Club is the President of the County Board, John Stroger [HM].  He has made many achievements, one that I considered profound in that he has cleaned up the hospital in terms of its structure and in terms of its operation in that he has made it a place where people can go who are poor and be able to get decent health care.  They can go into an environment that is clean and neat that lets them know that there is reasonable sanitation so that it is competitive with other hospital within the city in terms of making sure poor people are gonna get the basic human rights are protected, and that's something that I think is very important to all of us.  However, John has worked well in other areas as president of the county board, and he's been there for a long time doing things.  Before he became chairperson he was a member of the Board and he has been one of the political leaders of our community.  He's a very fine person.
Speaker 2: I think one of the years you gave it to Judge Damon Keith [HM], the Federal Judge.
Speaker 1: Damon Keith was one of the persons who received the award.  He's out of Detroit, he's a member of the Court of Appeals, he's a truly outstanding judge, he is encouraged and done everything he could to cause people to feel fairness and to be fair and he's encouraged young African American lawyers who are interested in going forward to do things in the system.  He's encouraged them to become judges, federal judges, not just in Detroit but around the country in Chicago and various other places.  So he truly deserved the honor and we're proud of him--
Story_ID: 84405
Speaker 1: Sir, I wanted to ask you about your style as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's been said--people say that you're a lawyer who loves the courtroom, you love making your case before a judge and a jury.  You want to take a case to court rather than settle out of court, you have a lot of enthusiasm in terms of that and you're seen as a role model for some young lawyers.  Now, that's what they said.  Who inspired you when you became a lawyer or who are your role models?
Speaker 2: When I first became a lawyer, the person that I thought and I still believe was one of the greatest in presentation of a case before a judge was George Leighton [HM], who is now a retired judge who is practicing law.  I first met George Leighton on the Legal Defense Committee of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Chicago.  I served on that committee with him for a period of time, he was chairperson.  That's how I first met him.  But I have seen him a number of times present cases.  I think that he's a very fine lawyer and he did a very good job of preparation before going to court.  One of the lawyers that was not afraid to present his case, no matter how bad the circumstances might be, was Euclid Taylor.  Taylor was the kind of person who felt that if he had a chance to deal with the jury, he could win the case, and he had a fabulous reputation in Chicago for winning cases and jury trials.  And he was the first lawyer that I knew in Chicago.  And I became very fond of his ability and his success.  Unfortunately, he did not practice very long after I was admitted to the Bar, he due to age and circumstance, he became ill and he was not able to continue to practice and ultimately he passed away.  One of the young lawyers who worked in his office was a person by the name of George Howard.  George Howard is just an epitome of Euclid Taylor.  He became one of the outstanding Chicago lawyers.  I have the highest respect for his skills and his tenacity.  He practiced with Taylor for a period of about four years, I believe, before Taylor was ill and was not able to continue to practice.  I admire George's spunk, you know, he's never frightened by a case, he always looked at a different point of view with the case.  So those are two people that I can talk about, but in addition to that, another, and there are numerous lawyers that I could tell you about, Jim Montgomery, who is of my same period.  Jim Montgomery is truly an outstanding lawyer.  He's a tireless worker.  If there's anybody ever over-prepared to present a case, he is.  And he can tell you everything about the case, the law governing the case and he can truly succeed where others fail, so that there are a number of lawyers that I see that I spend time with that I am very proud of their technique and their skill.  I could talk about Jack Hayes, who was a good friend of mine, who was truly an outstanding lawyer.  He could present a case in a way  that--but he did mostly civil work and that's one of the reasons I'm mentioning him because the other persons that I've mentioned other than George Leighton were primarily involved in criminal defense.  As a consequence--
Speaker 1: Finish your thought.
Speaker 2: --As a consequence, I think that my approach to trying to get a good decision for my client is based upon the fact that I'm not afraid to go to trial.  And if it turns out that I can't get something resolved in an area of fairness where the client is concerned, I'm prepared to have a judge or a jury make the decision.
Story_ID: 83389
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about the courtroom technique and you had some thoughts about technique in a courtroom, how to get your point across?
Speaker 2: Well, the important thing that I think you have to start out with when you get a case, you have to look at it very carefully and it has to be developed on the basis of the--I think there's background noise, I don't know if it--
Speaker 1: I don't think that's bothering us right now.
Speaker 2: Scott Stearns: We're okay so far.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  But any rate the one thing that you have to do in preparing a case for court, you have to come to a decision as to how will this fly.  In other words what are you going to do, are you going to wear overalls to church or are you going to wear a suit.  You got to figure what is going to be the best venue for you to deal with, a jury or a judge. Now that is decided in various ways.  First of all, you have to decide on the judge because if you decide you don't want that judge because he's so bad and I don't know but about three judges in the whole area of Chicago that I would just automatically take a substitution from if I had the case, and one of em is an African American.  But if you feel that strongly about a judge being unfair, you need to point it out to your client, what the problem is and let the client make the decision as to whether or not the client wants to trust the judge, whether the client wants to get another judge.  Once you get past that hurdle, you then have to take a position of whether you're going to have the judge hear the evidence and make a decision or whether you're gonna have a jury hear the evidence and make a decision.  Some kinds of cases will fly better with a judge than with a jury.  If it's a case that has the risk of a lot of prejudice against your client, and I don't mean race prejudice, I mean all kinds of prejudice.  Some people have certain attitudes about drugs, for example.  If you're involved in a drug case and you're taking a jury with it, you have not a very strong chance with a jury because so many people's lives have been been destroyed as a result of drugs being in the family or in the community or what have you.  Therefore you've gotta have a really special case that you would take to a jury if it involved drugs.  On the other hand a judge is sworn to follow the law and to give you a chance to demonstrate that there has not been proof beyond a reasonable doubt in a criminal case.  And if you have a decent judge, you can expect fairness and that's what you want fairness.  As a result you have to do a lot of planning early on when you first get the case because there's a certain preparation for the judge, there's a certain preparation for the jury.
Story_ID: 83390
Speaker 1: One of the other things that's very important is the manner in which you prepare your client to testify.  If it's a civil case and you've got experts in the case like doctors, or some other expert, he could be an engineer and architect or whatever, sometimes they know their subject very well but they have very little skill at testifying in front of a judge or a jury, and on the basis of that you have to spend enough time with that person so that he will gain some insight on how he's to present the evidence.  It's not easy dealing with them because many times they think they know their subject so well and when you start trying to tell them how you want them to present something, they feel that it's an encroachment on their intelligence or training.  And as a result of that what you have to do is to be very careful who you select an expert as to whether or not this is the kind of person you could work with.  Is it somebody who's going to be so pompous that you can't tell em anything because he knows too much, if it is try to select a different expert.  If you get trapped with a guy like that, you're better off being with a judge, because the judge is going to treat his information carefully rather than the manner in which he presents it.  The jury won't do that.  The jury will eat you up in a situation like that.  The lawyer himself has to be careful now about being too pompous and being too flamboyant because many of the jurors don't like that anymore.  Sometimes you think that you make a big flair in the courtroom and you gonna win your case and it destroys your case.  There are any number of little tips that people can have in terms of handling cases successfully.  But the most fundamental of all is the person who is presenting the case and that's the lawyer.  He has to feel and believe in what he's doing or she is doing.  If he does he has a chance, if you have no belief in it, you're in trouble.  And that's the way I go about it.
Story_ID: 83391
Speaker 1: Have you ever been in a situation where you really couldn't believe in your client?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And what I've done is withdraw.  Withdraw from the case.  I would rather withdraw after I've had the case and make a refund to the client than to go into a case that I have no faith in.  And I start out at the very beginning telling a client I want you to understand that I can do the very best I can as long as I maintain faith in you about what is going on, and therefore it's important for you to tell me everything you know about it right now and let me make my judgment as to how I feel I can help you.  If I don't feel I can help you, I don't want to be on your case.  And most of them accept that and are pleased to have me tell them that, so much so that I have many, many young--most of my practice is African American, although I have a mixed practice, I have mixed attorneys as well, but many of the young men come back to me to talk to me after the case is over.  I meet them they come up and hug me because I spend so much time with them trying to get them to see the necessity of them being guarded against the kind of setting that they found themselves in, sometimes because they're with other people, sometimes because they are imprudent in what they're doing.  And I can't say that every person that has been found not guilty in a case that I've handled didn't do what was charged.  I can only say that it is the duty of the prosecutor, if it's a criminal case, to prove and convince the trier of fact that there is guilt.  And it's my duty to make sure he follows the rules.  And in those instances that I have represented so many young guys, they come back to me and they thank me, and I'm constantly lecturing them remember what I said about it, stay away from those kind of things, and some of them listen to me, others don't.
Story_ID: 83392
Speaker 1: We're at a time now in the black community where there are more and more young men, higher and higher percentage going to prison.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think there's a certain age group and the statistics are unbelievably high, and maybe half or more are in the criminal justice system at some point.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well one of the big problems we've had in Chicago for a long period of time is that more African Americans go to jail who are convicted of crime than people who are not African Americans.  And in those instances where for example you try to negotiate a plea, your client is in a situation or you try to get the judge to give him an opportunity, don't send him to jail, okay.  They send him.  When the same thing happens to people of a different race, particularly Caucasian, the tendency is for the judge not to send them to jail.  And one of the reasons that the judges take that position is that the jails are loaded with blacks who are not gonna like this person, he's in a minority and he's gonna be picked on.  And therefore they want to do everything they can to keep that kid out of that kind of setting.  I had to literally put myself in a position of being held in contempt of court arguing with an African American judge about his announced intention of sending my client to jail on a case that he had tried as a bench trial, and I was representing the client.  He found him guilty, I believe as I recall, it was a lesser included offense but he said he was going to send him to jail.  And when he said that, I said Judge well I'd like a few days before that happens and the case was continued because I wanted the judge to settle down.  I came back, I think it was about eight or ten days and I had prepared a motion and presented it to the judge regarding the sentence.  And I went on to tell him a story about how this was happening and how it was that it wasn't just white judges doing it, it was black judges.  And the black judges should see through this and that it was important for him to understand that if there was some concern by white judges about sending whites to the jail, there should be some concern by black judges sending blacks to the jail.  I said there has to be some balance here.  I said there are more white judges out there than there are black judges.  And we need to have black judges be conscious of that.  There has to be some way of balancing this thing out.  We can't de-elect a judge just because he sends a black guy to prison, but we certainly can have sensitivity on the part of black judges to this problem.  And he in the courtroom took a position of saying to me, how dare you raise that kind of comment or that kind of argument to me involved in this case and so on and so on and so on.  And I started back with my argument again, putting in the little different and fresh stuff in there.  And he says we're gonna recess this case, and I said well judge want time do you want to come back.  We're coming back in two weeks.  Two weeks we came back.  I heard Mr. Blair's argument, I want everybody to know that that doesn't affect me one iota in terms of how I handle my cases.  I don't know what other judges do, I know what I do in this courtroom and I handle my court in a fair way.  And as a result I'm only concerned about the welfare of the defendant that I sentence.  And you young man, I'm sentencing you to probation.  This is the guy he was sending to jail.  And call the next case, and that was it.  Now this is a lawy--judge that I know.  He has never said a word to me about that since, when he was off the bench or on the bench or anytime.  I see him, hi, how you doing, you know.
Speaker 1: One can probably surmise that you had some influence on him.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's no question.  He said he was sending him to jail, and he was going to send him that day, but for the fact that I asked for an extension of time for him to be sentenced.
Story_ID: 83393
Speaker 1: We have a--don't you think we live in a time where the black community, especially those who have something to lose, property or a stake in the community are also the victims of drug crimes or drug-related crimes, and are often afraid of young people in general and want to solve this--solve the--come to some sweeping move--
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --You know by the criminal justice system--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, I think--do you think that we're getting more repressive as a community or less repressive in terms of how we treat our own.
Speaker 2: I think that there is more repressive action.  I think that we sometimes go overboard when that happens.  We do not take into consideration that fact that many of these people who are involved in crime have had circumstances around them that has made it--you know the circumstances have made it difficult for them to function in a normal and reasonable way.  Some of the people who are caught with guns, for example, they're carry guns because they're afraid to be on the street without one.  They haven't robbed anybody, they're not carrying drugs, they're simply interested in going to girlfriend's house, staying there until eleven or twelve o'clock at night and then being able to go back home without being beat up or robbed by some gang member, so that they are a number of things that have to be considered.  Judges sometimes will consider that and sometimes they won't.  But I do believe that if you live in the community, you have relatives and friends and they've been exposed to problems that you know about, it's easier for you to relate to that and try to take repressive action than it is if you live on the north shore somewhere and you not have any contact with the African Americans.  But sometimes that's a detachment that causes you to feel that well they should be in jail anyway, got no business out here, you see.
Story_ID: 83394
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask the people what their hopes and concerns are for the black community.  So that's the next question.  What are yours?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the black community is that we will realize that the ability to have a reasonable fairness in our society is to be able to have strength, not necessarily in numbers, but in terms of skill and understanding and ability to offer something to our community.  If many of us make an effort to do that, we're gonna find that we're in demand in a way that is meaningful as opposed to being the person that is not wanted.  Best example I can give you is this, if you're driving down the highway and all of a sudden there's a tragic accident that takes place and someone gets out of the car who is a doctor, someone gets out of the car who is white and not a doctor, who is it that the friend of the patient is going to want to have next to the patient.  He's gonna want the doctor and that is true in many ways, not just in total professional environments, but in terms of dealing with people, in terms of being around children, who do we want around our children, people who have qualities about them that we can benefit from, people who we understand will offer rather than destroy.  And the more we can do that with ourselves, the more the light will shine beyond our borders and into the homes and lives of those who otherwise would tend to want to oppress us.
Story_ID: 83395
Speaker 1: Sir, at this point in your life, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that my work with the Chicago Bar as the first African American; I think that has helped. I have worked with a lot of my peers, I think that on the basis of dealing with other lawyers, trying to be helpful to them whenever I could, telling them whenever I see them that if anything I can help you with, let me know.  I talked to lawyers from time to time and they ask me about things that they're concerned about.  Sometimes cases, sometimes professional things in terms of relationships with clients because of my long experience on the Board of the Attorney Registration Disciplinary Commission Review Board, I'm able to give them ideas on how they should try to deal with certain problems and be within the bounds of ethical propriety.  I believe that I have contributed, of course, to my friends and to my family and I think that probably in the long run will be the legacy that I will offer that perhaps is dearest to my heart.  But I feel that my contribution to any number of people that I've represented will also be something that is very, very important as far as I'm concerned.  I represented a woman in a medical negligence case who had--her case had been in the hands of a lawyer up to two weeks before the statute of limitations was to run.  She came into my office and started to talk about the case involving her husband who had passed away as a result of the problems that had occurred, the medical negligence aspect.  And in turn what she did was to start crying as she was telling me about it.  And I started trying to get information in order that I would be able to review doctors records, find out who the parties were involved and be able to recommend someone to her.  And she said, no, I want you to handle the case.  Someone sent me to you and she told me who it was, I don't remember now.  I want you to do it because I know if you do it, you're gonna do your very best.  Well, we were not able to get all of the correct names of all of the doctors, but we got names close enough that when we ultimately filed the case and subpoenaed records, we were able to put in the correct names that nobody every objected to them.  We went ahead and we succeeded after going to California to take depositions, we were able to succeed in getting her a substantial recovery on behalf of her husband.
Story_ID: 83396
Speaker 1: And what had happened we had worked so hard trying to get the information to know who to file the case against, it turned out that the statute of limitations was about to run, the very day we filed.  We hadn't been able to be sure about some of the names and we were afraid that we were gonna lose out.  So we worked until the last minute.  Twenty minutes before the courts were to close, I told my secretary at the time, I want you to go down to the Daley Center to file this.  We were located at the time at 400 South Dearborn, and the Daley Center is straight down Dearborn, of course, to Randolph Street.  So I sent her out, she just got out the door and she was waiting for the elevator and I said, no, wait a minute, and she said what is it, because we've been working feverishly all day long and for the last two or three days on this one case.  I said I'm not going to send you down there.  If they give you trouble we won't be able to get this filed and the statute will run.  I guess that must have taken another minute or so with me talking to her.  We went down the stairs and we had to wait, it seemed like forever for a cab to come along, and that's one of the busiest corners in the city.  The cab finally came.  We got to the place--to the clerk's office.  When I got there, the door, sure enough was locked.  I knocked on the door real--it wasn't four thirty, it was four twenty-five, I knocked on the door and I said--they said to me, what is it, what is it.  I said (pointing) and he said, closed, closed.  I said, look at that clock.  I said it is five minutes, and I'm talking through the crack in the door, I says it's five minutes before you're supposed to close this court, and if you don't open this door and file this case, you're not gonna have a job tomorrow.  Then the guy came to the door and says oh what are you making such a big fuss about.  I said today is the statute of limitations, buddy.  Oh, why didn't you tell me?  They went ahead and filed my case, stamped it, I think something like four twenty-eight, four twenty-nine and we went ahead and of course succeeded with the case.  But can you imagine.  The average lawyer would not have taken that case.  I kind of think now that I was a little goofy to take it because you jeopardize your ability as a lawyer.  For example, if I had not been able to file that before the statute had run, and she complained that I kept the case two weeks, that statute ran and she couldn't go forward with the case, I'm at fault, I'm at fault.  And these are the kinds of things that you're exposed to from time to time.  But I was happy I was able to help her.  She'd lost her husband and she needed redress and that's what I tried to give her.
Story_ID: 83397
Speaker 1: Something you're going to be doing very soon, I think within the next week is explaining, I guess, part of Chicago's legal legacy to some people at Harold Washington Library regards to Lorraine Hansberry's play--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --"A Raisin in the Sun".
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Well, Lorraine Hansberry of course is a young African American author who had a play that was produced on Broadway, I believe, in 1959.  And she was a very skilled writer.  She didn't do a lot in the way of quantity of writing because she died very early in life.  But she is a former resident of the South Side of Chicago.  Her father was a real estate developer.  And during the war, well actually before the war [World War II], he had been developing properties and buying properties and reselling it and so on.  And according to something that I read by Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious [HM], the family was fairly well to do because she says in the late '30s' (1930s) they had several cars and chauffeurs in their household.  This was something that was found printed in a book written by Dempsey Travis [HM] who was a well-known historian, and also a real estate developer in Chicago.  In any event, her father apparently was always trying to have new frontiers, break down those barriers that were preventing blacks from having a place to stay.  In the '30s' (1930s) and the '40s' (1940s) there was a great number of blacks that came to the Chicago area from the south; there had to be housing for them.  Because of the attitudes of whites that they didn't really want to be living around blacks, there was a kind of an untold, unspoken word that blacks would live in certain parts of the city and whites would live in other parts of the city.  Blacks were restricted along the corridor near State Street east of what is now oh I guess it would be LaSalle Street and then they would go as far south as sixty-third, somewhere around there.  It turns out that Mr. Hansberry was one of the persons who was helpful in finding housing for people and he wanted to buy land in an area that blacks were not supposed to be buying land in.
Story_ID: 83398
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Will you follow upon the story about Mr. Hansberry?
Speaker 2: So [Carl] Hansberry wanted to--he was very, very effective in helping to provide housing for African Americans coming into the Chicago area.  They were coming in large numbers.  The thing that developed as a result of this, not just of Hansberry, but because of the large numbers of blacks coming in, they established restrictive covenants.  And those covenants were designed to keep them away from certain areas where white people were living and give them the housing that was either the run down housing or areas where whites had abandoned more or less.  As a result you couldn't buy a house in an area where the restrictive covenants said that no blacks should live there.  And in order to get around this, Hansberry proceeded to have a white person buy some property for him that he intended to have a colored family occupy.  After he bought the property, it was discovered that he was African American and the property was being bought for him and therefore they went in to try and strike or void the sale.  The case went through all the courts and ultimately to the State Supreme Court and ultimately to the United States Supreme Court.  It turns out that the Courts held that the restrictive covenant could not be used.  And that was the more or less substance of what it was all about.  The thing that embellishes it, it makes it such a poignant history is that his daughter [Lorraine Hansberry] who was living in the house at the same time this was happening became a writer, and she wrote a story that depicted this particular situation with Sidney Poitier serving as the actor who performed the part in the play and ultimately the part in the film.  It embellished it in such a way that it became an outstanding piece of work.  It was a good piece of work, Poitier simply helped to make it well known because he did such a magnificent job in the role that he played in that particular play.  But she had gone to New York, I believe, before her play was ever published.  And it was published in New York, I think she was living in New York, and she died early of illness, I'm not sure what it was, but it turns out that she didn't get a chance to produce more of her talent in the way that we liked for her to have done because of her passing.  But that's an interesting experience to have a father be involved in a lawsuit of that type that affect us who are African American only to have his daughter tell the story and tell it in such a poignant way that it becomes a national--international thing, it doesn't happen often.
Story_ID: 83399
Speaker 1: Sir, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I would just like to be remembered as someone who worked hard, who tried to do the right thing, not necessarily in the language of Spike Lee's movie, but the right thing in terms of fairness to those who are around me and those that I interact with and that hopefully that's how I'll be remembered.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Thank you, thank you.
Story_ID: 83400
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Johnnie Cochran who is at a book store, and it was just around the corner.  I went by to say hello to him and he shook my hand because during the time that he was having his trial with O.J. Simpson, in fact, before the trial started, a friend of mine, a fellow by the name of Phil Corboy, one of Chicago's most famous lawyers and past president of Chicago Bar, had said to Johnnie in a telephone message, says, Johnnie, I'd like for you to come and speak to our Association and whether you win or lose, we still want you to come and visit with us.  And of course I was part of the group that had something to do with that.  As a result he won due to his great lawyering skills and he came to give a presentation to guests and members of the Chicago Bar Association.  It turns out that I met him at that and at several other events after that.  So when he wrote the book and I went by to see him, he remembered me and graciously said hello to me.  By the way he is a partner with Jim [James] Montgomery [HM] who is also a very, very close friend of mine.  Sorry I don't have a picture of Jim.
Speaker 2: So this was right after the trial?
Speaker 1: That was shortly after the trial when he had the book, right after he printed his book.  This is--I'm there on the left with a gentleman who is next to me known as Wilborne(ph) Woods and after Wilborne Woods, I'm going from left to right is Dr. Margaret Burroughs [HM] of the DuSable Museum, and I had did some legal work for her family in past years.  And right next to her is Howard Brookins, a former senator of the State of Illinois.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  When was this taken?
Speaker 1: I can't really remember the year now when that was taken.  But I think it was shortly after he had gotten a bill passed in the Senate, State Senate, granting $500,000 to the DuSable Museum in order that it could be enlarged and he is really responsible along with Dr. Burroughs in putting it on a sort of footing to make it a classic institution.  And now there's much more money has been voted to improve it.  This is a picture that goes back to 1946.  It's a picture taken by one of the federal buildings in Washington, D.C.  And the occasion was all of the youth councils of the United States were meeting there in an annual meeting and one of the key people there that I could point to is Thurgood Marshall who is right here and there's another person of less prominence of course, Chester Blair, which is me right here standing in front of him.  It's coincidental that I happened to be there.  I think possibly because I was talking to Marshall just before the picture was taken, so I had to step down with the other youth council presidents.  I was president of the NAACP Youth Council of Houston, Texas at the time.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Can you point yourself and Mr. Marshall out one more time?
Speaker 1: Here is Thurgood here.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: And here I am here.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Are you in this?
Speaker 2: Many of the police officers here are, in fact, all of them are officers.  They were holding high-ranking positions with Rochford.  He was the commander at the time.  One of the people that's here that went on to become superintendent himself is Rice, Fred Rice, he became superintendent and he was an outstanding superintendent.  He's been to my house several times for dinner.  He's a great fellow.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  What year was this?
Speaker 2: His wife--his daughter--his daughter is--that was taken, I believe, in about 1984 or '83' (1983).  Now that young lady there is my wife and that is--this was my second marriage of course, and this picture was taken in 1968 and of course we have two children, one is a graduate of Princeton, the other is a graduate of--what is the University out in California?
Speaker 1: UCLA?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Stanford, Stanford.  And she also, the daughter is--our daughter is also graduate of the University of California at San Francisco Medical School and our son has a doctorate degree.  This is a picture that shows the new and the first African American Chief Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County.  To the left I'm here, Chester Blair, here's a past president of Chicago Bar, and the person that I want to emphasize here is Tim Evans, this is a former Supreme Court Justice, George--what is it, isn't that Simon, yeah, Seymore Simon and this is the executive secretary Terry Murphy of the CBA.  The event  honored judge of the--now we have in this picture an event taking place involving Chicago State University.  And it was during the time that Delores Cross was the president and I was chairman of the president's advisory committee of Chicago State.  This is a little event that was taken place there.  So this is Dr. Cross and here I am and to my left is my wife Judy Blair.  We were being quite intrigued by some of the comments of Dr. Cross.  Now this is a picture of a classroom and the teacher.  The teacher is here and that's me, Chester Blair, and the rest of these kids are my students.  They were the first class I ever had as an assigned teacher.  I was graduated in 1952 and this is the fall of 1952 and it's at the Haines Elementary School is where I taught.  This group of course is from the year 1956, four years later.  It's a classroom of youngsters that I was the teacher of.  I'm standing here to the left, Chester Blair.  I ran for alderman of the 24th Ward in 1979. There was a van that was used to go throughout the ward to try and get votes for me and I would talk to people.  This is a photograph of the side of the van with some of the literature that was being distributed along with a picture of me standing there that was used of me to distribute throughout the ward when I was running for alderman.  This was in 1979.  They were having a benefit on my behalf at that time.
