Story_ID: 495471
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Freeman, F-R-E-E-M-A-N, Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N, Bosley, B-O-S-L-E-Y, Jr. [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.]
Speaker 1: All right, so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 20, 1954, and the place of my birth is St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: And you are the first elected black mayor of St. Louis, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I am.
Speaker 1: Or you were.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I was elected and inaugurated in April of 1993 and served until April of 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is a good question (laughter).  Today is income tax day for late filers, which makes it October 15, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Presently you are at my law offices advising associates [Bosley and Associates LLC], 611 N. 10th Street, Suite 300, Corner of 10th and Washington [Avenue] in downtown St. Louis.
Story_ID: 495472
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they only really require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Black.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The truth crushed to the earth shall rise again.
Story_ID: 495473
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's full name is Marjorie, M-A-R-J-O-R-I-E, Ellen, E-L-L-E-N, Bosley, B-O-S-L-E-Y [Marjorie Robertson Bosley].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth was July 7, 1935, and my mother was born right here in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  Did, did they originate in St. Louis as far as you know?  Is there any other origin for them?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's father is Melvin Robertson.  He comes from the, they come out of Pulaski, Illinois.  George [George Robertson] and Marjorie Robertson [Margie Robertson]; that was my mother's grandfather.  On my dad's side, it was a little different.  They come from Arkansas.  But, my father--my mother's father, Melvin Robertson, was born in St. Louis.  My mother's mother, however, Minnie Robertson, her maiden name is Harvey [ph.], and the Harveys came up from Chickasaw County out of Mississippi, out of Tupelo, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so now where is Pulaski, Illinois?  Is that close to St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not that close--well it's not that far, either, as transportation goes.
Speaker 1: Is it in southern Illinois?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it is.
Speaker 1: And then cross the Ohio [Ohio River] somewhere?
Speaker 2: Yes, Pulaski.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay  So, are there any stories from your mother's side of the family?  Either the Pulaski side, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my grandfather fought, I'm sorry, he'd be my great-grandfather, fought in the Spanish American War, George Robertson.  And he lived to be about ninety-seven years old, so he had--
Speaker 1: Do you know if he was in the 25th Infantry [25th Infantry Division] or the 10th Cavalry [10th Cavalry Regiment]--
Speaker 2: I'm not exactly sure, but we have his, his papers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have his papers from the war, so it wouldn't be hard for us to find out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's one of the things, 'cause I know the 10th Cavalry took San Juan Hill [Cuba]--
Speaker 2: Cool.
Speaker 1: That they give Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] credit for doing, but the 10th, I know personally did it, you know.
Speaker 2: And that was a black regiment.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Tenth Cavalry, yeah.  So--I always wondered.  I know the 25th Infantry was there too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, did he have any stories from the war about seeing (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, but I was too young to remember.  They didn't get passed down to me.  I would love to have had 'em, though.
Speaker 1: Anybody in your family named Maceo?
Speaker 2: No, no.  No Maceos.
Speaker 1: That traces back to the war too, but, anyway.
Speaker 2: The name Maceo?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because Antonio Maceo [Antonio Maceo Grajales] was a leader of the blacks in Cuba.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Any stories from your grandmother's side from Mississippi, from Chickasaw?
Speaker 2: Well, not a lot.  I just know that it's a lot of Harveys.  It's--a lot of Harveys came up from out of Mississippi and came here to St. Louis, and they were in what you call The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri] area of the city of St. Louis, and it was so many Harveys that they had an area designated for, named after themselves, called Harveyville [ph.].
Speaker 1: So this is in the what area of St. Louis?
Speaker 2: The Ville area.
Speaker 1: The Ville, okay, the Ville, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, where Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri] is located.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, the Ville.  Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You've heard of that area before.  Where Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] is located.
Speaker 1: Harveyville.  So, they, they occupied a few blocks or--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at least enough territory--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where people--
Speaker 2: Recognized it as theirs, (laughter) or at least identified the area as where they could be found.
Story_ID: 495474
Speaker 1: So what, you have a long history in St. Louis [Missouri] here.  What did your mother's [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] side of the family say about, I mean, did your mother talk about growing up in St. Louis and what it was like when she was coming along?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom and--talked a little bit about growing up here.  Pretty much saying she went to grade school at Simmons Grade School [Simmons Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] and high school at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], a lot of activities and events centered around big things going on in St. Louis like particularly the Annie Malone Parade [Annie Malone May Day Parade], which is one of the largest African American parades in the country.
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit about Annie Malone.  I'd--she's the--
Speaker 2: Beautician (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Poro society lady, right. The beautician.
Speaker 2: She was the Poro society beautician, a woman very high with an entrepreneurial spirit, probably massed well over a million dollars in the '30s [1930s].  Just a woman that was very spiritual in nature and very strong willed, and supported the African American community.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's comparable to Madam Walker [Madam C.J. Walker] for all--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Same kind of products and similar success.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Started a college [Poro College, St. Louis, Missouri], beauty school, yes.
Speaker 1: They're all over the United States from what I understand, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she had a parade every year?
Speaker 2: Had and still does.  It's called the Annie Malone Parade, and it, she started what we call the Annie Malone Orphan Home [sic. Annie Malone Children's Home; Annie Malone Children and Family Services, St. Louis, Missouri].  I imagine that the parade started out being a parade recognizing accomplishments in the African American community but it was also something I believe that was a tribute to just black people and it just grew, it grew by leaps and bounds and has continued to this day to be one of the largest gatherings, not only in the African American community but in the  St. Louis community, well over 110,000 people show up to view this parade and the routes have people just lined, sometimes three, four people deep, rows deep, from the beginning all the way to the end of the parade.
Speaker 1: What street does it usually come down?
Speaker 2: The parade used to wind through The Ville area where Annie Malone's children's home actually was.  It would start up around Page [Boulevard] and Kingshighway [Boulevard] and meander throughout the community and eventually working its way over to Ashland [Avenue] and then over Ashland to Kennerly [Avenue] and then down Kennerly and then emptying out on the grounds of Turner Middle School [St. Louis, Missouri].
Story_ID: 495475
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] go to Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother went to Sumner, yes.  My mother, father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.], almost Africa- everybody growing up in St. Louis [Missouri] black either went to Sumner or Vashon [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in tha- in those days those are the two black high schools basically for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Now, what was your mother, what is she interested in?  What does she do?
Speaker 2: My mother's interest basically was, she was interested in modeling as a young lady.  Was able to find a few little jobs doing that.  Then after that got a job with Southwestern Bell Telephone Company [SBC Communications Inc.], worked for that, worked that for a while, and then from there went on to work for the [U.S.] military at the aviation troop support command center [U.S. Army Aviation and Troop Command, St. Louis, Missouri; U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Command, Huntsville, Alabama], which was on Goodfellow [Boulevard].  They then closed that and then moved it to Huntsville, Alabama, and it just so happens that my mother had enough time to take advantage of what they call probably early out and retired at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it the [U.S.] Air Force or the--
Speaker 2: It's the [U.S.] Army (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Army, okay.
Speaker 2: And part of her job, basically is something really simple that many of us forget about is that she was responsible for trying to make sure that as the troops were moving or wherever the Army personnel were, that they had water and that she would have to plot the course and figure out how much water would be needed and where it would be located and how it would be- how it would get to the military personnel.
Story_ID: 495476
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Freeman McDuff Bosley [Freeman Bosley, Sr.].  It was really starting over from the beginning, it was King Freeman McDuff Bosely.
Speaker 1: King Freeman McDuff Bosley, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And so somewhere along the line, he, he dropped the King and he dropped the McDuff, and just Freeman Bosley.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind that name?  King?  King Freeman--
Speaker 2: Yes, there is and I think that I don't know how that came together but there was, my father's mother [Alma Bosley] was in charge of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and my father had eight brothers and sisters, so there was probably a Bosley over at Sumner High School every year for almost ten years in a row, and my grandmother was the president of the PTA for well over ten years, and so she created a relationship with a lady named Ms. Freeman [ph.] over at the school and they got to be close friends for whatever reason, my grandmother was a great gardener and there are some things of that nature but she and Ms. Freeman got to be good friends and so that's where the Freeman comes from, and I can't quite remember whether King had got in or the McDuff, but there is a story behind both of those too, and I've heard of it, I just can't--
Speaker 1: The McDuff sounds like a character from 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare].
Speaker 2: Well, Bosley is Irish and somewhere when you trace our roots back, they go back to two gentleman by the name of Dug [ph.] and Dunk Bosley, who came over during slavery days and hooked up with some women that really turned out to be one of my great-great-great-grandmothers, and so when you hear that word McDuff, that's in there somewhere coming from that Dug and Dunk Bosley.
Speaker 1: Does?
Speaker 2: Dug, D-U- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dug and Dunk--
Speaker 2: Dunk, D-U-N-K.
Speaker 1: And Dunk (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sounds like some donuts, doesn't it?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Bosley, now these were two Irishmen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Irishmen, yes.
Speaker 1: --who came over here--
Speaker 2: From Ireland.
Speaker 1: And they became involved with two black women--
Speaker 2: Black women.
Speaker 1: Two black women, I guess, and now, and so there, I guess the source is--
Speaker 2: Part of the patriarchs.
Speaker 1: The name Bosley, all right.  Now, tell us a little bit about, some more about the ancestors on your father's side.  So, we know, we can go back, we can trace back to Dug and Dunk, and they would be like what, before the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right along there.  Right before the Civil War.  And I can't quite bring you back too much further than that.  We've got this whole family tree that is ex- very extensive that I'm glad and grateful that one of my aunts was able to put that together.
Story_ID: 495477
Speaker 1: But for some reason or another, they wind up in Arkansas, and that's when my [paternal] grandfather comes up from out of Arkansas, got into a disagreement with a German down there and it appeared that his family thought it was in his best interest that he depart forthwith, and wind up here in St. Louis [Missouri] and up here he met my grandmother, Alma Jean Bosley [Alma Bosley], and--
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is Preston Bosley, your grandfather.
Speaker 1: Preston, P.T. Bosley, yes.  This is my father's father.
Speaker 2: P.T., what does the T stand for?
Speaker 1: Tyler.  Preston Tyler Bosley.
Speaker 2: He was, he was raised in Little Rock [Arkansas] but left at--do you know what he did?  Is there a story about what happened?
Speaker 1: I don't know the specifics, but it was a disagreement.  I don't know what it was about, but they felt that for his health, (laughter) safety and welfare, he needed to come on up out of there and so, you know, I think we all know that these stories are not unique with--
Speaker 2: This is a conflict with a white man.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This stories are not unique, where we hear about African Americans who have had issues with white people, and their families are deciding that it's best that they leave as opposed to one, either bring it home to the family or two, bring it home upon yourselves.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, about when was it that he left?
Speaker 1: My grandfather passed when he was about ninety-three years old, so I would imagine that he was in his early twenties when he came up here, so we're probably talking close to about 1920.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So 1920 or so.  Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us a little bit about your grandfather.  I know there are some interesting stories about him so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, my grandfather was pretty much a self-made man, self-educated person.  I don't think my grandfather finished high school, but read extensively, educated himself better than almost anybody that I've had a chance to meet and talk to, could speak English very well, gives speeches and could articulate extremely well without even a note, could read legal material, would show up at meetings and take people to task about certain language and sentence structure and things like that, and then becom- became actively involved in the St. Louis community.  He along with some gentlemen and some women helped create what they call the Central City Foods [Yeatman Central City Foods, Inc.], which was the first African American-owned grocery here in St. Louis in the early '60s [1960s] and out of that they went on to form things like the Fairfax Senior Citizens group [Fairfax Senior Citizens Center, St. Louis, Missouri], which was an entity set up to help service the interests and needs of seniors, African Americans as they became old.  Another component was they developed what was called the Yeatman Corporation [Yeatman Community Development Corporation], which was a community service agency and that then applied to the federal government and got itself set up and was able to create its own health clinic [Yeatman Community Health Center, St. Louis, Missouri] and from Yeatman Corporation, they went on to start several other businesses and one of them was the first African American-owned sporting goods here in the St. Louis community, so they were quite enterprising, and my grandfather seemed to really get excited about those type of things.
Speaker 2: And so he's an entrepreneur, active in the community--
Speaker 1: Yes. Slash almost, I guess you, I almost think he was a lawyer the way he would talk to you and be able to discuss things with you.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: But he could recite poetry, he could write poems, I mean, he was a very, he was very li- I mean he was very interested in literature and things of that nature.  Somewhere along the line he got a job working for the post office, and back then the mail, like you see trucks delivering mail now, the mail was delivered by railroad, and so he worked on the railroad car, helping to deliver mail, and I guess somewhere along the lines he developed an expertise at shooting pool, and so he was, he was one that would loom very large in terms of a presence at the pool hall that was located on West Bale [ph.] and (unclear) and some of his pass-times were, favorite pastimes were shooting pool.  As a matter of fact, he taught me how to shoot pool, which I really enjoy and to this day, when I get a chance, we enjoy a good game of pool.  But, one of the, I guess things that we enjoy most in the Bosley family that my grandfather exposed us to was fishing, and my grandfather started all of us fishing.  I could first remember going fishing I was about, I caught my first fish when I was about three years old, and I got so excited about it that they wouldn't, I wouldn't let them put the fish back in the water and carried it around with me all day, and so ever since, I've always, every chance I've gotten to enjoy myself, I like to go fishing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, your grandfather died, he was about ninety--
Speaker 1: Ninety-three.
Speaker 2: Ninety-three?
Speaker 1: In 1993.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he was born at the turn of the century then?
Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right? Exactly.  Okay.
Story_ID: 495478
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.].  What--did he talk about growing up and what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well my dad grew up here in St. Louis [Missouri], and he went to Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] along with everybody else.  He was the second to the youngest of the eight, and all of my father's brothers and sisters got scholarships and went on to graduate from four-year colleges with degrees in various aspects of disciplines.  We've got a psychologist in our family, we've got a chemist in our family, school teachers, map specialists, and my dad went on to a place called DeVry Institute of Technology in Chicago [sic. DeVry Technical Institute; DeVry University] and the interesting thing about that is that he had to re-, since they didn't let blacks in the school, he represented the fact that he was Puerto Rican, and he was able to get in the school on the guise that he was a Puerto Rican, and while he was there, if he was Puerto Rican, they wouldn't expect him to be speaking English, so my father went to that school for two-and-a-half to three years, and never spoke a word of English--they never heard him speak a word of English.  He taught himself, well he learned Spanish at Sumner, but he became very fluent in it over the years and my father probably can speak Spanish better than just about anybody I know.
Speaker 1: That's incredible.  That's--so he went there three years.  They thought he was Puerto Rican.
Speaker 2: Puerto Rican, yeah.  And never, they never heard him speak a word of English.
Speaker 1: Hm.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 495479
Speaker 1: So, what, what trade did he learn at DeVry [DeVry Technical Institute; DeVry University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: TV, ra- TV, radio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and TV repair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he became very good at that and expanded upon those skills and learned about electricity and became one of the most prominent electricians, African American electricians in the St. Louis [Missouri] metropolitan area.  My father, interesting story, I heard my aunt tell the story that my father got a job over at General Electric, which was (unclear), portions of the company (unclear) located over on Etzel [Avenue] off of Skinker [Parkway] and my father started repairing some of the machines and as technology grew and became more sophisticated, they would bring in these large lightbulb-making machines and filament twisting equipment and filament generating equipment, and there was nobody there that knew how to install the equipment and so they took the directions and things to my father, and my father was the one that learned how to install equipment, so whenever any of the state-of-the-art equipment came in, there was nobody there to install it but my father, or if the equipment would break, they would say well go get Freeman [Freeman Bosley, Sr.], and my father would be the person that they would get to come in and repair the equipment, so he is a quick study and my dad was a very entrepreneurial-type person; as a matter of fact, he started one of the first African American owned record companies in the country.
Speaker 1: What was that one called?
Speaker 2: Teek Records.
Speaker 1: That's T--
Speaker 2: E-E-K.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's something.  He was an entrepreneur.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did a lot and never turned it into a Motown [Motown Records], but was trying and I think what happened was he didn't become astute at being able to deal with the deejays and the promotion aspect of what he had, and it did not work out to be financially profitable for him.
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the artists on Teek?
Speaker 2: Little Herbert and The Arabians, they came out with a song called 'Bouncing Ball.'  There was another song--and my father would write these songs--and another one called 'Searching For My Man,' by Dot and The Velvelettes, which was, as a matter of my fact, my father, when you start talking to my dad, as a matter of fact, he is one of these people that you probably need to interview because my father built one of the first recording studios in St. Louis and he built it in our basement, and so he would record, I mean, you're talking about a state-of-the-art facility in our basement and people would come from all over the city to record their records, or at least if they felt they could make one, in our basement and my father built the whole thing.
Speaker 1: So he did all the work himself?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  Soundproofed it.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: Probably about 1960. Sixty [1960], '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's about the same time that Motown would get started in Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about the same time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis and Chess Records, they were doing it in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Part of the record business as I understood it was you just had to make sure that your stuff got played.  You know, people are making plenty of records.  I mean, there was plenty of music out, but it was hard to, you just had to have the connections to get it played.  If you could get it played, then you wind up being able to generally get your hit, but being here in St. Louis, the African American population was not as strong as it was in Detroit at that time, so his ability to be able to penetrate the disk jockey network and to get into the promotional aspect and get to see the program directors, some of these studios and things--it just wasn't--he just didn't have connections.
Story_ID: 495480
Speaker 1: Now, now one thing he [Bosley's father, Freeman Bosley, Sr.] did is he got connected with the political life of the community and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Was elected to city council, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: And in St. Louis [Missouri] you call it an alderman.
Speaker 2: Board of Aldermen, City of St. Louis, yes.
Speaker 1: And now, when was he elected?
Speaker 2: My father first ran, we had an interesting thing take place.  We moved into a community up on Grand [Boulevard] and Natural Bridge [Avenue], north St. Louis, around, must have around about 1964.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the significance of north St. Louis?  Is that--
Speaker 2: That's where the African American community lives and resides.  But, it was in, certain portions of it was in transition, where a lot of the area was, a lot of the people, ethnic groups, Germans, and Irish lived, and generally what happened when, just like anything else, when the black people started showing up, then the white people started leaving, and so what happened was in this area where we were around Grand and Natural Bridge, once I got to be about eleven or twelve years old, the neighborhood started going into transition, and so by the time I was sixteen years old--and we first moved there when I was ten--and the area was probably 75 percent white and 25 percent black from when I was ten years old.  When I turned sixteen, it turned around.  It was 75 to 80 percent black and 25 to maybe 20 percent white, and so along with that came political empowerment and black people began to get registered and started to participate in the electoral process, and so my father had an arrangement with some people in our neighborhood, that we would support them as they ran for committeeman and committeewoman, and they then would turn around and support my father for alderman, and my father was supposed to run for alderman in 1972, '73 [1973], the race for committeeman and committeewoman was in 1972, so we helped get these people elected to be committeeman and committeewoman in 1972, but lo and behold, they decided they didn't want to support my dad, for alderman they supported somebody else, so in 1973, we lost that race and then my dad came back and ran for it in 1977 and got elected.
Story_ID: 495481
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father's [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] campaign for alderman.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He made the Board of Aldermen [St. Louis, Missouri].  That was in seventy- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1977.
Speaker 1: --seven [1977], okay.
Speaker 2: In 1977.
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977] and he served how long?
Speaker 2: My dad?  He's still there.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's still--
Speaker 2: And my father ran for mayor in 1985, and that was an unsuccessful campaign, and so he had to sit out until 1989, so he came back and won it again in '89 [1989] and he has been the alderman ever since, so from 1977 or so, it's almost thirty, man it's a long time, thirty years.  With the exception of four (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he's been in the city council [Board of Aldermen, St. Louis, Missouri]--
Speaker 2: With the exception of four, so you've got twenty-six years.
Speaker 1: Has he been in the city council longer than anybody else?  Is that--
Speaker 2: No, we've got people that, there are other political families here like the Villas, that I think had, maybe thirty-four years or something like that, but he's on his way to be one of the longest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Which would be quite (unclear).
Speaker 1: He's not the first black elected to the City Council, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no. You had several others, many before my dad.  I wouldn't have any idea.  The first one is probably around in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And your dad represents the 3rd Ward [Ward 3, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: The 3rd Ward, which is one of the most economically depressed areas in the city.  Our zip code is prominently known as 63107, and one of the highest crime rates probably, one of the highest infant mortality rates in the city.  It is a, it's probably the most economically depressed Ward in St. Louis [Missouri], our ward, the 3rd Ward.
Story_ID: 495482
Speaker 1: Now is there a s-, where did your father go to school, now?  He, he went to Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis] too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Sumner and then the DeVry Institute of Technology [sic. DeVry Technical Institute; DeVry University, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then DeVry Institute of Technology.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My father was at Sumner and so was my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley], and so my dad used to play a lot of baseball and (laughter) the people in the neighborhood, I guess who they played with, my father had the bats and the balls, and so nobody could get the game going generally until Freeman [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] showed up, so we have some time in the Bosley family, we have a penchant for being tardy from time to time, so people would say where's Freeman with the balls and the bats?  And they'd say well, he's coming, so my dad generally would show up with the balls and the bats and so my aunt, my mother's sister, was complaining about it.  "Why we gotta wait?  Why we gotta wait on him," and this and that, so eventually my mother, I guess, was at one of these pickup games and that's when my dad saw her and my father was dark complected and my mother was very light complected, and so he tried to talk to her and I guess she kind of would ignore him from time to time, and eventually he just started coming by the house and I guess he wouldn't take no for an answer and then they just started dating.
Story_ID: 495483
Speaker 1: Now, was she [Bosley's mother, Marjorie Robertson Bosley], was she, did she ever talk about being consciously you know, against going out with a dark-skinned man?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't necessarily think that she was, but my grandmother was very conscious about skin color and even when I was coming up, she didn't want me talking to dark-skinned girls.  My grandmother would, if (laughter) if I'd be out on the front and meet some girls out on the front when I was about ten or eleven years old, twelve years old, my grandmother would come over and visit and she'd look outside and see me out there, she'd say, "Make him come in, make him come in the house.  He doesn't need to be out there with those dark-skinned girls."  You know, but my grandmother, I'm very extremely proud of her.  My grandmother, when she couldn't find a job, my grandmother found work as a domestic worker, so she would be at white peoples' homes 7:00 in the morning, cooking food and breakfast and getting their kids off to school and preparing lunch and cleaning up their house and preparing dinner, and meet at their house at 5:00 or 5:30, and then come home and start cooking her own meals, you know, and so she got exposed to a lot of things, but she was very conscientious about her race.  I can remember when [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond got elected to the city in Georgia.  She brought that, it was in World, United World, it was the Ebony, it made it to the Ebony magazine.  She brought me that magazine and said, "You see?  This is what you can do.  This is who you can be.  You can do this.  You can be, I want you to be just like him," and I would, of course, I was only about seven or eight years old, but it had, not knowing at that time, now I remember, so it was having some kind of impact on me.  It wasn't like I forgot, and when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] made his 'I Have a Dream' speech, my grandmother, we all knew about the speech, but my grandmother was the one that brought the speech to me.  Now, I'm eight years old.  "I want you to learn this speech," she said.  "I want you to learn this."  "Grandma, I don't know," you know how you do, but she was very conscious about that stuff.  I would hear my grandmother talking about Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  I'd hear my grandmother talking about Cassius Clay, and boxing and changing over to Muhammad Ali.  She was the one that I think was, I guess, a little more politically, maybe not more politically astute but more politically active, because she was about the business of trying to expose me, and she always wanted me to have the best in education.  There was a very private school called Christian Brothers College [Christian Brothers College High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  They call it CBC, and it was out in the county where she would go work.  My grandmother offered to pay my tuition to go to that school and she would drop me off and pick me up and more, but I wanted to, because I grew up as a Negro, I wanted to go to school with the kids I grew up with.
Speaker 1: Now is this your mother's mother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's mother.  So she was-
Speaker 1: What's her full name?
Speaker 2: Minnie [Minnie Robertson]; Harvey [ph.] was her maiden name, but Robertson was her married name and on my mother's side--
Speaker 1: She's the one that had her roots in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Chickasaw County, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, when you think about that, she was the most forceful component in my life in terms of consciousness, you see what I'm saying?  Because she was all, although she worked in these homes with the, with white people and cleaned up after them and took care of the kids and being very docile.  When she would come home, she was very strong about certain things.  But, you wouldn't think it.  I'm sure they never even thought it either, while she was working for them.
Speaker 1: Well, she's a complicated figure in a lot of ways, but mostly positive for you, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And, even though she was trying to teach me all of this, she didn't like me talking to--she probably didn't like me talking to girls, period, but I know she had if she didn't want me talking to darker skinned girls.
Speaker 1: It seems to me maybe whoever is watching this in the future, seems to be more prominent in that generation of women, that generation born at the turn of the century.  I mean, that's where I heard it from too.  But, I didn't hear it from my mother's generation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I don't, you know.  I heard it from that other generation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the previous one.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  She was very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were very conscious of that and would talk about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 495484
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' talents and abilities and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm, you know, I know I have a blend.  I think I got my, I know I got my father's [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] energy and my dad's drive.  I think I have a little bit more of my mother's [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] discipline in terms of completing, completing things or seeing things through.  What I learned from my father is that you can do a lot of things, and I learned from my dad that you can do a lot of things at once and you, it's not that you can, you don't have to find one thing and just stay with it.  You can find a lot of things and stay with them, and that's what I learned from my dad, seeing him start a record company [Teek Records], seeing him start, have a radio and TV shop, seeing him be an electrician, seeing him just do so many different things and he'd have all these things going and he was doing, for the '60s, [1960s], 1960s, he was doing good, but my mom was the one that kind of kept me focused on, because when I graduated from high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] I wanted, me and some of my friends had planned over to school over in Illinois and party for four years and my mom said, "Oh no."  "I can save my own money and pay my down payment for my room and board."  Mom said, "Oh no, you're not going over there.  You ought to go to Saint Louis University" [St. Louis, Missouri].  I didn't know she was conspiring to have my back with one of my counselors at school.  They had got me accepted at St. Louis University, which I didn't know, but she was the one that stayed on top of that and constantly making sure that the grades were right, that I was doing the work and, you know, now that I think about it I couldn't type and procrastinated a lot, and so there would be times when I'd have to crank out these term papers and things.  I'd have to have ten or fifteen page papers done and I'd be working on the papers and I wouldn't get through them until maybe ten or eleven o'clock at night and my mother would actually type those papers for me and we would meet 'til two or three o'clock in the morning typing and she'd be editing and going over stuff, "Is this what we're really talking about?"  "Is this what this is about?"  "How is this reading?"  "Does this sound good to you?"  "Think about it." It'd be three o'clock in the morning and the next thing I know I'd be getting ready to go to school.  My mother would have to get up at seven o'clock.  She'd be going to work, so she played a major role in our education, me and my sister [Pamela Bosley Byes].  She did the same thing for my sister, you know, making sure that we went to schools and colleges and making sure that all that stuff was straight.  She was, you get, I got that from her.  -You know, and, I don't think my mother, I don't think there's anything that I ever wanted to do that my mother and my father told me I couldn't do.
Story_ID: 495485
Speaker 1: Tell me, now, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Well, we have a some, somewhat complicated, from my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] and my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] is me and my sister, and then I have some other siblings that my father had with someone else.  So, we have those things that are going on, that went on in our family (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in your immediate household, it's just you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Pamela Bosley [Pamela Bosley Byes], yes.
Story_ID: 495486
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Early childhood memories, of course, fishing, that's things that I really enjoyed.  I remember once how my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and my grandfather [Preston Bosley] took us, took me fishing and it just rained and there was a big old tree that had fallen in the water and it was laying across the water.  You know, for whatever reason, I felt that there were some fish out there and I had to climb out on my own on that limb and my dad kept saying, "Son, don't climb, don't go out there, don't go out there," and I sat there and could look away and he'd be working on something and I'd inch out just a little further and he'd say, "Now son, don't go out too much further now."  And he'd start doing something else and I'd inch out just a little bit further.  "Son, I told you don't get out there," and the next thing I know (makes sound) you could hear the limbs cracking but before all of my body could get in the water, my dad was there.  I think I got about waist deep, but before I could get any further he was right there and caught me, you know, so that's a good memory.  He and my grandfather.  I used to always--I cherish now the moments that the three of us were together.  How three generations of men, or two generations of men and a boy; you know, I think is always something you can gather from that.  So that's, that was a good memory for me.
Story_ID: 495487
Speaker 1: Of course, you know, growing up in the neighborhood that I grew up in was always interesting and there was plenty of activity going on.  We were really big with go-karts and I always got a good BB gun fight going on, good dirt bomb fight, you could always find a good dirt bomb fight (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what was the name of your neighborhood?
Speaker 1: Well, it's, we just called it Fairground Park [Fairground, St. Louis, Missouri] area.
Speaker 2: Fairground Park, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fairground Park.  Was it near the fairground?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Fairground Park was a fairground a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it was built on top of an old fairground (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During the World's Fair [St. Louis World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri]?  Huh?
Speaker 2: It's on the grounds of the old World's Fair?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I think there were like carriage races, fairgrounds, and the horse racing going on over there.  They built a bear pit on the 1904 World's Fair.  It was located there.
Speaker 2: Oh, so it was on the ground?
Speaker 1: It's a park.
Speaker 2: It's a park actually on the grounds of the old World's Fair.
Speaker 1: No, no.  It's not anywhere near the old World's Fair.  That was Forest Park [Forest Park, St. Louis, Missouri].  Fairground Park is just another large park in the St. Louis [Missouri] community up in north St. Louis--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --area.  So, I thought I had a pretty good childhood growing up.  There was plenty of stuff going on, always some activity.
Story_ID: 495488
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Again, fishing was a good smell that we would have because we would sneak off a lot and go fishing in Fairground Park [St. Louis, Missouri], and one of the things that we used to like to do a lot was to crawfish, and I don't know if you've been down to Louisiana, they've got crawfish.  We have crawfish over at Fairground Park.  All we needed was a string with a piece of liver and we had, we'd take the screen that would be in the door, we'd always cut somebody's screen out, and you could fold the screen into a little basket and put a, tie a string on each end and if you tied a knot in the middle you could hold it up like that.  So, we'd put the string in the one with the liver on it and the crawfish would get on it and you'd raise him up off the bottom and you'd get the string with the--screen with the string on it and you'd dip that down in the water and you'd bring the screen over to get it up under the crawfish and you'd pull up and you'd have crawfish, and we'd catch about a bucket full of those and they'd be about this long, and then we'd come back to somebody's house and put them in some boiling water and eat them and that would be a full day and, of course, we'd be fishing at the same time, so that was, that was a good sound.  That was a good smell, rather, to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, where would you fish for these, was it a pond out there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a lake in Fairground Park.
Speaker 1: A lake, okay, a lake.
Speaker 2: It was a nice size lake there with two big bridges that come across, so to get into the deep water you could be on top of the bridge and drop your string down maybe ten or fifteen feet, and it'd get down in there and that liver would be smelling in that water and the crawfish would get on them, and that was really exciting.
Story_ID: 495489
Speaker 1: That was a lot of stuff. And then what else would we do?  I used to go hunting a lot.  My dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] bought me a .410 shotgun when I was about ten years old and we would go rabbit hunting over in central Illinois a lot and so friends of ours would have dogs over there and they'd take us out to hunt and we'd wake up in the morning to biscuits, rabbit, biscuits and gravy, go out and do our hunting and come back with ten or twelve rabbits.  The man's wife would, of course, cook them, cut them and cook them for us and we'd enjoy that, play a lot of baseball, play football.  When Herbert Hoover Boys Club [Herbert Hoover Boys and Girls Club of Greater St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] opened up on Grand [Boulevard] and Dodier [Street], we would begin, some of my friends, we were one of the first football teams at Herbert Hoover. Never won a game (laughter). So, but eventually and to this day, now Herbert Hoover is one of the best juvenile football leagues, junior football leagues in, in the state. You know.  So, we enjoyed it and got, got quite a bit of excitement out of that.
Story_ID: 495490
Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Everybody in our family was musically inclined but me and my sister [Pamela Bosley Byes].  All of my cousins on my father's [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] side, there was always a piano in my father's, my grandfather's [Preston Bosley] house, so everybody on my father's side could sing or play an instrument; my aunt, June Bosley [June Bosley Hawkins], June Rose Bosley, was one of the first African Americans to tour Europe singing opera right along with Grace Bumbry.
Speaker 1: That's June Rose Bosley (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) June Rose Bosley, um-hm, then since turned school teacher.  Her daughter, Diane Hawkins [Diana Hawkins], is up in New York now singing, but there was a lot of talent on my father's side, but for whatever reason, me and my sister never got involved in that, so I never learned how to play an instrument, nor did I learn how to sing, but of course, I have a song in my heart.  I've got members of our family that can play two or three different instruments, write music, sing, and are very musically inclined.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you like a particular kind of music growing up?
Speaker 2: Of course, R and B, you know, The Temptations was always my thing, Temptations, I loved Adele Phoenix [ph.].  Then, of course, Michael Jackson, The Dells.  They were the Four Tops, Impressions [The Impressions].  That was always something and will continue to be very memorable to me.  Of course, when I got to the high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri], though, after I graduated from high school and got to college [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri], I was in school, it was a predominantly white university and so it was probably 90 percent white, 10 percent black, so I got exposed to a lot of rock, and so we were just on the end of the hippies, you know, that era where everything was just free flowing, if you know what I mean.  So we got into a lot of rock, listened to a lot of Led Zeppelin, a lot of Bachman-Turner Overdrive, a lot of Uriah Heep, a lot of Jonathan Winters, a lot of Santana, you know, all of those.  So, I got a good blend of music and to this day, I like to listen to a lot of that stuff and still remember some of the words to a lot of those songs, and people wonder where'd you get exposed to all that stuff at?  A lot of black people, I mean you turn some rock on and wait a minute, they like to listen to some music, but that's just about a little bit too much for them.  Yeah.  So, I got a nice blend of music and I really did enjoy it and to this day, you know, if you, when I travel or whatever, I have my pack of CDs, you know, I'll have some of everything in there.  You know, and if not a lot of people are around, I'll, sometime I'll play some of my rock stuff before I play some of the other stuff.
Story_ID: 495491
Speaker 1: Now, was, was church a big part of growing up?  Did you, was your family in church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simutlaneous) Our family was what you call charter members of Samaritan United Methodist Church [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Samaritan?
Speaker 2: United Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the, that's the church that the Bosley family belonged to, and I would imagine again, that probably at one point there were more Bosleys in the church than almost anybody.  We, when my fa- grandfather [Preston Bosley] came up from Arkansas, he and my grandmother [Alma Bosley] joined that church, early '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], and my family had been members ever since, and some, now people go wherever they wanna go to church.  There used to be a time where wherever Grandpa was going, that's where everybody went, where Daddy [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] went, where everybody went, and so it wasn't uncommon to have, on a Sunday, fifty Bosleys at Samaritan United Methodist, and we would take up a whole section, and let my grandfather and my grandmother sit on the front row, and Bosley family on the row right behind them and will take up over half the rows, pews, I'm sorry in the church.  So, yeah, we came out with a lot of that, a lot of church influence.  Many of the older ones in our family, aunts and uncles, still belong to the church and go on a regular basis.  The choir probably has more Bosleys in it than anybody.  My aunt still plays organ for the church, so we are still very active, very much involved and very much a part of that church.
Story_ID: 495492
Speaker 1: How would you describe your personality as a little kid?
Speaker 2: I guess I was kind of rambunctious, so to speak.  You know, I was always mixing up, always, a blend of an Eddie Haskell-type, you know, adults that would see me I was always such a nice little guy, but out on the street, I'd be the main one instigating, always trying to--the smallest generally always, but always trying to get somebody involved in something.
Speaker 1: That's Eddie Haskell, the character from 'Leave it to Beaver,' that was always trying to get Wally [Wally Cleaver] in trouble.  He was nice on the surface, but then--
Speaker 2: I'd be back in the background trying to agitate something but, you know, we would always organize, we always had plenty of things that we would be doing, trying to build a go-kart, or we'd make, I don't know if you've ever seen matchstick guns, but we'd make guns, take a clothespin and reverse it and be able to shoot Ohio Blue Tip Match [Ohio Match Co.] from about thirty feet with a clothespin, so we had those kind of fights.  We'd always be organizing a BB gun fight or a dirt bomb, whenever some construction was going on somewhere we'd be there having a dirt bomb fight or something like that.  Generally, those were the type of things or, then as we got older, organizing a nice crap [sic. craps] game somewhere behind the school or behind somebody's garage or apartment building somewhere and I got to be pretty good at that, and that's how I used to make a lot of my lunch money.  Our high school, in as much as we've been known for a lot of things, we had one of the best crap games going on.  At lunch time, the best crap game in town could be found at Central High School [Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Story_ID: 495493
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  We- were you a good student in school and did you--
Speaker 2: Not really.  I, one of the things, like I said, my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] instilled that stability and I knew that the goal was to get out, you know, to graduate but I was always the type that once I figured the subject out, I was like oh I got this, I could--I was happy with a C or a C plus.  I never felt a need to want to excel in the academics, you know, and I never know to this day why I don't, but I just felt that once I could get it, I could always get it if I wanted to, and I could master it if I needed to, so then I started wrestling in high school.  I really got into that.  I really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Now what was your first grade school?
Speaker 2: Farragut, Farragut grade school [Farragut Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Farragut, okay.  Farragut Elementary School, they called it that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you go to a middle school?
Speaker 2: No, nope, nope, nope.  Graduated from the eighth grade and went straight to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central High.
Speaker 1: All right.  Central High School [Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject at Farragut?
Speaker 2: I, you know, when we were in grade school I wanted to be a scientist.  I wanted to be a paleontologist, study of dinosaurs, and I don't know if you remember when you were in grade school, you have to, there are certain books that were required reading, and you had to do book reports, I think maybe seven to ten book reports, and at our school we had what you call a book mobile that will come to the front of the school and the teacher let you out and you're supposed to go out and get the books that you're going to do the book reports on, but I would always come back with books about dinosaurs and birds, and I was really into science, you know.  I could really lose myself by reading about that type of stuff.  And so, that's where my real interest was and for whatever reason, once I got to high school I got off that, and got into, I think I discovered girls or something.  Acad- books, I think became of less importance to me.
Story_ID: 495494
Speaker 1: Was television important?  No?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] taught me how to fix TVs, he taught me how to do certain things to earn a little money and I had a little hustle with that, but also I could paint real well.  I liked to, you know, I got into painting, not artistic painting, but painting hom- painting rooms and things like that so I, somebody on the block, I was always finding a job, either painting bedrooms, living rooms, or stuff like that, and we'd pick up thirty, forty, fifty dollars doing that type of stuff, so I was always able to find a little hustle.
Story_ID: 495495
Speaker 1: Now Central High School [Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri], is that an all-black high school?
Speaker 2: At the time I started, it was 75 percent white.  By the time I graduated it was 80 percent--by the time I graduated I would say it was 75 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It flipped.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, well, did you have a favorite subject at Central?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I liked math.  I enjoyed math and I thought that was a challenge, certain aspects of history was always important to me.  Then I had a phobia about geometry and wound up getting a tutor and then really wound up loving it and got, immersed myself in it, and wound up getting an A out of that course.  I really got into it, and then once--like anything else, once I realized I could get the math, then I lost interest in that and didn't p- decided to go, I should have taken some trig [trigonometry] but I didn't.
Story_ID: 495496
Speaker 1: Now were you in any clubs in high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or did you run for student body president or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I, I really, I wasn't that quite of a--let's see, how would you describe me?  I was more of a disruptive type of element, not violently though, but just generally.  Not necessarily wanting to be part of it.  We always got something going on, you know, and I'd be generally be in the middle of it somewhere (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But was it mostly subterfuge?  It wasn't like overt was it?  If you were the Eddie Haskell type, you'd be like--
Speaker 2: I mean, we weren't around, I wasn't running around trying to beat people up.  It just all seemed like we would take the bench in the morning when people came to school, coming down the hall, walking by us, just jokes being hurled at you, just a lot of agitation, kind of like, you know, kind of riding people.
Speaker 1: Mostly fun--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of joking constantly, disrupting the class with that type of activity and stuff, you know, just not really being mean, we were just having fun.  That's what I would do a lot, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but I really never got into the organizations.  I thought that those people were rele- I thought they were jive to be honest with you.
Story_ID: 495497
Speaker 1: Well with your father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and your [paternal] grandfather [Preston Bosley] like, you know, being entrepreneurial and being so active in the community, I mean did you, how did you feel about that as a teenager?  'Cause I think your, your father ran [for the Board of Aldermen, St. Louis, Missouri], you were still in high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri], right?
Speaker 2: It was after I graduated.
Speaker 1: That's when he won, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was '72 [1972].  When I graduated in '72 [1972], that's when they first decided you could vote at eighteen, so I was able to register before I got eighteen for the upcoming election.  So, that was when I think we began to get a little more serious about what was going on around us, because then I was able to round up a lot of my friends and get involved in those campaigns and we'd be out putting bumper stickers on cars or putting literature in mailboxes, or putting posters on the streetlights, street posting, things like that.  So, that was, I would imagine that's when I began to kind of get a little more focused, once I got about seventeen or eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: I know usually in every city, there's a group of politically active people that, you know, keep stuff going in the city that, you know, any of those kind of organizers--
Speaker 2: Well back then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) coming by your house talking to your dad?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a lot of that, but there were things, there was a group called ACTION [Action Committee to Improve Opportunities for Negroes] headed by a guy named Percy Green.  They were activists.  We had a group called the Black Nationalists, that used to hang out at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and they were always good for trying to either educate or politicize an issue.
Speaker 1: Now, was this a formal group or just black nationalist people?
Speaker 2: Well, they call themselves an affiliate, now I never saw any offi- official signage (laughter) or anything of that nature, but they took on that, that title.
Story_ID: 495498
Speaker 1: And then, when we were in high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] now there were people that, because you know with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being killed and issues around white teachers in, in a predominantly black school, those issues were being raised by students and we had student newspapers at that point in time, but those of us who were still playing and joking and everything, when it came time to walk out, it was oh yeah, we're gonna be part of that, but we don't know what we're walking out for, we're walking out to get out, you know.  People just walk out of the school and get on the other side of the street and look back at the school.  So, we're out here now, you know, what was this all about?  Nobody--
Speaker 2: So, did you ever walk out of school?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, all the time, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: But you didn't know, really know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, that was--we just knew we were getting out of there and somebody'd say, "Man we're walking out at one o'clock." Yeah all right, we're down for that, but nobody was there to talk about well here's what we're doing.  These are the issues that we're concerned about.  We just knew, hey, if we can get out of here, we can get out of here at one o'clock, so that's what we, we did.  But there were people, somewhere in that effort, there was somebody organizing something, trying to get a message out, but weren't interested in that at that point.  You see.
Speaker 2: Do you remember who the leaders were and all that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  The guy turned out to really be a good friend of mine.  It was a guy named James Robnett [James Robnett, Jr.].  We're still good friends now and he would constantly, he's an older guy, maybe about two years older than us, but he was always up on the issues.  I mean, he had literature and we had newspapers.  He was passing out stuff, always constantly trying to get you focused on it, but we just had too many other things going at the time.  But, as after I graduated from high school, I went to Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], he went on to Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and as I became more focused on what life and everything was about, then what he was talking about made more sense.  And so, we got to be good friends and we formed a study group called United Community Youth [ph.], me, him, and maybe about six other people and we would read extensively and read different, study different forms of thought and politics and philosophies and books and things like that, and then get together once every two weeks or so to talk about that stuff.  So, then at that time there was Black Student Alliance formed at Saint Louis U, so I began to get involved in that--
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which I became president of when I got to be a senior.
Story_ID: 495499
Speaker 1: Slow down a little bit, and just go back to high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] for a minute; but--so, when you, how were your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a C plus student. I was, once I knew how to get a C or C plus, I was happy.
Speaker 1: But from what you said earlier, you knew you were going to college, or you pre--
Speaker 2: I knew the goal was to get out and go to college, but I hadn't quite, a lot of times when you're young and like that, you're not quite making the connection that you got to have the grades, the ACT scores, and all of that to really get to where you need to go, and then you also want to try to have some halfway decent scores to get some scholarship money to try to help your mom and your dad out.  You know, all those light bulbs weren't coming on for me.  I just knew I'm getting out of here and at some point I'm going to college.  I--it wasn't 'til I got to be probably junior or senior that I made the connection that I gotta have some halfway decent grades, but by then it was too late, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, in your senior year, you said you'd saved some money to go to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaing, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]?  Or to Southern [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], SIU (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carbondale [Illinois], yeah, that's where I was headed.
Speaker 1: And you saw that as a big party.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the buddy plan.  There were about four of us going over there, so you know, we were going to be in the same dorm, and like young people, we were gonna just kick it over there when we got there, but my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] put an end to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she said you're going to Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Saint Louis University, that's where I wound up.
Speaker 1: Now Saint Louis University, is that a Catholic university?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Jesuit.
Speaker 1: Jesuit Catholic, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so what did you think of that and was it bit--much difference?  What was it, way different--
Speaker 2: It was a culture shock, culture shock, I mean here you are at a university now.  I mean, you're talking about a huge campus and you're probably talking about seven thousand people.  There's seven thousand and there might be seven or eight hundred African Americans walking around down there, so--
Speaker 1: About 10 percent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you'd be in a class with forty, fifty people in there, and maybe two or three blacks, so you're looking around, well, where's the rest of them?  Where's everybody?  And then it dawned on me, there's not a lot of people here.
Speaker 1: Now, was black studies in vogue?  Had it hit yet?
Speaker 2: Eventually.  I think during my sophomore or junior year, we finally got one black instructor to teach African American studies, and then have, maybe there became a few courses offered, but we began to demonstrate around those issues.  You know, by then, now, time I get to be a sophomore now, I know a lo- I know more than I knew.  I'm asking more questions than I did.  Now, I'm at the point that we're gonna organize and we're gonna make some demands and start addressing some real issues here.  By this time, I'm talking to people out of Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], who were doing the same thing, but they got the Organization of Black Allegiance [sic. Association of Black Students], and they got a black manifesto [The Black Manifesto] that they put together that they submitted to the chancellor out there, asking for black, bill of rights for black students, and we're down at Saint Louis University, asking the same question.  Well, how come we don't have any black instructors?  How come we don't have any black curriculum?  How come our money in this budget isn't spent to get black speakers down here so that we can start hearing people that think like us or look like us?  So, now, I, I'm really beginning to get a little more involved.
Story_ID: 495500
Speaker 1: Back to high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] for a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember what you were doing back when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, I think I was still fooling around.
Speaker 1: You were what, fourteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the eighth grade, I had just graduated from eighth grade then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirteen, see?  Funny but back in eighth grade, then, you know, everybody is heartlessly upset.  Not a lot of rioting, not any rioting going on here in St. Louis [Missouri].  Very little protests, as a matter of fact, but I felt that there was a sense of people galvanizing and unifying around this man's death, though.  I could feel that.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and his friends discuss it?  Or your grandmother [Minnie Robertson]?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother, of course, cried and you know, and she was devastated by it because I saw she was preaching to me this stuff about Dr. King, and if you can remember, there was this riff between Dr. King and Malcolm X, remember?  And Malcolm X was more radical and Dr. King was a little more love not hate, turn the other cheek-type stuff, and so for those of us as my age coming up, you know, we were more in line with Malcolm X.  Somebody do something to me, I gotta, we--it's going down.  With Dr. King--
Speaker 1: So that made more sense to you than taking punishment and absorbing the punishment (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're the young boys.  The young boys, we're ready to, you know, we're going to charge the gate.  I mean, at that point you see people walking down the street and, you throw, remember people just see you walking down the street and throw their hand up in the air, just like that.  I mean it was just, almost a knee-jerk after King died.  It almost became like a knee-jerk reaction, you know, or the song, 'Say It Loud-I'm Black and I'm Proud.'  Who is that that came out with that song?
Speaker 1: James Brown.
Speaker 2: And then The Temptations.  (Singing) "No matter how--".  'Message From A Black Man.' (Singing) "No matter how hard you try you can't stop me now."  Remember that?  Who else was that?  'We're a Winner,' 'Moving On Up.'  I mean, you had all of that--
Speaker 1: The Impressions.
Speaker 2: The Impressions, "If I had a choice of colors" ['Choice of Colors'].  I mean, you had all this stuff popping which was inspiring and instilling some feelings of upward mobility and self-worth, so now your level of consciousness is coming now.
Speaker 1: Did you have a black book store in town?
Speaker 2: We had a book store.  I wouldn't necessarily say it was a black book store, but there was a book store over on Olive [Boulevard].
Speaker 1: Run by a black person?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, James Robnett [James Robnett, Jr.] used to take me over there and sometimes we'd have our meetings over there and we would talk a lot about a lot of different things, which was, we even studied Communism and we had Marxist, Marxist Leninism, and we had Red- copies of the Red Book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung'] by Mao Tse-tung and we were reading all of that stuff.  I'm talking about I'm eighteen now.  So, all this stuff is popping now, you know.  Then at Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], part of the curriculum is global-mindedness, so now we got to have twelve hours of philosophy, twelve hours of theology.  So, you're reading things that are causing you to think about a lot of different things.  So, the philosophy, you know, we learned about Kant, Immanuel Kant, we got Aristotle, you got all of these different lines of thought coupled with some theology, and then you get out of school and here we started Marxist Leninism, Pan-Africanism, you know you're seeing all this stuff on television, you got things going on all around the world, so your mind is, is cranking now.
Story_ID: 495501
Speaker 1: Now, was there, were those ideas, those new ideas in sync with what your father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and grandfather [Preston Bosley] were doing?
Speaker 2: And I'm glad you brought that up, 'cause my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] found out I was going over to this bookstore and that we were having these meetings over there, and she saw that Red Book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung'] by Mao Tse-tung.  She said, "Do you know what you're reading here?"  I said, "Well, it seemed like those were some statements by Mao."  She said, "Yeah," she said, "but that's Communism."  I said, "Yeah, I think it is."  And she said, "Well, you know, don't you know that this country frowns down on that type of stuff?"  I said, "Well, I'm just reading it.  I'm just trying to educate myself."  She said, "But you know people find out you reading that kind of stuff, they might put you on some kind of list or something."  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "You all going over there to that store?"  She said--she was right.  She said, "You know, they might be taking pictures of people coming in and out of there.  You know, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  You might be on somebody's list or something, and probably be find out."  About ten years later, they were taking pictures.  They did have pictures.  They were watching that place, but at that time I didn't care, but I was not in sync with them.  Okay?  I was reading stuff like things, 'Strategy for a Black Agenda' ['Strategy for a Black Agenda: A Critique of New Theories of Liberation in the United States and Africa,' Henry Winston], written by a communist.  I was reading Mao Tse-tung, those, those words. I was reading Marxism Leninism, dialectical materialism, things like that, stuff that was really giving me some insight into people and how people operate and, you know, not just science.
Speaker 1: That's James Foreman, 'Strategy for a Black Agenda'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now this guy's name is--
Speaker 1: It wasn't Foreman?
Speaker 2: The guy was Bland.  Was it Claude?  Well, maybe it was James Foreman, but anyway, maybe James Winston or something, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Oh, Henry Winston.
Speaker 2: Henry Winston.  James Henry Winston, that's who it was, okay.  So, I'm reading all of this stuff and light bulbs and everything in my mind is racing trying to figure out what, why do people do what they do?  How do you motivate them?  How do you mobilize them?  How do you get them going?  You know, and you get all of that, some, just some basic understanding about personalities, about people and nature.
Story_ID: 495502
Speaker 1: Now was there a Black Panther Party in, in St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were some makings of that.  We all, we had those papers here, probably people trying to act like Black Panthers.  You know, folks were walking around with army fatigues on and paratrooper boots on in black tams, you know, bullets through chains and fists around their neck and stuff like--we had them perpetrating like that, you know, but I mean they weren't really here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there were some fans here, at least.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Some wannabes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 495503
Speaker 1: Now you said you be- you get- came involved in Black Student Or- Association (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alliance, yes.
Speaker 1: Alliance.  Was it Black Student Association? Yeah.
Speaker 2: BSA.  Black Student Alliance.  BSA.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, Black Student Alliance, um-hm.  That's at St. Louis--
Speaker 2: Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri], yeah.
Speaker 1: How were your grades there?  Did you do pretty good?
Speaker 2: Still C, C plus.  I think that I never felt a need to have to excel.  I just felt the need to be able to grasp it.  You know, if I could grasp it then I could excel at it if I ever wanted to, but I just, you know, I never felt the need--it's just like, say for instance, there was a hard course that we had called statistics and research methodology, Research Methodology 101, and everybody was flunking and failing and I saw that you gotta have it.  I said I'm gonna take it.  And I started fa- flunking it, you know, because I was giving it my cursory attention, you know.  I figured I'd just try to get this down and I was failing it.  And, I realized I needed that grade, 'cause that's part of the curriculum that you gotta have to get your degree.  So finally I went to the teacher and I said, "You know, I'm not really doing well with this course, and I'm wondering if there's something I can do to try to make it up."  "Oh no, son.  There's nothing you can do."  I said, "Well I really need to try to get a passing grade, 'cause I gotta have a major in political science and (unclear) I gotta have it."  He looked at me and said, "Well, I'll tell you what son.  I'll tell you what I'll do.  If you get an A on the final exam, I'll give you an A for the course."  I looked at him and I said, "Oh, okay, all right," so I thought that was a halfway decent challenge for me, so I went and started to put this, I started sleeping with this book.  I started immersing myself in it, a mean, a standard deviation, how you get it all, how you computing all of this stuff, so my mind, I'm into it now, and so here comes the day of the exam, I stayed up late until about two or three clock in the morning trying to get ready for it.  So, the exam was at nine o'clock and we took the exam.  I felt pretty good and the grades came out and I think I got an 89 [percent], which is really just a B plus and I was devastated, so I went back to him and I said, "Well, I didn't get the A, but I got an 89 and I appreciate you giving me," I was just thanking him for it, and he said, "Oh, no, son."  He said, "We--this was a hard exam so I had to grade on a curve.  He said 89, that's an A.  You get an A for the course."  So, of course, I patted myself on the back, but that was a challenge that he gave me that I rose to the occasion for, so I felt good about that.  So I would, things that I felt challenged by, I would get into.  You know, the same thing with political science.  I had another--so I took this man's strategy, and I needed to try to get an A out of the international law taught by Professor Christopher [ph.] and it was very hard, very hard course.
Speaker 1: Is this a law school?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This is undergrad.  This was still an undergrad.  They don't let you do stuff like that at law school.  It is what it is (laughter), so I went to Professor Christopher.  I said, "Professor Christopher, I haven't, you know, I've been distracted, I haven't been applying myself in the class."  I said, "I don't have the grades that I'd really like.  I just got some C's and C pluses here.  What if I, if I get an A on the final, could you give me a much better grade?"  And I guess he, I don't what, if there's something in the water.  He said, "Well son, I'll tell you if you get an A on the final, I'll give you an A on the course."  And I'm thinking, you've been talking to the man over here in statistics or something.  I said, "Okay, bet, I'm on with that."  And so, I do the same thing with the international law and this time I really, I blew it out.  I got about a 97 or 98, so I got an A.  He said, "Son, I just want you to know that I'm really proud of you," he said, "you rose to the occasion, you studied the material, you demonstrated that you had a very good grasp of it and I'm proud of you and I'm gonna give you an A for the course," you know, so--the things that I really felt a need to, to get into, I would get into, but for the most part I'm still, even once I got to law school, I never, I've just never felt a need to want to get the grade.  I just, as long as I could feel I could understand it and understand it and really get into it when I wanted to, then I would be happy with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you really, fear motivated the higher grade (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I just always, if I could understand it, then I got it.  You know what I'm saying, so to me, there's no need to dwell on excelling at it, when I know I can if that what I want to do, so I'd rather use my time to do something else, which I should do what I'm supposed to be doing, but I'm always trying to find some other time to do something else.  So that's, I guess that's just my, as it relates to academics. You know, I just never felt the desire to want to get the highest grade.  I just never did.
Story_ID: 495504
Speaker 1: Were you involved in a fraternity or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You know, when I graduated from law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] and I placed grad chapter Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: But not while you're in undergrad school [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: No, no.  To me, they were not, that was non-progressive, 'cause see, we're reading now.  We'd be studying dialectical materialism.  We're talking about Marxist Leninism and I'm reading 'Strategy for a Black Agenda' [Strategy For A Black Agenda: A Critique of New Theories of Liberation in the United States and Africa,' Henry Winston].  They partying. They, they drinking and partying and dancing, and I do that after I finish reading and stuff, see, so--
Speaker 1: Now your father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.], di- he ran, did he win his election [to the Board of Aldermen, St. Louis, Missouri] when you were in college?
Speaker 2: My dad won in '77 [1977].  He won my first year in law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, on your first year in law school.
Speaker 2: In college, he lost.
Speaker 1: Now were you active in your dad's campaign (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Well you said you passed out literature--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: In the second one you were active--
Speaker 2: I was first year in law school.  I was not as active as I had wanted to be, 'cause I'm studying now.  But you know, we'd come back, I'd bring friends and we'd pass out literature and stuff like that, knock on some doors but it wasn't like every day like it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So those days, though, did you think of your father's generation and say, hey, they really don't understand what's going on here after reading all the material?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, to me they were running for local offices, which I thought was fine, but then I would say that we needed to have black people run for state senator.  Black people really needed to be running for city-wide offices here, I said, but you know, that's why they are, so I leave them now and just keep doing what I'm doing and at some point we'll all catch up.
Story_ID: 495505
Speaker 1: So now, how'd you make a decision about law school?  You said your grades are okay, but, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, in political science, urban affairs--poli sci majors, that's the only way you're go- place you're going is going to law school, or at least you're teaching.  So I'm at undergrad [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri] thinking and wanting to go to law school, all right, and still again not necessarily getting the grades for it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense at that time of the lawyers--there's a rich tradition of black lawyers in this city, and I don't know if you, were you aware of [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson and [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman?
Speaker 2: I was not aware of Margaret Bush Wilson.  I was aware of people like Clyde Cahill [Clyde S. Cahill, Jr.], who was one of the first black U.S. district court judges here, who graduated from Saint Louis University in the '50s, [1950s], almost before I was born, and number one in his law class, which was something unheard of.  I was aware of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he's somebody that we all ought to be aware of, apparently.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was, he became a--
Speaker 2: A United States district court judge, and when he graduated from law school, he became a prosecutor and never lost a case.  And then went on to work for the Human Development Corporation [Human Development Corporation of Metropolitan St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], where he was the director there for a while, and then got selected, got appointed to be a circuit court judge.
Speaker 1: He was a U.S. district court judge.
Speaker 2: Federal, as appointed by the president.
Speaker 1: Was he appointed by Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]?
Speaker 2: No, let's see, Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Carter, okay.  So that was later down the line when he became, okay.  In '76 [1976], so yeah.  When you come out of, well, when you're getting ready to start law school, Carter is the president, right in '76 [1976], so how did you choose Saint Louis [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]?  I mean, it seems like it's easy, but it seems like you might have decided to go to some other school.
Speaker 2: Might have, but again, grades played a role.  You know, like my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] used to--my grandfather [Preston Bosley]--my aunt used to always talk about all she was gonna get, all she was gonna do, everything, but he said, "You got a Cadillac mind, but Pinto money," you know.  I got ideas.  I want to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I want to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I want to go to all these schools, but I don't have the grades, you know, so I got these ideas but I didn't do the work and so I had to settle for what I, where I could get in, and I think Saint Louis University was one of two schools.  That's where I got in at.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where I went, which really turned out to be a blessing in disguise for whatever, based on my career and what it was I got involved in, it was good that I was here.
Story_ID: 495506
Speaker 1: Now how did you like law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]?  Was it what you expected, or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I loved law school, but I mean it's, anybody that's gone will tell you that you gotta be a glutton for punishment to go to law school.  It's like self-inflicted torture.  I mean, most of us didn't have jobs, so you don't have any money and there were times when we'd be so broke we'd be taking turns buying each other lunch.  That was it.  If you got six or seven dollars in your pocket, everybody can eat, you know, and we got to the point we could buy--go to McDonald's and get a fish sandwich and get an order of fries, and everybody, we'd cut the fish sandwich up in different sections and everybody'd get a little piece of fish sandwich and then we'd all split the fries and to this day, I have a check for two dollars that a girl named Mona Green [Mona Green Cross] wrote me, trying to pay me back for lunch.  She gave me a two dollar check.  I said why don't you just give me the money?  I don't eat a check.  So I kept the check, but she was kind of eccentric like that.  But anyway, I mean, they were very tight times, so everybody got little crazy-looking cars, unless you, see most of us went straight to law school from college, but there are some that go into the working world, and so they get to accumulate a little wealth and things like that.  They got a little money maybe, some nice cars and things like that, but most of us who transition right on from college, we don't have no- too much of anything.  You already broke your mom and dad.  They put you through undergrad.  Now, you're back in their pocket again, you're still at their house eating up all their food, soaking up all the heat and everything, you know, and asking for some money every now and then for three years.  So you got a seven year run here, and you don't have anything, you don't have no money.  So, it's a very challenging time.
Story_ID: 495507
Speaker 1: Law school.  Now any, any law professors or courses that stand out as particularly significant to you?
Speaker 2: In undergrad?
Speaker 1: No, in law school.
Speaker 2: In law school?  Oh yeah, well the thing about law school, it is such a, it's such a marvelous experience, it's such an enriching experience, it's such a learning experience that almost every professor for the most part is, stands out to you.  I mean, I can remember a guy by the name of Professor Gerald Dunne [Gerald T. Dunne] taught me bankruptcies, fewer transactions, he's smart as a whip.  I mean, you know, every case was entertaining, every day in class with him, you know, was uplifting.  Then, you know, you got classes by people who actually wrote the book that you are learning out of, or is a member of the national committee that writes the law that you're studying.  You know, I mean so these people are like the brightest and the best, you know what I'm saying, so they, I mean it's honor, it's privilege, it's pride to be studying from them, you know.  I mean, it's almost like you're just like a sponge, just wanting that for me, just every word just trying to hold on, if I enjoy them, if I respect them, if I knew about who they were and what their credentials were.  I mean, it's just waiting on the information.  You know, I want the information.  Give it to me.  So, each, those were great experiences, you know, constitutional law professor, Michael Wolff [Michael A. Wolff], is now in the Missouri supreme court [Supreme Court of Missouri].  I mean, he took torts by a guy named--Professor Donohue--McDonough [J. Norman McDonough] was the man's name.  I mean, he was known around the country for being one of the top guys in his field.  I mean, sat on what they called the restatement of torts committee.  He was a member of the committee, sometimes was chairman of the committee.  I mean, you would sit there in the class knowing here's this man in front of you that's got this information.  You want it.  A guy named, we just had contracts, being taught, I mean all these subjects, I mean all these things that you've heard about, now you're in it, you hear what I'm saying?  You're in.  Professor Vincent Immel [Vincent C. Immel].  If you ever saw this book called, this movie called 'The Paper Chase' [James Bridges], Kingsfield [Charles W. Kingsfield, Jr.], Vincent Immel was our Kingsfield at Saint Louis University [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri].  Contracts, I mean, this is the man.  I mean, he is revered all around the country.  I mean rope contract law, is on the restatement of contracts committee.  You hear what I'm saying?  Now here he is right here teaching you contracts.  You want this information.  You want to learn, I mean, so these are very exciting times, great moments, you know.
Story_ID: 495508
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Scary too, because in law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] all you get is one test for every subject.
Speaker 2: Was there ever a time that you were, you said hey, wait a minute, I don't know if I can finish this.
Speaker 1: I never, I was there as long as they let me stay there, (laughter) you know what I'm saying?  I was there but you gotta get the grades, you know, and we had little phrases like just see me and free me.  You know, that was, you know because the work would be just so hard for some of us.  You know some of the stuff you just have to read over and over and over again.  Sometimes you had to read stuff four or five times before you gradually begin to figure it out, you know what I'm saying?  So if you--there's also as much academic and there are also endurance tests, because you can get it if you stay with it.  A lot of times it'll break you down because I mean, for some people, if you read something about three times and it's not coming to you, you say well I can't get it.  But, it may be that fourth or fifth or that sixth time of reading it, then all of a sudden, hey, it's making sense to you.  So, what's to endure, that's why I'm saying you gotta be a glutton for punishment.  I mean, you'd have to say for instance in one subject they tell when read it'll be five cases.  To read and brief five cases, just think if it takes you two hours to read a case, five cases are ten hours, and what if you've got two or three classes the next day, you've probably got fifteen cases, so that's thirty hours of work that you should have done within twenty-four hours, you know, or something like that, so you got to, it's weird, it gets real intense.  You get yourself together and you do what you gotta do.  So, that's what I liked about it.  It was so challenging for me.  I had to stay with it.
Speaker 2: And so how did it transform you?  I mean, being, finishing this process, how were you changed?
Speaker 1: It changed me from the point where, you know, like I said high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] I figured I could get in and dismiss it.  College [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri] same thing.  Law school you get there and if the light bulb don't come on soon enough, then you're gone.  So you've got one, you've got one semester to get yourself together, and if you don't get yourself together, you're gonna wind up getting on probation.  If you get on probation then you don't make it through the next semester, you're flunked out.  So, you don't have a lot of time to straighten yourself out.  So, once I got there, I was around some people that were not in as playful mood as I was, you know, wasn't interested in that stage, 'cause a lot of times, like I said when you go from college to law school, you still haven't gotten that maturity that it takes, and the discipline to just get right on in this stuff a lot of times, but we, I mean I'm in school with people.  I'm twenty-one, twenty-two, but I'm in school with people that are in their thirties.  They work jobs.  They see, hey we don't come here playing now.  This is some serious stuff.  They're married, they got kids, they got bills, so they come from, they know what they're there for.  I'm there, and we're still trying to figure it out.  Can't we party just a little bit?  You know, so eventually you settle in.  If you're gon--you make it just because you can settle in and got yourself together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's when I straightened myself out.
Story_ID: 495509
Speaker 1: So what did you do after law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I wanted to--I always wanted to work for Legal Services [Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri].  That was my thing.  That was my thing. To go--my grandfather [Preston Bosley] started the Yeatman Corporation [Yeatman Community Development Corporation], my grandfather was in the Yeatman Health Center [Yeatman Community Health Center, St. Louis, Missouri], my grandfather had the Fairfax Community Relation [ph.], Fairfax Senior Center [Fairfax Senior Citizens Center, St. Louis, Missouri], my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] was involved in politics.  I wanted to provide legal services for poor people. So my--oh I keep my--so my sophomore--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: My family's involved in all of these different community services.  So my sophomore, my second year law school, I'm lucky to get a job at Legal Services and do an internship work study, and I like it.  I'm in the consumer unit working with my mentor, a man by the name of Rick Teitelman [Richard B. Teitelman].  Okay.  So I get into it.  I really enjoy it and so next year, my third year in law school, that summer, I get a job again.  All right.  So I'm really enjoying that.  So when I graduate from law school what do I do?  I wanna work for Legal Aid.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: So, my first, another brush with reality, I graduated from law school and Legal Aid won't hire me.  I said, why not?  What's wrong?  I've been there two years.  I figure I'd distinguished myself.  I handled my case.  I worked hard.  Come to work on time, stay late.  But they don't hire me.  I think they had like eight positions to fill and out of all those positions, I think they hired only one black person.  I'm devastated now because that's where I wanna go.  That's where I wanna be.  So, what they forgot is that I went to law school. So I said what is Legal Aid, Legal Services, what is that?  And somebody said, "That's part of Legal Services Corporation, which is national and is created by Legal Services Corporation Act."  So I said okay, well let me look at the Legal Services Corporation and I could find out what is this thing.  How is this set up?  And I started reading about it, and read about how it came in existence, what's on the policies and the procedures are, and then I said, well, let me, is there something in there on employees?  And I get in there and find a section on employees and then it starts talking about the type of people that they want to work for Legal Aid.  And they say that people who were hired to work at Legal Aid should come from the Legal Services community.  I said, well I'm from the Legal Services community, and, which is the St. Louis [Missouri] metropolitan area.  So I said, well who got hired?  And there were a lot of Jewish kids that got hired.  They're from New York [New York] and they're from Chicago [Illinois], California.  I said they're not from the Legal Services community.  Then it starts identifying several other different criteria that they're looking for, and I got all the criteria.  But I still don't have a job.  So, I said well maybe they just didn't get it.  So, I write them a letter and I cite the Legal Services Corporation Act and why I think that they're in violation of the act and that I think that in order to remedy that, they need to offer me a position.  So, about ten days later I get a call and somebody says, "Hey, Freeman [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.], this is Rick."  I said, "How you doing?"  He says, "How'd you like to come and work for Legal Aid?"  I said, "I'd love to."  I got my job, and I'm happy.  So I worked for Legal Services.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is nineteen seventy----
Speaker 2: Nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Nine [1979], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1979.
Story_ID: 495510
Speaker 1: So you, you were pretty much familiar with what they did and what kind of cases they--that came through there [Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well, I was in the consumer unit, but we handled elderly cases, employment cases, housing cases.
Speaker 1: Any particular cases that come to mind that were, you know, special in those days?  That really still stand out?
Speaker 2: Well, just to give you an idea of just how sometimes people would just have a rough time, I can't quite remember the man's name right now, but he had, he was a postal worker all his life.  And so, his teeth got bad and so they pul- took him to the dentist and they pulled out all his teeth.  And so in order to, he had just bought a Cadillac, of course, bought a brand new Cadillac.  He's got payments and got insurance, credit insurance, credit life insurance and credit disability insurance.  A lot of people don't know, well, they got the credit where you pay a little extra premium, for if you die they'll pay your car off, and then they got a premium in there for disability if you become disabled.  They'll pay your premium.  Your car note.  So this man, they pull out all his teeth, and then they realize that he's got some kind of growth in his jaw and they send him to an oral surgeon.  Well, the oral surgeon starts dealing with this growth in his jaw and saws down his jaw.  So now you've got to get the surgeon and everything straightened out and now he's ready for his dentures.  So, he goes to get his dentures.  He can't get his dentures, because the man who drilled has filed down too much of his jaw bone, so he can't have dentures now.  So, they said well, we got a remedy.  We'll take a piece of bone out your hip and put it in your jaw and that way you'll have some dentures.  So, he's taking this and working for him.  He can still work.  So, he goes in the hospital.  They take the bone out of his hip.  They put it in his jaw.  He's got his dentures.  Now he can't walk, because they took the piece of bone out of his hip.  So now, he can't walk so he can't go to work and so now he's disabled.  He calls the credit union to get them to pay the credit disability insurance on his car so he doesn't lose his car.  They refuse.  So, we get involved in that.  This case goes on for a year-and-a-half.  It's one of my best cases, and we wind up filing a law suit that they violated the Truth and Lending Act [Truth and Lending Act of 1968], Regulation Z, which provides for disclosures a certain amount of things for truth and lending, and the biggest moment came when the guys offered to sell the case.  He has lost his car, they had bought him a brand new car, got his back pay, and then Legal Services attorney's fees got a check for about seventeen thousand dollars, so that was back in 1980.  That was one of my best moments, so I, that's one of my best cases.  I liked that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay, okay.  All right, so how long did you work for Legal Services?
Speaker 2: I worked for Legal Services for two years.
Story_ID: 495511
Speaker 1: Meanwhile now, you know, I'm just not sitting there.  Of course, my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and them still are running in politics.  We got all kinds of political things bouncing around and my dad wants me to run for a committeeman in the Ward [Ward 3, St. Louis, Missouri]. I said well I'm--we already been there.  You all already got that.  I'm, when I do run, I'm probably gonna run for something nobody has.  I think we need the, I always called it expansion politics.  They went to retention.  We're gonna keep what we got.  My philosophy was we need to try to expand.  And so, now I'm sitting there.  I had put in two years here and so I start thinking wow, I'm not gonna be here all the rest of my life.  What's my next move gonna be?  So, I started thinking about running for office.  And then I started figuring, well what office am I gonna run for?  And I hadn't quite figured it out, but then kept saying to me, part of being a young lawyer, you do a lot of grunt work and grunt work is the send you down to the courthouse to look up files and represent the major lawyers in court when they can't be there, and things like that.  So, I started going down to the clerk's office and looking for files and going to the file room, and almost every time I went there they couldn't find a file.  Well where is it?  And we'd look on the file, it'd say not--look on the file--couldn't find it, not found. We can't find the file. I mean, where is it? Isn't there a place where it is kept?  Yeah, but we can't find it.  Okay.  So I fooled around with that.  Then I started representing people in court, and the people would be taking off from office to come down to be in the courtroom and the case is continued.  I said why are we continuing the case?  Where is the case continuing?  Well, we can't find the file.  You can't find the file, so you continue the case?  Something's wrong with this.  So then I started thinking and I said, well who is in charge of this place?  And then I found out that the clerk is a guy named Joe Roddy.  He's about sixty-five years old at the time.  He's chairman of the Democratic power party, one of the most powerful elected officials in the St. Louis [Missouri] metropolitan area.  Been the clerk for the last twelve years, but the place is in a shambles.  And so I go back and I'm at the office one day and I'm talking to my supervisor and I said, "Man, you know that clerk's office is a mess."  I said, "You can't find a file, the cases get continued.  Somebody needs to straighten this out."  I'm talking to my supervisor, John Essner [John R. Essner], who is now circuit judge.  He said, "Why don't you straighten it out yourself?"  And you know, lawyers get smart with each other like that, and I say all right and so I go back into my office and I'm sitting there and I start thinking about it and I said, well, let's look at the statistics.  I'm a political science major.  So I go and look at the races and the elections and you know, he got appointed to the office in '68 [1968], the guy ran in '72 [1972] without any opposition and ran again in '76 [1976], didn't have any opposition, you know.  Got elected again in 1978, didn't have any opposition, which is really a testament to his money, his clout and the respect that he's got.  So I said, well, he really never has been tested before.
Story_ID: 495512
Speaker 1: So, I started looking at the statistics and the breakdown and seeing where the votes were coming from.  Well how many black people were registered to vote?  I figured that out.  How many white people were registered to vote?  Figured that out.  Then there was a professor named Ernest Calloway [Ernest A. Calloway], who had a very nice statistical model for analyzing the elections where he broke the city down into north side, central corridor, and the south side.  North side were the black people here, central corridor was where it was racially mixed but generally more progressive people here.  south St. Louis [Missouri] was where the white people were.  So, I said if I can come here with a forum where I could get the majority of the votes in the black community and get, beat them in north community, in Central Corridor [St. Louis, Missouri], and then just a hand, get a nice 10 or 15 percent vote in south St. Louis, I can beat him.  So, I start talking to my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] about it, and my dad said, "Well son, remember one thing.  If it works on paper, if it's carefully executed, you can pull it off."  So, now here I am now with all the people that I've been studying with, reading with, going to the bookstore with, people I went to high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] with, people I shot dice with, you know, all the folks I know, I'm talking now.  "I want to run.  I'm thinking about this.  Would you think about it?"  And of course, you know they made a choice.  "Oh, yeah, yeah, that's my man, yeah, let's get this, let's go for it."  And so, by now, I think I probably, I probably a conjuring of a good hundred people that I think could, you know, out of that hundred, if you're lucky you get 10 or 15 percent to be with you then you're good, so I knew I got twenty or thirty people that I could roll with.  So, I started talking to my dad about a little more and my father said, "Son, you probably need to start talking to some of these elected officials," 'cause in the political world you gotta pay your dues.  And by that you gotta have worked in somebody's organization, been behind somebody's campaign, been a precinct captain, something like that.  Of course, I had none of that because I've been in law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri].  I'm educated.  So, they say no.  We're not gonna support you, you know, and the top guy, you already did that interview with Congressman Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.].  He was the Grand Pupa [sic. Grand Poobah].  He was (unclear) politics, so my dad gives me a meeting with him and we go down and talk to him and he says, "Why do you think your boy can win," you know, 'cause he's got a son too.  "Why you think your boy gonna be able to win?"  My dad's explaining.  But you know, I'm allowed to talk, he said, "Well son, you tell him."  So I got my statistics, I got my paper, I got the monologue showing, just like my dad said and all that, and he said, "Why this man's the chairman of the party.  We got jobs in these offices.  You know, we can't go against this man."  So, there are twenty-eight wards in the city and out of twenty-eight wards, I'd only find three that were willing to help me.  One was a guy who was a state representative by the name of Charles Quincy Troupe.  He was also the committeeman and his committeewoman, Ethel, her name Evelyn Walker, and the alderwoman, the woman I'll never forget, she's deceased, her name is JoAnne Wayne.  So that's the 1st Ward [Ward 1, St. Louis, Missouri].  I couldn't even convince the people in my own ward.  My dad was the alderman but he wasn't the committeeman.  So, I went to the 19th Ward [Ward 19, St. Louis, Missouri], which was headed up by a guy named Jet Banks [J.B. "Jet" Banks], who was a state senator at the time.  He was really strong.  Had him and his committeewoman, and then there was a more senior guy by the name of Leroy Titus [ph.] out of the 20th Ward [Ward 20, St. Louis, Missouri], and so I got him.  So out of twenty-eight wards in the city, I only got about, I got three wards.
Story_ID: 495513
Speaker 1: Meanwhile back at the Legal Services [Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri] office, Legal- the Republicans are in office now, they're cutting the budget.  Legal Services, Legal Aid locally got cut, made some cutbacks.  So my boss comes, "Hey Freeman [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.], I hear you're think about running for office?  When you leaving?"  You know, 'cause I think my salary at that time was probably about twenty-five, twenty thousand, twenty to twenty-five thousand so they saw some savings.  So, I decided I'd go on and do it.  So, I decided to go on and run.  So, I left Legal Aid about a year before the election, and set up and office, not set up an office, I was able to find me some space with another lawyer named Charles Bussey [Charles Bussey, Jr.] of Bussey and Associates [ph.].  So, we started putting the campaign together.  This guy had about $180,000 and I think I was able to raise $10,000 by having these little $5 parties.  And, the political establishment really laughed at me and they really wound up laughing at us, because what I had was, I had a lot of young professionals, you know, people from the fraternities, the sororities, all these social groups, and other folks from the neighborhood that was a pretty solid base of folks.  And then I was able to meet a man by the name of Bill Slayton [ph.], who was in charge of what you call the Federation of Block Units and these block units are what you call the major areas of where people meet, you know, once a week and once a month to talk about problems in the neighborhood, and he turned me on to all of those block units and every night I was going to three or four block unit meetings.  The next thing you know, the campaign started catching on and started building momentum.  People started letting me speak in the churches, wanted to hear from me, and the ministers and things, and the next thing I knew I had all these elected officials weren't with me, but I had all the block units.  I had all the neighborhood groups, which I had these three wards, that was important.  I had the clergy.  I was meeting, speaking in every church.  My dad used to say, "Son, if there are three people getting, wherever there are two people getting together, you'd be the third one there."  So I see people standing around the corner.  I'd park in my corner and stop and get out and start talking to them, passing out literature and stuff.  And the next thing I know, we had a campaign.  That election was the hottest day of the summer in that summer of 1982, probably got up to be about 110 degrees that day.  I mean, people falling out, I mean, but the lines were long because Congressman Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] was running for reelection and there were some other issues on.  But our campaign had picked up quite a bit of steam itself.  So, the night when all the votes came in finally, I had won.  I beat this guy by about a thousand votes, and I was twenty-eight years old and probably one of the youngest elected officials in the city of St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: That's quite a victory.  That's, at twenty-eight years old.  Now was the other guy a Democrat or Republican?
Speaker 1: He was a Democrat.
Speaker 2: Democrat.  Okay.  So, St. Louis is the kind of town where if you beat him--
Speaker 1: If you win the primary it's over.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's like Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 80, 90 percent--85 percent of the people vote democratic.
Story_ID: 495514
Speaker 1: All right well, how did you take to the job?  Was it as easy to get things in order as you thought (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't.  It was the largest patronage office in the city of St. Louis [Missouri], had over two hundred jobs in it, and each ward had some jobs.  You got twenty-eight wards.  Each ward had almost five to ten jobs a piece.  Some of them had more than that.  But, these are jobs where you just don't apply for them in the newspaper.  These are jobs that are held by nieces and nephews and husbands, and wives and sons and daughters of elected officials.  So, they're not the most competent or qualified people either.  So now, I'm, now I'm figured out, why the thousand thing is a lost cause.
Speaker 1: So there was just no civil service exam for those jobs?
Speaker 2: Oh no. Serve, serve (unclear).  So, I mean it's three or four o'clock in the afternoon and I look up and I've got employees still walking around downtown shopping.  Our folks are not coming to work, but still getting paid.  I got people that are working in the file room, but instead of files being on the shelf, the files are in somebody's drawer.  Haven't been filed.  You know, I got checks that should have gone out a month ago, but people still haven't issued them.  So, I just got a whole bunch of mess here, and so I start pissing people off, I start firing folks, and I was smart enough to know that the jobs belong to the ward.  So, when I fired them, I wouldn't hire people that they didn't want.  I'd fire them, said but you gotta send me somebody else.  But then, of course, you know I got people to help me too, knocking at the gate, and I figured you know, we helped in the campaign, where are our jobs?  So I had to, you know, I didn't take all of the jobs but I did take some to reward the people that were with me.  And then as I got stronger politically, I was able to place my people, not necessarily in my offices but in other offices.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you ever disappointed with somebody that you rewarded with a job?
Speaker 2: Why don't you tell me when I wasn't?  (Laughter) You know, more times than not I think we, you know, we all, we create our own Frankensteins.  You know, and there's a phrase, with family friends, you don't need any enemies.  So, that happened a lot.
Speaker 1: Now is there a particular story, you don't have to name names, but is there a particular story that stands out as to how someone did not take the job as seriously as they might?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I've got several examples of that. (Unclear)  There's one guy I gave, I mean he knocked himself out, you know?  But he was kind of like of activism nature.   You heard me talking about the people with the paratroopers on, and the fatigues, always around the town.  He was one of those.  But he wanted a job and he earned it and he worked hard.  I said, "Okay now.  This is an office, though."  "I know.  I just need a chance, you know my wife and I have a couple kids."  I said, "Okay." I said, "But when you come in here just get your job and start working and just do your work.  Come to work on time and just leave."  I said, "I don't need to hear about you carrying on here."  "Oh, I promise you, I promise you."  So, I mean everything is going along well for about month and then all of a sudden one of the managers come and said, "Well, have you talked to So and So lately?"  I said, "No, I really hadn't seen him."  I said, "What's he up to?"  He said, 'Well he's up in the lunchroom now giving a speech."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "He's up there organizing and he said we can organize a union here."  And I said, "Oh."  So I stop what I'm doing, I go up, go upstairs and there he is.  He's standing up in the chair preaching and talking to people.  I said, "Hey, what's going on man?"  I said, "So come on down."  "Oh," he said, "Things gotta be better here.  We gotta get this place organized."  I said, "Well you come to the wrong place."  I said, "This is a patron's office.  There's no union here."  "Well, we're gonna have to have one."  I said, "Well, I don't think so."  Well, whatever.  As things would have it, as he got more and more arrogant, He got more and more disrespectful, so eventually he opened himself up for dismissal, so I wound up having to terminate him.  But that's just an example.
Story_ID: 495515
Speaker 1: Now you had asked me if there are points in time where people that I've done something for or appointed to something disappointed me.  Now, you know, I started laughing because that happens a lot, you know, but that's the nature of the business that we're in.  And, you know, classic case is I remember one time, when I first got in office, I was out meeting with the gangs and I was able to suppress substantially the amount of violence in our community in the homicides because I went out and met with people right there on the street, talking to them.
Speaker 2: So, it's through a relationship that you were able to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in talking to them and things like that.  And so I know that what I found out was that it just really was, and it's silly, but it's so basic.  That the young kids just didn't have anything to do.  So, everybody was just out on the street and out on the street all hours of the night.  So, what I started doing was I started opening up the schools that had gyms and I'd keep the schools open until ten, eleven o'clock at night, and still there's a sound of the young people, they'd just be in there playing basketball, simply playing basketball, and so out of that came a concept that was going on around the country at that time, you might have heard about it, called Midnight Basketball.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was where you could, you know, the kids would be playing literally basketball 'til twelve, one, two o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 2: So, was this an idea that originated here?
Speaker 1: No, it didn't originate here.  But we built on it.  It really is McDonald's.  It was a problem that was supported by McDonald [sic. McDonald's] corporation, the hamburger people.
Speaker 2: The Black McDonald's Owners Association [sic. National Black McDonald's Operators Association]?
Speaker 1: No.  It wasn't the Black--it was a corporation.  I mean, that's how big this thing was.  And so, when the local regional guy from McDonald's heard about me keeping these schools open, he asked me if I had ever heard of a concept called Midnight Basketball, and I said, "No."  And so he said, "Well here, you know, let me give you a little flavor for it," and he told me how it worked.  So I said oh, okay.  But what I want to do is I took that same concept but then I built a job training component around it.  I built an education component around it.  I built a voter registration component around it.  I put an AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] testing component, a cholesterol, sugar, diabetes, GED [General Educational Development] component, so while you're out here at the school 'till one, two o'clock in the morning playing basketball, you can also avail yourself of all these services.  So, we had people going back to school, getting GEDs, getting resumes, getting jobs.  It went off so well that corporations like Enterprise Leasing Corporation funded to the tune of 25 to $30,000.  We had INTERCO corporation [INTERCO Incorporated] almost under wrote our entire recreation program for the summer for the City of St. Louis [Missouri], and so this program got to the point where Interco would give a brand new tennis, Interco made Converse, tennis shoes, okay?  So brand new shoes for the basketball players, a warm-up, McDonald's was providing them with outfits and all these different things, wanting for nothing, got to the point this thing was almost like about a $250,000 a year operation.
Story_ID: 495516
Speaker 1: I was looking for some people to run this thing.  Who was it that I knew that knew more about basketball than guys that I went, two guys that I went to school with?  I mean, went on to play, one of them went on to play professional basketball.  Another one went on to be a coach at one of the local schools and stuff, so if anybody was good at this, these guys could do that.  Plus, since I knew them, I knew that at least my back would be covered in that respect, they're gonna do nothing to hurt me.  They're gonna do the best they can.  The next thing I know I hear about the fact that money is missing, all right?  So comes the lay director of recreation, comes down to the office and she's got a bag full of all kind of receipts and signature stamps and everything.  Why these people made up signature stamps with each other's signature on them and they're spending money out of the program.  Next thing I knew, three of them had stolen probably a total of about sixty thousand dollars out of this program where the media got a hold to it, and in this community that's racially divided.  I mean, that was the spark that they needed to really launch a media offense against me, and so what was normally a one or two day story, they turned it into a six-week story.  Every day something about this Midnight Basketball program would come rolling out and it would be on the front page of the newspaper and be the lead story, five, six, and ten on some of the TV stations.
Speaker 2: Now, this was during the tour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) While I'm mayor [of St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: When you were mayor, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And it just so happens that it comes when I'm up for reelection in 1997, so.  And you would think, kind of like what we've discussed earlier, that these guys would say, "Hey, Mayor didn't have nothing to do with that; that was us.  We did that.  Blame it on us.  You know, we're gonna take ourselves out."  Not a peep out of them.  Not a peep.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Here it is to this day 2007, still not a peep.  So I mean, those are, but those are the type of things that your enemies can't do to you, 'cause you don't let them get that close to you.  But people that you got faith and confidence in, those are the ones that you're more vulnerable to, because you're gonna try to, you know, all things being equal, you're gonna try to give them an opportunity if you can.  And so by putting these individuals in charge of this program, I just knew, hey, that's, I don't have to worry about that no more.  I'll move on to something else.  But they took that confidence, I guess, as the opportunity, knowing hey we can sit here and rip this thing off for a little while before it ever gets discovered, and it might not ever get discovered.
Story_ID: 495517
Speaker 1: In retrospect, when you look back on that, is there anything that you could have done or would do in the future if you had--were in the position again to, I guess, short stop that kind of thing before it ever gets started.  I mean, I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, simple as it was and as silly as it was, I think what happened, Midnight Basketball was really a victim of its own success.  I mean, you heard Congressman Dick Gephardt, majority floor leader of the United States Congress, showing up at Kingshighway [Boulevard]/Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], at one o'clock in the morning to see a recreation center full of three or four hundred people enjoying themselves.  And you had this constantly being talked about on the floor of the United States Congress, because where I was going with this was for every police officer, it cost us fifty thousand dollars for every police officer.  We need to spend, we gotta spend eighty million dollars to build a new jail.  For two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, I got a program for probably five or six thousand people, you know what I'm saying?  So my thing was hey, jails and police are on the back end.  We gotta treat crime on the front end, recreation, jobs, and economic opportunity, education.  That's on the front end.  So, that's where I was headed with this, so your question was what would I do if I could do things differently?  Instead of just getting so excited about it because it was doing so well, I think the thing was just to not even have it be part of the mayor's program.  Just have them fund it over at the Urban League [National Urban League], or let the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or somebody fund it, set up a foundation with them.  Let them deal with it, but McDonald's was so excited about it, I was so excited about it, the corporate community was so excited about it, because it was working that we, I think you just got so excited about it you just got caught up in it, which created the opportunity for somebody to sneak, not necessarily sneak it, but just take money, which they did.  They stole money from kids, for young people.  You know? Just the simple thing of just, hey, send the money over to the Urban League.  How long did it take me to say that?
Story_ID: 495518
Speaker 1: Well, now tell us about the, now the campaign.  Now you were a clerk of courts for how many years?
Speaker 2: I was clerk of the circuit court from 1982 to 1993, when I got elected mayor of the City of St. Louis [Missouri].  I, before I got to be mayor, though, I became chairman of the Democratic Party in the City of St. Louis.  I was the first African American chairman of the Democratic Party in St. Louis.  This was in 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your chairmanship parallels, I guess, in some ways Ron Brown becoming chairman of the national [Democratic National Committee].  He became chairman of the national, I guess, it was around 1991 or '92 [1992]--
Speaker 2: In '92 [1992], when the Clintons [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] got in.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's quite a feat, to become chair of the Democratic Party of St. Louis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Was there any reluctance to making you chair?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all the time.  But, you know, one of the things that you, what I've learned, I think it was Frederick Douglass that said power concedes to nothing without demand.  Power concedes to nothing but power and never has and it never will.  You get what you can take and keep what you can hold.  So, when I'm coming up, and even to this day, you hear people wondering out loud why, you know, why can't black people do this, and why can't black people have this, why can't we get a black mayor, why can't we get?  Well, it's not like getting.  It's like taking, and that's what politics is about.  It's like power in the street, but it's power in the ballot.  And, nobody voluntarily gives up power.  Nobody's gonna say okay, it's you-all's turn.  We're gonna hand this over.  It's more of a wresting from the hands politically that has to take place.  So, what young people and people, period, have to understand, it's, politics is not a spectator sport.  It's not a whining sport where you wonder out loud about why this, that's philosophical, you know what I'm saying?  I mean, it's work.  It's a participatory sport.  It's not, you know, like, for black people, for the African American community, I think in many instances politics for them is like watching a football game or a baseball game.  You got two teams on the field and you're picking a team.  You're back home sitting on your couch or living room rooting for your team and if you don't watch the game, you miss the game, the next day you say, well what happened in that game, did we win?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's what they do with politics, so you're running for an office, they're not helping you, they're not giving you money, they're not voting, they're not campaigning, after they elect--well, what happened to Bosley [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.], did he win?  What happened?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, we got to realize that it's not something you just sit back and look at and--you get in this.  You know, nobody's gonna come and say you all won the game, here's the trophy.  You take the game.  You take the job.  You take the office.  But, I mean, it's a political taking, so to speak.
Story_ID: 495519
Speaker 1: And so the same thing with the dem- being the chairman of the Democratic Party, you know.
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was, the chairman was white.  I was the vice chairman.  But when the white chairman decided they didn't want the office no more, wasn't gonna go for it, you'd think they would say, oh, well, you know, I don't want it, Freeman's [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.] the vice chair, let Freeman be the Chairman.  It seemed like that's natural thinking to me, though, isn't it?  But Freeman didn't get that offer.  Freeman had to find out about the fact that the person wasn't going to be the chairman through some other people, and then when I finally contacted the lady, Sharon Carpenter, who (unclear), she said, oh, she said, "Well I didn't think you would be interested."  Well, why not?  I mean, that's just like on the job, how many times black people on the job, you come early, you stay late, and then there's an opening and you go to the white boss and say, "Hey, I want that, I thought I was gonna get that job."  "Well, we didn't think you would be interested.  Why would you want something like that?"  So--and then to my dismay, not only were the white people saying it, the black people said, "Well why you wanna be the chairman of the Democratic Party?"  I said, "Why not?"  "What do you want that for?"  And so, I started calling around, and you know, there's fifty- there's twenty-eight wards, so each ward had a committeeman, committeewoman, so that's fifty-six votes.  Magic number is twenty-eight.  I had to twenty-eight votes, made twenty-nine.  I had twenty-nine votes to win this thing.  So, I know I'm having problems with the white people, 'cause they wouldn't offer me the job, so I said at least I better get all my black elected officials together to see if I can pull this thing off.  So, I need twenty-nine votes.  I figure if I get thirty, I got some insurance.  So, I get up, start calling around.  I got some support, but then the more, the older black elected officials asked, "Well, what do you want that for?  Why would you wanna be, what do you wanna be the chair?  Why?  What are you gonna do with that?  Why would you want it?"  I said, "Well why not?"  I said, "I'm the vice chairman.  Wouldn't it necessarily follow that I would be the chairman if there's a vacancy?"  "Oh, well I never even thought about it."  So, here I am, I need thirty votes.  I'm trying to get thirty votes.  I'm adding everything up.  I got like twenty-six votes and I'm locked.  So, I said well how can I get these other four votes?  So, I knew I was gonna be the chairman.  Well, who wants to be vice chairman?  So, I need white votes.  So, I started calling around to the white committeewomen.  See, the committeewomen, they get discriminated against too, 'cause nobody will want them to have nothing.  So I called this woman named Marie Lammert, the committeewoman of the 12th Ward [Ward 12, St. Louis, Missouri], and I said, "Marie, are you interested in being vice chairman?"  "Oh yeah, Freeman, I'd love to be the vice chairman, but you know I can't get the votes.  Nobody's gonna support me.  They'd never let us have any, they don't let the women have anything."  I said, "Well, I'll tell you what Marie.  I got twenty-six votes.  I got twenty-six votes for me to be the chairman.  I got them same twenty-six for you to be vice chairman if you want them," I said, "But I need four votes, we need four votes.  You need four votes."  So, she said, "All right Freeman, I'll call you right back."  About thirty minutes later, she said, "Freeman, would we need four?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well, I got ten."  We put them votes together and that was the first making of a white-black coalition that I was able to put together, so I'm learning now.  All you gotta do is make sure you got something for somebody else.  They can be with you too, 'cause somebody else getting shut out.  So, I got to be the chairman of the Democratic Party through the white peoples' help.
Speaker 2: Okay, and Marie was the vice chair?
Speaker 1: Vice chairman.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, what did you do now, for the po- old-timers who say what do you want that for?  What did you want it for?  What were you gonna do with it?
Speaker 1: Well, (laughter) I knew that anybody who wants to be governor, come talk to the chairman of the Democratic Party.  Anybody who wants to be state senator can come and talk to the chairman of the Democratic Party.  Anybody who wants to be president, come talk to the chairman of the Democratic Party.  Anybody who wants to be United States Senator, come talk to the chairman of the Democratic Party.  I knew that being the chairman of the Democratic Party not only created me relationships and opportunities, but also strengthened my position as the clerk of the circuit court, who had to run city wide.  You see what I'm saying?  So, I used, you know, you build up points.  In politics, it's the point system.  You, it's an imaginary system of points.  And that's what, you know, when you mentioned the word relationships, the relationships are based on points.  People help you if you've help them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is--
Speaker 1: Or they help you if you're able to help them.
Speaker 2: This is the key to real political power.
Speaker 1: Yeah, on the way to the mayor's office in '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, from there, you know.
Story_ID: 495520
Speaker 1: So, where did the idea come to be mayor?  Now, now you've lived, when you were a teenager, Carl Stokes in Cleveland [Ohio] was the mayor, first one, I think, then Kenneth Gibson, and the mayor [Richard G. Hatcher] up in Gary [Indiana], you know, there are other black mayors, Harold Washington in '83 [1983], you know, in Chicago [Illinois], Bradley [Tom Bradley] out in Los Angeles [California].  Did you think about how these other people became mayor?  Did you ever see yourself in those days as, you say well, I think I could do that, or I'd like to do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I hadn't quite made that leap yet.  I was happy where I was in being the chairman, being the clerk, but I think it was my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] who pretty much said, you know, my dad ran in '85 [1985] and he lost badly, you know, but after the election was over, I said, "Well dad, we lost," I said, you know, "but there'll be another time."  He said, "Son, I can't win it."  He said, "But you can."  He said, "You can't win it now, but you can win it."  He said, "Based on what I know now, and based on what I've learned and based on what I've seen," he said "you can win it."  And, I remember my father used to, 'cause I would sometimes be complaining about things and this and that, and not working out.  My father used to say, "Son, you're gonna be okay.  He said, all you got to do is keep on living, just keep on living," and so that's what he told me when I said, "Well dad, you didn't win it," I said, "But you know, that's okay."  He said, "Son, I didn't win it," he said, "but you can."  He said, "All you gotta do is just keep on living."  And, he was right.  And so, as being chairman, I began to see it then.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And then what I also began to realize is my--based on all the reading and the studying and all the stuff that I had been doing early on, I gradually began to realize that the growth, the state of the growth and development of a lot of the other people really wasn't where I was.  You know, I was trying to, I was really trying to take them too far too fast.  Because the things that I was talking about, you know, being chairman of the party [Democratic Party], you know, what do you want that for?  Being mayor, well why do you want to be the mayor?  Who wants to be the mayor?  You know.  I mean, people start saying stuff like that to me.  At first it frustrated me but then I realized that's where they are.  You see what I'm saying?  That's where they are in their mind, so not a lot you can do with that but lead by example.  So, I began to just continue to cultivate the relationship, so Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] running for president, hey I'm in for that, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there any, any grass roots call in the black community for a black mayor?  I mean, I, coming from Chicago I know there was.  People called for the mayor before there was a candidate.  We want a black mayor.  Was there anybody in St. Louis [Missouri] saying that we want (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Louis is different.  St. Louis has a more complacent type of African American.  I mean, in, in Chicago, if the chairmanship of the Democratic Party came up, black people are gonna say, well, what do you want that, why would you want that?  In Chicago if the position for mayor came up, nobody black would say well, what do you want that for?
Speaker 1: That wouldn't happen.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  In Atlanta [Georgia], they don't say, well, why do you wanna do that?  In New Jersey, nobody says well what do you wanna be the chairman for?  Washington, D.C., well why you wanna be mayor?  When these spots come--hey, let's go get that.  Yeah, I'm down for that.  Yeah, let's go get it.  Let's take it.  Like you say, grass roots come.  We don't have grass roots.  We had problems getting grass here, you see, nevertheless the roots.  You know, we had a time, a lot of times I used to say these people here won't throw rice at a wedding, you know, but you can mobilize them. You know.
Speaker 1: So this is an education process.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an education process, you know, you can mobilize, they can mobilized.  You know, then you got those on the frantic fringe, who clamor for everything.  You know what I'm saying?  They're always down for a protest, always wanting to go on a march, but not understanding really why.  You know, and you've got to step through these things to understand the nature of the circumstances of what it is that you're dealing with, you know, at the time.
Story_ID: 495521
Speaker 1: And so, what I basically started doing was cultivating these relationships with people, you know, Bill Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] running for president, chairman of the Democratic Party, I'm gonna be in this.  I'm gonna be part of this.  I'm gonna mobilize.  St. Louis [Missouri], we're gonna get in this, and so when Bill Clinton, they did that bus tour, you know, him and Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton], throughout the country, St. Louis had the largest turnout over fifty thousand people than almost any city.  You know, and I wasn't, didn't do all of that, but I played a major role in it.  Prior to Clinton being president, we also had Mel Carnahan, who was lieutenant governor of the State of Missouri, from Rolla, Missouri, who wanted to be governor.  So, I said, I fooled around, helped Clinton be president, I helped Carnahan be governor, you know, now we're working with something.  We're working with some things.  So, you know, I figured I have a relationship with a guy that's president and a relationship with a guy that's governor, so whenever I decide I want to do something, I'll be able to get a few things done.  So, I started getting people and helping people get appointed to boards and commissions, board of police commissioners, board of election commissioners, board of curators on the universities and things like that.  You know, start cultivating relationships with people, major corporations and things, you know, start working with barbers and beauticians and humans, and just building, like you say, grass roots, but just as basic as you could possibly get in terms of networking with folks.  So, when it would come time to start moving on something, you know, I don't start at the top, I start at the bottom, you know.  There's a religious and gospel song called 'The Solid Rock' [sic. 'My Hope Is Built on Nothing Less']. Says my faith is built on nothing less than Jesus' blood and righteousness.  I dare not trust the sweetest frame but wholly lean on Jesus' name.  On Christ the solid rock I stand, all other ground is but sinking sand.  So, I build relationships on rock, solid rock, that's my goal, to try to create that rock, because as you build, if you build on rock as you build, your foundation is tight and solid, but people starting at the top, that's all they are, they're at the top, but they're not anchored.
Story_ID: 495522
Speaker 1: You build a pretty good organization then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the neighborhoods and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: People--so when did you formally announce, or what are the circumstances that landed your formal announcement of candidacy?  This is after President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected in '93 [1993]?  It's the year after Clinton?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Ninety-two [1992]. It's all--November '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's when you announced your candidacy?
Speaker 2: That's when I announced my candidacy.  But I began quietly, maybe about six months in advance, eight months in advance, assembling a very small group of key people, maybe ten to twelve, who I considered to be my advisors and started meeting with them, probably once a month, then as we got closer to the presidential election, probably weekly, getting organized for a mayoral run.
Speaker 1: Now, what role did Congressman Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] play with this?
Speaker 2: He was relatively quiet initially, because it's a big move.  This is a major undertaking.  But what happened was the sitting mayor, Mayor Schoemehl [Vincent C. Schoemehl] at that time, decided that he was going to run for governor of the state, and Congressman Clay and others were wanting to try to support him, but I knew that he wasn't going to help me be mayor, so me and some other younger elected officials began to get in behind Mel Carnahan, who was lieutenant governor, and then all of a sudden happened where Congressman Clay and Mayor Schoemehl fell out.  It might have been over something involving some political business.  And that was almost the blessing in disguise, because then Clay pretty much gave the green light, opened the doors for people to go be with Carnahan, and then Schoemehl insulted Carnahan with one of the greatest insults.  He called him a redneck from Rolla [Missouri], and that made national news.  And when that happened, momentum began to build and black people pretty much figured that if we were gonna call him a redneck, we'd know what he's gonna call us.  And so we're ready to put together a very strong coalition with Mel Carnahan, and we were able to get so organized and get people so motivated, that we beat Schoemehl in St. Louis [Missouri] with Mel Carnahan. In his city.
Speaker 1: Right in his own, in his own place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the St. Louis Metropolitan area.  And I was the chairman of the party [Democratic Party] at that time.
Story_ID: 495523
Speaker 1: Now, was there a--was a voter registration effort a major part of your campaign in the black community?  We all know that a lot of black people, you know, they say watch politics like a football game or something.
Speaker 2: Spectators.
Speaker 1: They're looking at it but they're not participating.
Speaker 2: Well, there's also something unique about St. Louis [Missouri], too.  It's unique as well as pathetic and pitiful, so to speak.  We have one of the highest voter registration rates of any city in America.  We've got 85, 80 percent of our people are registered to vote.
Speaker 1: That's incredible.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, but our voter participation levels are like 35 percent, 37.  You see what I'm saying?  So we, my thing was we can get them registered, but we also got to get them out.  So, you know, contrast that to New Orleans [Louisiana], which also has elections on Saturdays, New Orleans will vote 50 percent of the population on their worst day, you see.  But in that, before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], I mean, you're talking about 70 percent of the people in New Orleans vote on Election Day, 70 percent.  To them, politics is a participatory sport.
Story_ID: 495524
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have to register a lot of voters, but you already had them, and--but you had to get them to turn out?
Speaker 2: Yeah we had people that were registered, and we, you know, like any presidential campaign, you're working on voter registration.  But our goal was to get people out.  But you know, as a backdrop to that, there were two white candidates for mayor and two black candidates, so we had somewhat of a crowded field, and when you talk about a grass roots call, there was anxiety in the black community about two blacks running for the office and so we didn't necessarily have a political convention to try to work that out, but we did have situations to come together in which people tried to get in behind a consensus candidate, and eventually I wound up being the consensus candidate.
Speaker 1: Now, who was first?  Who was the first candidate?
Speaker 2: Who was the other candidate (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who announced first of the two of you?
Speaker 2: I think I, I don't think I announced first.  Steve Roberts [Steven C. Roberts]--I think what happened was Steve Roberts announced first, but I had been working on it for about a year, so people knew that I was running and I was looking at--
Speaker 1: And he knew too.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  And I was considering it, but I think that to announce to be first probably was political too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, what made people decide, what was the decisive factor in determining which one would be the candidate?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the fact that I was the clerk on the circuit court.
Speaker 1: What was Roberts at the time?
Speaker 2: He was an alderman, but he had resigned from that to work at his brother's--he and his brother have one of the largest African American-owned cable companies in the country, you know, so they've done extremely well as business people, but because, one, I had run city-wide several times, I have won and have done extremely well. Two, chairman of the party, three, just helped the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], four, just helped get elected a governor [Mel Carnahan], five, had spent eleven years creating these relationships with people throughout the St. Louis [Missouri] metropolitan area, so people knew me, and were committed me.
Story_ID: 495525
Speaker 1: So, would you say that when you decided to run, once your, all your ducks were lined up, you were pretty sure you could win?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, um-hm, yeah.  And, of course, the main thing is money.  You always gotta have money, but what my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] told me is something I always believe.  If you got the people, you don't need as much money, and that's why I always talk about that solid rock, because that solid rock is, is the people.  If you're out here in the neighborhoods and in the communities and if you cultivate the relationship with the people over years, you got that rock, you got that solid rock, so you don't need near as, you do need some money, but you don't need as much money.
Speaker 1: The money is primarily spent to persuade people, is it not?
Speaker 2: Well, it's that spent to persuade and it's spent to dissuade?  Because some people a guy sitting on two or three hundred thousand dollars, he's hard to beat, so why fool with him?  And then in this day and age too now, you got money as the easy way out.  Going out talking to people is hard.  You know, as opposed to wanting to talk to the people, they're going to have to raise the money and so they figure if they got enough money, they shut out the contenders.
Speaker 1: Okay. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I've never really been excited, you know, involved, you know.  I've never been that excited about the money and the times I've worn my most important offices, I've never really had the money.  When I was twenty-eight in '82 [1982], the guy had over $170,000.  I had $10,000.  And the mayor race in '93 [1993], guys had $1.5 million, another guy had $1 million and I had $200,000.  But I had people.  I had the people.
Story_ID: 495526
Speaker 1: Who did you run against in that primary? In that election (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In that primary, you had the president of the Board of Aldermen [St. Louis, Missouri], Tom Villa [Thomas Villa] was running.  You had the majority floor leader of the House of Representatives [Missouri House of Representatives], Tony Ribaudo [Anthony Ribaudo], he was running.  And then you had Steve Roberts [Steven C. Roberts], former alderman, and then you had me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So all four of you at the same time.  And so, how much did you win by?  What was the final?
Speaker 2: I think I got close to 90 percent of the vote in the black community.  I got over 50 percent of the vote in that Central Corridor [St. Louis, Missouri] that you heard me talk about, and I only got maybe about 10 to 12 percent of the vote in the white community.
Speaker 1: South St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: South St. Louis, yes, so I think I, I did win by about three or four thousand, two or three thousand votes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's substantial enough.
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: What was the atmosphere like, was there, what dramas were associated with election night?
Speaker 2: It was electrically charged, I mean even before the election, we had created quite a buzz.  You know, because people began, the type of campaigns that I run, people began to feel it, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have a slogan, a campaign slogan or--
Speaker 2: It's time for new direction.  We need new direction at city hall, and so we, we were able to put a pretty good team on the field.  You know, I had neighborhood organization, block units, unions, elected officials.  This time, I had an overwhelming amount of the black elected officials.  I mean, they're with me now.  And so I had people like State Representative Paula Carter, Senator Jet Banks [J.B. "Jet" Banks], you had my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.], you had Charles Troupe [Charles Quincy Troupe], that I mentioned about him earlier.  You had all kind of aldermen, all type of power for the politically connected people.  I was able to pick up a nice contingent of Jewish support.  I was able to quite a bit of support in the gay and lesbian community, so I was, I had a lot of young people involved in the campaign so, a lot of middle classed folks.  I had a, although I was running for mayor in the city, I had a county, people in the county for Bosley [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.], raising money and campaigning.  People grew up in the city but moved to the county, their mothers and fathers, their moms and dads were still here in the city.  So it was a pretty broad base of support, pretty good broad base of support.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the black church?  Was that where they were a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The ministers, clergy coalition was with me.  I had a lot of ministers that were, they would go around introducing me at different places where I was speaking, speaking engagements and open up their churches for me, you know, and we'd be in the pulpits campaigning, talking about voting for me.  So, it was a lot of momentum by the time the election came around.
Story_ID: 495527
Speaker 1: Now, how did it affect your family?  Now, you were married at this time, and--
Speaker 2: Married, got a little girl [Sydney Bosley], about three years old, and you know that was one thing that a lot of the public doesn't see, and that's the strain that it puts, you know, on the family.  I'd leave, going to work at eight o'clock in the morning, but you know, I had a thing where my wife [Darlynn Cunningham Bosley] insisted and I wanted to too, I took my daughter to school every day.  I took her to school every day and every morning, without fail.  But generally, wouldn't come back in the house until sometime around ten or eleven o'clock at night, you know, because after I'd make all my speaking engagements, I'd make it a point I would try to make it to some of the bars and the clubs and stuff, where another group of people would be that I wouldn't see during the day.  And that was part of helping out while we'd say I gotta the campaign on the ground, we gotta get the campaign on the ground, and once you're able to touch base with all those different type of people, then, you know you've got the ground moving then.
Story_ID: 495528
Speaker 1: Now, what was the primary issue, I guess, in the black community or any, the city, that--
Speaker 2: Jobs, economic opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's time for a change, we need a new direction, the city was broke, we didn't have any money, had one of the highest homicide rates--the city had the highest homicide rate that it ever had before in the history of the city.  Crime was high, you know.
Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri] does have a reputation for high crime and the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Our present mayor [Vincent C. Schoemehl] had been there for twelve years.  He had three terms, and then he had announced that he wasn't running for reelection, so now you got that extra element power grab.  Got all those different dynamics working.  Made for a good time.
Story_ID: 495529
Speaker 1: Now, where was the announcement made that you had won the election and how many people were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were at the Boilermakers Hall [St. Louis, Missouri] down here in the Soulard [St. Louis, Missouri] area and Broadway, polls closed at 7:00.  It was late, probably maybe 10:30 before the actual announcement came out and the place was already loaded with people, you know, so I had friends who had been a helping me all around the country that flew in for it, folks from out of New Orleans [Louisiana], people from Chicago [Illinois], folks form New York [New York], we had people here from California, people from Atlanta [Georgia], folks that come from Memphis [Tennessee], then all our friends from Illinois, I mean so you had an all-star cast, so to speak (laughter).  People there from everywhere.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the celebrities that showed up to--
Speaker 2: I don't necessarily know whether I had that type of celebrity involved, you know, but I can't help but you know one of my strong supporters at that time was people like Nelly and [HistoryMaker] Cedric the Entertainer and this is before they had really blown up, but they were people that helped move the ground for you.  So, they were pushing and shoving for me, and so yeah, there were a lot of folks that were you know, really genuinely interested in what was going on.  You had people who, whose mothers and fathers, you know how freely people go to school, away to college, and they don't come back home.  But by this time, you know, a month before Election Day, Mom [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] and Dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] and them are sending them the clippings in the newspapers about what's going on, you know.  Then folks are calling, so you got network, you got buzz, you got all of that.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular sight or incident that stands out on that night when you won the election?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's cold and it's about--the polls closed--it's about 7:00, 8:00, I'm making one last pass through.  I come through area called LaClede Town [St. Louis, Missouri] and it's cold and this guy's got his barbecue pit out and fire is coming up out of the pit and everything, and right next to it, he's got two Bosley for Mayor signs on the side and I just say get fired up for Bosley. So, I mean, just little things like that.  There are people with buses with yard signs and posters on them, folks would ride around in cars with bull horns and PA [public announcement] systems on them, I mean you just had a lot of, lot of energy which I like.  Kind of motivates you, you draw a lot of strength from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get any sleep that night?
Speaker 2: Probably, not really.  Because I got all these people in now from out of town, now.  So, after we got the victory, you know, we gave a victory speech, it's 11:00, 12:00, so nobody's ready to go to sleep, so everybody stands, stays up talking, you know the stories are pouring out.  Folks are talking about happened over here and what happened over there, and all of this, and so we're all talking and everything, and so I wind up, I think I wind up getting to bed about 6:00 in the morning, but then and seven o'clock in the morning, the phone is ringing now.  Everybody's calling, interviews, people from around the country talking, and so my wife [Darlynn Cunningham Bosley] can't sleep, the baby [Sydney Bosley] can't sleep, so I said I better, I gotta get outa here.  So I just tell everybody, tell them we're at the headquarters, so at eight o'clock I'm at the headquarters now just opening the doors, and just whoever of them come on in and we'll talk to them.  So, I got very little sleep that day, probably for a couple days, but I mean it was, at this point, you don't need sleep.  I mean, you got your own energy.
Story_ID: 495530
Speaker 1: So, well how was it to be mayor?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a great honor.  I mean, you know, this town has been good to me.  I mean, who was it, Tupac [Tupac Shakur] somebody said, "I ain't mad at you.  I ain't got nothin' but love for you," and I said that's how I feel about St. Louis [Missouri].  I mean, because I've had some ups and downs and rough and tumble political career, but I've gotten much more highs than lows here.  So, it was a great honor, you know.  It was an honor.  I mean, the public service is what my family's been about.  You know, my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.], my grandfather [Preston Bosley], so that's all I ever wanted to do was serve, so I mean, being mayor.  I mean, there's no better honor than that.  I mean they're, they've given me, you know, I've got the brass ring, so I'm, I'm happy, so I've been able to, I've had the honor and the privilege of being the mayor of one of the largest cities in America and I made my mark.  They know I was here.  I was able to do a lot of things.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things, some of the milestones in your mayorality?
Speaker 2: You know, from the time I got appointed I was appointed first African American chief of staff, first African American city counsellor.  I appointed more blacks to boards and commissions than any other mayor.  You know, I was able to pass--when I said the city was broke when I got into office, I was able to pass a tax generated through 3/8 and 1/2 cent sales tax proposition, generated over thirty-seven million dollars of revenue to the city every year, still does.  Paved more road streets and bridges than any mayor in the history of this town, money for parks, helped restore Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], which is the second largest park, urban park, in America, probably over one hundred million dollar restoration probably over two or three million dollars in housing under my administration.  When (unclear) we'd build a stadium [Trans World Dome; The Dome at America's Center, St. Louis, Missouri] without a football team.  I was part of a coalition that went and got the Rams [St. Louis Rams; Los Angeles Rams] here.
Speaker 1: You built the stadium first without the team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which I don't know why they were doing that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, let me get this straight. The Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals] just left town, right?  They go to Phoenix [Arizona], which I--
Speaker 2: Yes, so we didn't have football tickets?
Speaker 1: Did they leave while you were mayor?
Speaker 2: Before I was mayor.  Before I was mayor.  And so there were a group of people together to try to go get a football team.  So, the team said well how are we gonna come to St. Louis when there's no stadium.  So, I guess they figured build it and they would come.  So, they built a stadium and we didn't have a football team, so that was something that I had to do while I was in office, 'cause, you know, that's the running joke.  Yeah, you're mayor of St. Louis, you're going to be on the stadium without a football team, so before I could get to give my speech, I'd have to deal with that joke.  You know, so we were able to do that.  TWA [Trans World Airlines] was in bankruptcy, which is one of the larger airlines in the history in the St. Louis area, so I was able to negotiate their rise from the bankruptcy.  We were able to bring Fortune 500 companies here to St. Louis corporate headquarters, created jobs and economic opportunity, so we had quite a few things to be proud of.
Story_ID: 495531
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have anything like the council wars in Chicago [Illinois]?  Were there, were there aldermen who bonded together to oppose you, or did you have that kind of thing in yours at all?
Speaker 2: I didn't have that really because I had, was clerk of the courts.  I was the chairman of the party [Democratic Party], so I had created all of these relationships, and my dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] was on the board.  So I had created all those relationships with these people before I got to be the mayor, so it was almost like a natural transition of sorts.  But, my biggest problem was with black people; you know, black aldermen, not necessarily with white alderman rising up against me, because they wanted to be part of this coalition, but you know you had black aldermen.  It was just really four that couldn't understand--
Speaker 1: Four out of how many?
Speaker 2: Four of eleven, no, four out of twelve--
Speaker 1: And how many are in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and then out of twenty-eight totally.
Speaker 1: There are twenty-eight aldermen?
Speaker 2: Members of board of aldermen total, but that wasn't a piece of legislation that I attempted to pass, because I didn't pass.  But just people, you know, that's just a natural order of things when you're in an office like that.  Everybody's not going to be with you, and you can't expect everybody to be with you.
Speaker 1: What was the nature of their opposition before they opposed you?  I mean, I don't know if you can really know, but what do you think it was?
Speaker 2: Jobs for themselves and family members and things like that, that I attempted to try to get done, but for whatever reason they weren't happy with it. I can give you an example.  There's a street in St. Louis [Missouri] called Kingshighway [Boulevard].  A certain area of Kingshighway, North Kingshighway, probably hasn't been paved in twenty years.  This one particular alderman says to me, "Well I'm gonna support you but I need three things from you. One, I need a job for this lady," whom she wanted a job for.  "Two, I want a shopping center in my community," which the black community didn't have one, "and three, I want you to pave North Kingshighway."  And none of those were things that I'm disagreeing with.  You know, if you want a job, we have plenty of jobs, so I can get somebody a job.  So time comes to do North Kingshighway, but it's a very narrow thoroughfare.  It's got four lanes, two lanes in each direction, but they're very narrow, built back in the day when cars were smaller.  So, but it's got a median in the middle of it that's 50 feet wide.  So, the engineers come back with a new design of North Kingshighway, and they say, "Mayor, the street is, the median is too wide.  So we gotta have 10 feet more.  Let's see, I'd say we gotta take 11 feet out of this median, 5.5 feet on each side."  I said, "Well that's fine."  You know, there's gonna be wider, it's gonna be more navigable, and it'll be a better constructed street.  I said fine.  So, when I lay out the plan for the pavement in North Kings- fixing of North Kingshighway, she said, "Well I don't want you to take 11 feet out of the median.  I want the 11 feet to come out of the sidewalks.  Take them off the curb."  I said, "No wait." I said, "Now I'm a mayor and I'm a lawyer, and you're an alderman and you're a lawyer.  Neither one of us are engineers."  I said, "Let the engineers design the street.  Now, if you got some aesthetic issues about the trees and things like that, then we can make sure we got enough trees and things," I said, "but don't tamper with the design."  So, she would introduce the bill to re-do the street because she didn't want the 11 feet coming out the median.  She wanted it coming out the sidewalks.  So we struggled with that back and forth, so finally I had to have the president of the Board of Aldermen [St. Louis, Missouri] introduce the bill of objection and we passed that bill and we redone that street.  So those are the type of things that I would have disagreements with certain black elected officials about.  One of them wanted to run for president of the board of aldermen and didn't have any money, and didn't have any political support, and so I didn't her.  And so we fell out about that.  And so the two of them together were able to find two more aldermen to kind of be with them against things that I was attempting to do.  It never really stopped anything, but it was just always in the way.  But I mean, we weren't mad about that because as, again, I mentioned that stuff happens.
Story_ID: 495532
Speaker 1: What's the things that you're most proud of, I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess the most- thing I was most proud of and still going on would be the passing of the 3/8 and 1/2 cent sales tax, generating that money to the city.  I was able to give a three-year pay and planned increase to the city employees, firefighters and police, something that they've never had since then.  That money continues to come now to provide money to keep up the parks, to pave the streets, to repair the bridges, to improve the rolling stock, I mean, so when you see new trucks, city trucks, that's part of their tax that I pass, the money to restore Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], the hundred million dollar part of their tax fund is there, so when I take my daughter [Sydney Bosley] by that park I can smile and say, you know, "Daddy helped do that."  I think that's probably one of the biggest things, and it's still going on, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Forrest Park, Fairground [Fairground Park, St. Louis, Missouri], every par- major park in the city of St. Louis [Missouri] gets a little piece of that tax money.
Story_ID: 495533
Speaker 1: You lost your bid for reelection.
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997], yeah.
Speaker 1: And what happened?  What happened?
Speaker 2: I think that you know there was a lot of, I think a lot of anger, there was a lot of animosity, a lot of resentment built up about my administration.  I think that one of the things that happens when I talk to you about power and power change and power shift, power realignment, you know, I think that there are people that probably expected me to just be happy to be the mayor and not necessarily do a lot of things and a lot of the things that I was doing was causing real change.  You know, when we were expanding airports or building jails or redoing streets, I had a real serious concern about the level of minority participation.  So, to me, you know, we had a policy in place that when it comes to the expenditure of public dollars, 25 percent would go to minorities and five percent would go to women.  That's what I want to see happen here; you know, not that, yeah we know you got it but we can't find it.  No, we got it and we're gonna do it.  When I got in office, over 70 percent of those times that, instead of being able to satisfy their requirement, they would give what you call a waiver, meaning yeah, we had made a good payment but finding people, but we can't find them.  I wouldn't accept any waivers and so that meant that people who were used to getting a million dollar, two million dollar contract every year, instead of getting that, they might get half or maybe not get the contract at all.  So, after a while, a light bulb began to come on and said hey, this guy is costing us money, I mean, if that's the way you wanna look at it.  So that support wasn't there.  You know, St. Louis [Missouri] is a city that is racially divided.  My concept was black and white keys.  My dad [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] used to tell me, he says it takes the black and white keys to play the 'Star Spangled Banner.'  It takes blacks and whites working together to have a city and move it forward.  Well, to my dismay, white people didn't want that and black people didn't want it either.  They didn't want, you know, what do you want, like the old man said, why do you wanna do that?  What do you wanna do that for?
Story_ID: 495534
Speaker 1: Classic case, we had a flood, I mean the greatest flood, the flood of 1993 and it was in south St. Louis [Missouri], which was a lower area of the city.  That's where a majority of the white people live.  It got to the point where I came in office in April of '93 [1993], and in June they said, "There's a flood and it looks like the water's coming.  We gotta put the flood gates up."  I said, "Okay, put them up."  July comes, "Hey that water's getting' a little higher," so they start setting up a command center, and by the middle of July, by July 15, "Hey, we think you might have to declare a disaster."  I said, "What is that?  Disaster?  What?"  I said, "What do you have to do to do that?"  They said, "Well, you know, you're gonna have to turn the peoples' electricity off.  You're gonna have to turn their gas off.  You've got to evacuate."  It was way before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], and not like Katrina, but a mini-baby.  So, they said, "We gotta go over there."  I said, "Take me over there, let me tour the area and everything."  So I on, took a tour of the area.  Now white people sitting out right away from the, there's this river preparing--this, this thing that's getting ready to flood 'cause the water from the Mississippi River was getting ready to back up up in here and all this water's gonna come over this levy and everybody's gonna be messed up.  So they're sitting out, drinking beer in lawn chairs.  It's hot, you know, around July 15, and, "Oh, Mayor, don't worry about it.  The flood of '72 [1972]--," they can tell me the water mark. "This is where it came.  It's not gonna come any higher than this."  I said, "Well this water's right almost there now, it's another six inches gonna come over the levy and you're gonna drown."  "Oh, well don't worry about it."  So, my birthday is July 20.  On July 18, they come back and they say, "You got to declare a disaster because now you can't even have any traffic on the water."  No traffic at all 'cause any wake, any rippling on the river would cause the water to come over the levy.  So I have to go over there and read this proclamation.  "Where's the chief?  I want the Chief of Police to come."  "We can't find him."  Nobody wants to be part of this.  This is dirty duty.  So, I go over here and I'm gonna get ready to read this, proclaim this disaster, and there's white people standing around, walking around with signs saying only disaster here is Bosley [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Um.
Speaker 1: So, they didn't want me over there.  They didn't want me declaring a disaster, but we had to declare a disaster.  We had to evacuate over two thousand homes and families and within twenty-four hours that water came over that levy and over six feet, six to eight feet of water was in the basements of those homes.  If anybody had been there, you'd have fire, explosions, drownings, and everything else.  They're on the radio, they're on the television, next day, "We didn't know it was gonna be this bad."  And the news people said, "Well the whites didn't want you over there.  Do you feel vindicated?"  I said, "I don't feel vindicated.  I just did what I had to do."  But during the flood, you know, you had the clergy, black people sending blankets and food and water over.  They didn't even want it.  "Send that back there.  We don't want those people coming over here.  We don't want to help them sandbag.  We don't want to help us sandbag.  We don't want their clothes.  We don't want their food.  Send it back."
Story_ID: 495535
Speaker 1: But another example of that too was when I won the clerk's office in 1982, I was saddened by the fact that I didn't get many white votes.  I got less than 10 percent of the white vote.  So I was twenty-seven, twenty-eight years old, so I went to a guy who was my guidance counselor in high school [Central High School; Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri], went to his father and I said, "Well you know, I didn't--,"--he's white, a big, big time politician of south St. Louis [Missouri].  I said, "I didn't do well in that primary."  I said, "I got all the black votes but I got very few white votes."  I said, "I appreciate it," because the general election is coming up."  I said, "I'd appreciate it if you would, you know, take me around, invite me to some of the picnics and things and take me around to churches and kind of help me meet some people and make some friends."  (Unclear) He said, "Wait a minute."  He said, "Don't come down here.  Do yourself a favor.  Don't come down here.  These people find out that you're black, they'll never vote for you."  I was hurt.  So then I went back to these older elected officials that asked me what I want this job for anyway.  I said, "You know what they told me?"   He said, "What?"  I said, "They told me not to come down to south St. Louis, not to campaign down there.  That once the people found out I wasn't white, once they found out I was black they wouldn't vote for me."  He said, "Well, they're right.  Do yourself a favor.  Don't go down there.  Stay down here.  Stay down here with us.  You don't have to go down there.  Don't fool with those people."  So I'm you know, you ever hear that song 'I'm Stuck in the Middle With You' [sic. 'Stuck in the Middle With You']?  (Laughter).  It's like the white people don't want to help me and the black people don't want me to go.  So, what are you gonna do, you know, and that was the nature of it.
Speaker 2: So, did, did you campaign in south St. Louis?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, yeah, absolutely.  All the time.  You know in many instances it helped, you know.  A lot of instances it didn't, but that didn't stop me from going.
Speaker 2: Were there any scary moments over there where people threatened you or anything?
Speaker 1: Well no, I got a few threats, phone calls to the office and stuff like that, but I mean I don't really think that any of it bothered or mattered to me to that extent, as long as my wife [Darlynn Cunningham Bosley] and my daughter [Sydney Bosley] were gonna be fine, you know.  I was okay with that, you know.  I was married.  I had a security detail that was assigned to me by the police department, so I was pretty much, felt pretty comfortable.  I mean that, that was really never a moment that I was scared.
Story_ID: 495536
Speaker 1: Now who ran against you when you ran for reelection?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a black chief of police named Clarence Harmon, who when tame- came time to go to deal with that flood, went home, but he and I, I guess, had some real issues politically, I guess, and personally that we weren't able to resolve and so, I guess people who were trying to defeat me figured well we probably couldn't beat him with a white candidate, so I believe we could beat him with a black candidate.  So, they went and convinced him that he should run.  So, he ran against me and race card raised its ugly head again and so the community became racially not only divided, but polarized and charged.  And so I got 90 percent, 95 percent of the black vote and he got 90 percent of the white vote.  And so white people, you know, who generally vote more than black people do, and black people figuring that, you know, it's a participatory sport for going in anyway, so I didn't get as much of my support out as he did, and so I lost.
Speaker 1: So is that clear that he was the candidate of the white community, but was still black (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting dynamic.  There was the National Association of Political Science [sic. National Conference of Black Politcal Scientists] presented that at its annual meeting, the analysis of that race, it was so popular.
Speaker 1: Such an anomaly that it had to be studied immediately by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. It was a case study, yes.
Speaker 1: --by scientists.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Yeah. It was very interesting dynamic.
Speaker 1: So, there was- there wasn't a major white candidate that they--
Speaker 2: No.  It was black on bl--yeah.
Speaker 1: --they put forward.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 495537
Speaker 1: Now you ran again at some point, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah in 2001, which when he came back up.  The town [St. Louis, Missouri] was still having problems.  Things still weren't quite, I guess, running the way people thought they should, plus I was still thinking that I hadn't finished doing the things that I wanted to do and so I had people talking to me about it.  Of course, initially I had dismissed it but they kept talking about when we can raise money and they did some polling that showed that I still have a substantial amount of support.  By this time, a guy who's also a friend of mine, Francis Slay, who was the current mayor, was also president of the Board of Aldermen [St. Louis, Missouri] at that time, decided he wanted to run.  So this time, you had two blacks and a white person running and, of course, I got 90 percent of the vote, 95 percent of the vote in the black community.  I was only able to get 10 percent of the vote in the white community and the incumbent mayor only got 5 percent total vote in the whole city, so, and the white mayor, Francis Slay, was able to win (unclear).  So there's a guy that got 90 percent of the white vote, a black man who got 90 percent of the white vote the first time he ran against me, and didn't get 5 percent of the white vote the second time he ran, which really underscored what his first candidacy was really about.  I'm, I'm sure that was a very defining moment for him.
Story_ID: 495538
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do during this period of time when you were, you know, you're in office, you're going pretty good and all of a sudden you're not, not mayor anymore.  Was that hard to, to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was an interesting transition, but I guess the beauty about all of that is that my mother [Marjorie Robertson Bosley] and father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] always made sure that I was going to school, so you know, made sure that I got Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] undergrad paid off and then going to law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] and graduating and then going to law school and passing the bar.  You always make money.  I could always get a real job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went into private practice with some friends and that turned out to be very well and I really enjoyed it and then at some point I started thinking instead of sharing this money with people, I could really have my own business and it could be my money.  I could build Bosley and Associates [Bosley and Associates LLC], which is where you are now, so.
Story_ID: 495539
Speaker 1: And, I mean, do you ever, have you ever considered--are you still involved in politics on any level now?
Speaker 2: Well, there were not a lot of people to help young folks when I was running for office, so I always try to help the young people that run.  People that are interested in running for alderman, or something that I think is worthy in my view, worthwhile chasing, I will try to help, and so I still dabble in it from time to time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Have you given up the idea of, you're still a fairly young man for a politician (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I mean that's age-wise, but I would imagine experience politically I got a few years on me.
Speaker 1: It seems like it'd be of some use to your constituency here [St. Louis, Missouri], I mean the people of this area.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I find there are opportunities for me to provide advice and counsel, but what's interesting is I don't people like old mayors being around.  I think it's just too much information, too much knowledge and experience and, you know, I just don't, there's no place for us to go, you see.  Where do old mayors go?  You know, I mean if you're not old, you can't just ride off in the sunset.  So, you know, you're not old enough to just sit on the bench, so you gotta do something, which is, I guess for me the beauty of having a law degree and being able to channel my energies and my resources; I mean, if I carried a town of 350,000 people, then clearly I can carry my company or carry a business.
Story_ID: 495540
Speaker 1: You said that politics was a participatory--in nature.  You really don't know until you get in and start doing it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know. What advice would you give to someone, you know, trying to get involved in politics today? A young person, younger than yourself, but you're still young by most standards.
Speaker 2: Well, I think part of my job, I think is to challenge them.  I'm saying for instance, you know, if I'm out at some reception or party or something and, "Oh, Mayor Bosley [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.] is here."  They might come over and start talking to me and they went to school with my father [Freeman Bosley, Sr.] or my grandfather knows you and this and that, and, "You know me--," they're in their thirties--or you know, "We can really take this town over.  It's our turn now."  I said, "Well how old are you?"  "Oh, I'm thirty three, thirty-four."  I said, "Well when I was twenty-eight, I had a citywide office."  I said, "What are you waiting on?"  I said, "You're talking the talk.  Can you walk the walk?"  And so this, back at it again.  Don't talk to me about what you want to plan on doing.  Let me see, let me see.  You know, people say let me see your demonstration.  And so my job, I think now, is to find the people, the workers, you know, as opposed to the talkers.  You know, I mean, I see a lot of people that talk the talk.  I'm looking for people that can walk that walk and if I can see that you can walk it and you're willing to walk it, I'm going to help you.  And so that's my job and I like to challenge them.  Sometimes they get mad and frustrated and say, "What's wrong with him?"  But, you know, I got to stick that, that pin in them, you know what I'm saying, to let them feel me.  You know, and I think that's what they got, you know, just don't come talking to me.  I ain't the one.  You know, if you gonna talk to me, I'd be ready to have a real conversation.
Story_ID: 495541
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, in my--it's to unde-, it's to understand, and I don't expect the whole community to understand it, and you don't need the whole community to understand it but you do need a few, and you know, there's a phrase that says leadership is action, not position, you know, and I think that one of the biggest problems that people have generally is just the fear of failing and what you'll realize is after you fail once or twice, you realize it's not all that bad.  You can't fall off the ground.  All you gotta do is just try.  You know there's a saying it's not how many times you fall on the ground, it's how many times you can pick yourself back up and get in the race, and you know, I think that I just, my goal and what I'd like to see is just people charging the gate more.  Particularly the younger you are, the greater the opportunities are for you to charge the gate.  The older you get, the more set in your ways you become.  You got a job, you got a family, you got bills, so you're more conservative and more reluctant to change.  Change is with the youth and with young people, you know, and that's how I was able to bring things about, 'cause as I told you, I mean, the older people couldn't see what I was talking about, and those that saw, they were afraid.  They were scared.  They felt it would cost them.  So young people are the ones that got to make the difference.  You know, they're the ones that got to push and shove and press that envelope, and at some point I'm hoping that the African American community in St. Louis [Missouri] will realize again there's power here, but you got to take it and then once you take it, you got to fight just as hard to keep it.  You know, one of the things that I learned is after I won in 1993, mayor, a large portion of the people were still trying to celebrate my victory, you know, back slapping and wanting to talk about the victory and the race and how we won, and you know, after about a year, I said we gotta go to work now.  Black people don't really understand the act of governing.  You see what I'm saying?  Running the campaign and winning is one thing, but can you govern?  You gotta learn how to govern.  You gotta learn how to run the government.  You gotta understand how the government works and you gotta be willing to do what's necessary to put the pieces together and create the coalitions that it takes to move the community forward, like business, and a lot of times people don't understand that.  When I got in office, anxiety among white people was extremely high, but what are you gonna do, you gonna take all our money and don't let us do nothing, and then expectation level in the black community was extremely high. Oh, it's our turn now.  We want it all.  But you know to be mayor and to govern, you can't do all of that.  You've gotta have a blend.  To be mayor there's gotta be something there for everybody.  It's like being daddy of the family.  You ever watch the Discovery Channel where the animals, like say for instance like the birds and the nest and momma leaves the nest and comes back and before she can get in the nest, you've got all of those heads up with their mouth open waiting for some food.  (Laughter) That's just like being mayor.  I mean you're in charge, and everybody's got their mouth open waiting on some food, but you gotta have a little something for everybody, because if you don't then somebody gonna die and the weak birds, they get pushed out of the nest, right?  So the mayor's gotta govern.  You gotta have something for everybody and move your town forward, and so a lot of times people don't understand that and leaders, real leaders, you can't expect them to understand it, but you gotta lead and your action, it's about action, not your position and your action has got to provide them and you have to know the way and show them the way, and sometimes that way is painful, sometimes it's frustrating, sometimes it's very anxious and a lot of times, people don't wanna go, but your job is to get them there.  And that's what I always try to do.
Story_ID: 495542
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is the- is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Well, we talked about the Midnight Basketball, you know something simple like that, you turn that over to somebody else.  You know, that issue about me on the cell phone just like they did with Campbell [Bill Campbell] in Atlanta [Georgia], using cell phones to make personal calls, but you with mayor you're working every day.  It's not like I'm working nine to five, when do I ever get off?  When would a mayor ever get off?  So, whatever your use of the phone is, that's your use of the phone.  That's the cost of being the mayor.  That should be the cost of being there, but something simple like that, don't even take a city phone, pay your own cell phone bill, you know.  Talk to whoever you wanna talk to.  You know, little simple things like that.  I had other things that I wanted to do.  I wanted to be able to, I had a dream for a nine-hole golf course surrounded by 150, $200,000 homes, something similar to Victoria Park [Victoria Park Estates] in Detroit [Michigan], not necessarily around the golf course, but middle class housing in the inner city, that's Victoria Park.  Same thing down in Atlanta.  Now, they took an old housing project and converted it into a middle class housing around the gold course.  That's one of the major things that I wanted to do.  In St. Louis [Missouri], there's a lack of housing of any meaningful numbers for middle class people.  What we've been able to do, we build 10 houses here, 20 houses over there, but we haven't been able to build 100 homes.  We haven't been able to build 100, $200,000 homes and just totally transform a neighborhood or a community, but then people say oh, you're just trying to displace me, you're trying to drown folks out. Where? There's nobody there.  The people are going.  When I was born, this town had 700, 850,000 people in it.  Now, it's got 350,000 people in it.  But we still have housing and neighborhoods and communities and a downtown for 850,000 people there. There's nobody there. There's plenty of space, so you're not displacing anybody.
Story_ID: 495543
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look at everything you've done at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say that [HistoryMaker] Freeman Bosley, Jr. was a mayor that probably instilled a lot of pride and dignity in a community, probably paved more roads, streets, and bridges, than any other mayor, restored our parks, generated probably over three hundred million dollars in housing, a guy that came and pushed and shoved and tried to do what's best, but he probably fell down a couple times, picked himself back up and got in the race.
Story_ID: 495544
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your family.  Now your daughter [Sydney Bosley] now is--
Speaker 2: Sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just came back from the homecoming dance, you know, her and her mama [Darlynn Cunningham Bosley] have been arguing back and forth about what kind of dress she ought to wear and she now wants to wear high heels, heels too high, how's she gonna wear her hair, women things, you know, so--I'm trying to be the dutiful dad, and make sure she tries to get some decent grades so we can get her into a halfway decent school and just hopefully provide her with a good quality of life and a halfway decent outlook on life so that she can grow up to not be a selfish person, but also try to think about what she can do to help make St. Louis [Missouri] better, but like most kids that leave this town, a lot of them don't come back.  I'm hoping that at some time she would come back and try to help continue what it was that her family started.
Story_ID: 495545
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that you think I ought to ask before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think so.  I think you've done a pretty good job as a in- as a person conducting an interview.  I think it's generally been more thorough than most of the ones that I've participated in.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'm clearly going to be remembered as the first. You know, but as the first what?  I know as the first African American mayor, but also as one of the first mayors that got elected and really tried to make a difference, tried to create a better racial climate in this town, tried to create better economic opportunity in the community, tried to what he could to reduce crime, tried to go out and convince young people that there was a place for them and actually tried to show this town that if you wanna live in the kind of town that the kind of town you like, you don't have to put your bags in a grip and go on a long, long hike.  Real towns aren't made of being afraid.  If you can think about it, it's not the town, it's you. If you make the right contribution, if everybody antes up and kicks in, you can make your town what you want it to be.  It's not the town.  It's you.
