Story_ID: 3206
Speaker 1: Major funding for the following program was provided by Northern Trust Bank [Chicago, Illinois]. Additional funding was provided by AT&T Broadband, Ameritech SBC [telecommunications companies], McDonald's [Corporation], Walgreens [pharmaceutical chain], and the Chicago [Illinois] Tribune [newspaper].
Story_ID: 3207
Speaker 1: He is a humanitarian, activist, and performer. His life, a model for others to see. His name, Harry Belafonte. The HistoryMakers is proud to present 'An Evening with Harry Belafonte'.  And now to our host, star of stage and screen, Danny Glover.
Story_ID: 3208
Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers, an archive of 5000 African Americans who made a difference. There is something everyone can appreciate in these stories. It's about education. It's about our legacy. It's also about telling our story and about correcting American history before it's too late. Now, a person that I hold dear, that I love very much, who made history when times were different.
Speaker 2: Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 1: (Belafonte's song 'Turn the World Around' plays in the background) "Do you know who I am? Do I know who you are. See we one another clearly. Do we know who we are? Do you know who I am? Do I know who you are? See one another clearly--,"
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Here he is, Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 1: (Song) "Do you know who I am? Do I know who you are. See we one another clearly. Do we know who we are? Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life. Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life. Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life. Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life. Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life. Oh, so is life. Ah, so is life."
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Thank you, my friend.
Story_ID: 3209
Speaker 1: You look great, man.
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If you run hard enough and you run long enough, the wrinkles won't catch up with you.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) I'm hoping for the same kind of luck.
Speaker 2: I think you're going to be eternal.
Speaker 1: Oh, God.  Yeah. Well, you know, well, now, we're speaking about history. Now, we know that you were born in 1927--March 1, 1927 as Harold George Belafonte. But your parents [Harold George Belafonte, Sr. and Malvine Belafonte] were immigrants to this country. They came here from a small island in the Caribbean. So their stories are different and more profound story. Talk to us about that.
Speaker 2: Like most immigrants, my parents came here looking for a place that would afford them dignity and opportunity. Everybody was constantly living on the edge of danger. They were here illegally. They had to constantly elude federal agents who were rounding up illegal immigrants. We changed our names so constantly that after a while, I didn't really know who I was. My mother, who was an extremely clever woman, was able to outwit both the landlord and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the [U.S.] Treasury Department, all of which served me very well.  I grew up with these magnificent survival instincts. My mother was a domestic worker, uneducated. My father was a seaman. He was a wonderful cook, but he was very absent from home. He declared more often than not that he was at sea--that was not always the truth. My mother was usually offended by his betrayal, but she did not let life dismantle her. In that context, when she found Harlem [New York, New York] and America overwhelming in its--in all of its characteristics, she decided to send her children back to the Caribbean where life was a little less frenetic.
Speaker 1: Talk to me a little bit about growing up in Jamaica, those formative twelve years, and what were your grandparents like?
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandfather on my mother's side. I knew my grandmother. As a matter of fact, she became central to my values. She became central to my sense of comfort. And she had a way of reaching out to not only her own children but to her grandchildren and others in the community that made her a pillar of great strength. And she, with her counsel, with her care, guided me through the most mischievous of my years.
Story_ID: 3210
Speaker 1: Now you came back to New York in, what, 1940?
Speaker 2: I came back to New York in 1939.
Speaker 1: '39 [1939].
Speaker 2: Right. That's when the British and Germany went to war.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Your mother [Malvine Belafonte] wanted you back there, as you said, because she felt that--
Speaker 2: She wanted us back because she said, "Well, my children are here with me."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: "They'll be safer. I'll know where they are."
Speaker 1: How were you different, then, when you came back to New York?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had changed considerably. I had this heavy West Indian accent. I was the odd kid on the block. I had a great distinction while I was in the Caribbean. On the island of Jamaica, I attended almost all of the best schools that education could afford. I went to many schools. And the only problem with it was I did them all in one year. (laughs) I was an absolute horror to everyone's disdain and displeasure and unhappiness. My mother, however, in her frustration, decided that she would try to direct me towards institutional experiences that would help discipline and guide me in life.
Speaker 1: You joined the [U.S.] Navy when?
Speaker 2: I joined the Navy when I was seventeen, which was in 1944.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I volunteered for the service because--two reasons. One was it was a place that had all the kind of discipline my mother sought for us. It was also a place where she thought that--and I believed it as well--that I was in the service, of a campaign that America was on that was to the best interests of the human family.
Story_ID: 3211
Speaker 1: I mean here, here you are in the [U.S.] Navy. What was it like for you?  How was that a turning point in your life in the Navy?
Speaker 2: It was very critical in my life. First of all, the armed forces was segregated. Where I did my basic training was at the Great Lakes [Naval Training Center] in [Great Lakes] Illinois. The camps were very divided. But in my particular--Camp Moffett was where I trained--the men that made up our unit were remarkable, meaning they were very culturally fulfilling, very bright.
Speaker 1: Race men. Race men.
Speaker 2: Exactly. And a lot of them were musicians, a lot of them were teachers, a lot of them were members of our community who aspired to other occupations like lawyers and stuff. And I gravitated towards them, and they articulated for me a point of view about black commitment to the Second World War and the defeat of fascism which was very enlightening, and it was an extension of the race saving thoughts and ideas that [W.E.B.] DuBois had taught, that [Paul] Robeson had preached. And they were quite annoyed with me because I brought a rather simplistic, sophomoric point of view to the table, asking these juvenile questions while they were busy talking in lofty terms, quoting Socrates and Plato and quoting Dr. DuBois. And I'm just sitting there with my mouth open, wondering where does all this stuff come from.  And one day, to get rid of me, they threw me a book written by DuBois, hoping that I would, you know, slither away and get lost. I took the book and began to inch through its contents.  And I discovered as I went along that each time I saw a number at the end of a statement or sentence, I would compare that number to the foot of the page italic, which then told me that it was a work being referenced.  And I decided never to have to go through the embarrassment of the attitudes of these men again, that I would just--since I was reading DuBois, who by their account was the supreme intellect, then I would just have to see where DuBois got all of his information and go get me a taste.  So much to my fascination, as I went through the book and looked at all the different references, the name that appeared with the greatest consistency and most often was the name "ibid."  So I made my notes carefully, listing all that I wanted and on the first liberty I had, the first time coming into Chicago [Illinois] to have my weekend fling, I went to the Chicago Public Library. I went to a little old lady, white hair--I'll never forget her--and I gave her my list of what I wanted. And she told me that the list was far too big, that I could never take that many books at once, and that I would have to pare it down and--that even with my privileges as a serviceman, there was just too many books. I said, "Well, I'll make your task really easy. Just give me everything you've got on Ibid."  She told me that there was no such an author.  Well, that's all I needed to hear.  I leaped on that woman.  I called her every kind of racist.  I told her that she had got to stop this mission that all of her kind had, which was to keep us in darkness, that I had read DuBois and that he had said there was an Ibid.  And I would not be turned around.  And in short order, she was reduced to tears.  I was reduced to embarrassment, and I left.  And at the end of the weekend when I got back to the base, I told my colleagues, my fellow servicemen of my experience, and they did what the audience has just done. They howled. And at the end of their laughter, they explained to me what "ibid" meant in reference to self.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And when I understood the size of my error, I instantly felt an enormous sense of guilt for what I'd done to that little white lady.
Story_ID: 3212
Speaker 1: Here you are, 1946, 1947.  You're back on the streets of Harlem [New York, New York]. What is life like?
Speaker 2: I became a janitor's assistant--I had no real skills. And although I, since I was handy with my ability to mop a hall and haul the garbage, and do minor repairs in the apartments of the tenants, I was instantly employable. And while doing such work, I was given a gratuity, a tip, for repairing some broken something in an apartment.  And it was two tickets to a theater called the American Negro Theater. It was located in Harlem in the basement of a library on 135th Street called the Schomburg [later the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture].  And I went there, having never seen a play or been in a theater, and what else was there to do? I didn't have any money to take a date. And so I went, and I got into this tiny theater. I think the capacity was about sixty seats or less. And I was quite taken how reverential the environment was. It was kind of very quiet, like being in church.  And I didn't quite understand the reverence, because there were all black people sitting there.  And outside a church, and some time not even outside a church, when you've got that many black people in a room, there's a lot of noise. There's a lot to say. There is a lot that people have to impart to one another as a great social moment.  But there was this reverence, and I partook in it 'cause I didn't know anyone.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then, when the lights went down and the curtain opened and these players walked on stage, I was absolutely overwhelmed with what I saw. I saw play-acting, but I saw people who had purpose. And the play was called 'Home is the Hunter' written by a black man. And what he had to say about life and our condition sparked in me an enormous appetite. And I was called upon to do a play in the very earliest days of my involvement with the group, and it was called 'All in the Family'.  The woman who played my mother was Etta Moten [Barnett]. In the play, and the success that we got, one evening we were visited by one of the greatest human beings in the world--,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Paul Robeson came and saw the play, and at the end of it stayed behind to talk to us. And as he spoke to us, I realized that not only was I in the world that I wanted very much to be, but that I had seen in him the way in which to carry forth the mission. Paul Robeson, in his earliest of counsel, said, "You know, the purpose of art is not just to show life as it is, but to show life as it should be.  That is our power."
Story_ID: 3213
Speaker 1: We're going to see a clip of your early career, and I want you to talk a little bit about that after you see this clip.  Okay?
Speaker 2: "Harry, I want to present you with this RCA Victor [recording company] long-playing gold record for being the first performer to sell over a million copies of a single album, ladies and gentlemen." [from 'The Steve Allen Show']
Speaker 1: The album was 'Calypso', and Belafonte's music touched the hearts of audiences around the world.
Speaker 2: (Harry Belafonte sings 'Jamaica Farewell') I took a trip on a sailing ship, and when I reached Jamaica, I made her stop.
Speaker 1: Though Belafonte sang passionately, convincingly about the human condition, he sang to inform, delight, and amuse as well. And in 1953, he starred opposite the beautiful Dorothy Dandridge in 'Bright Road' [motion picture].  His next big break came in 1954 when he won a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for theater excellence] for his role in the Broadway production of 'John Murray Anderson's Almanac' and starred again opposite Dorothy Dandridge in Oscar Hammerstein's 'Carmen Jones' [motion picture].
Speaker 2: "Suppose I never come back?"
Speaker 1: "You'd never get away from me. I'd follow you down the rivers or across the sea, to hell or up to heaven. Why'd you ask?"
Speaker 2: "Just to hear you say it."
Speaker 1: Directed by the renowned Otto Preminger, the success of 'Carmen Jones' put Belafonte alongside his lifelong friend, Sidney Poitier, as two of the most celebrated black performers of their day.
Story_ID: 3214
Speaker 1: You met Sidney Poitier at the American Negro Theatre.
Speaker 2: The first day I walked into the theater at the A.N.T. [American Negro Theatre] to register for its curriculum, Sidney walked in, as well. And that's the first time we met. It was quite a coincidence. Of course, here he was. It turned out that I'm eight days younger than he is. And he was born in America also of Caribbean parents. His birth in Florida was a birth of accident that it was there, not too unlike my own being born in New York. And here we were, the both of us, walking to the same place, but never having met. He'd served in the Second World War as a soldier, I as a sailor. And we kind of sized one another up. And I remember when I first heard him speak and audition a part. I did not understand why he thought he could be an actor. And little did I know that he was across the room looking at me, wondering exactly the same thing.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The same thing.
Speaker 2: And through our earliest of years, we kind of had this little gentle, sibling rivalry going on. I was in a play, and in the American Negro Theatre, we weren't paid and we had to hold down a day job. Theater was at night.  But at night was when I had to do most of my chores as a janitor's assistant. And I paid someone to take over my janitorial responsibilities while I was in the play performing. On this particular night, the young man could not take over and I had to concern myself with becoming unemployed if people's garbage wasn't hauled. So I had to excuse myself from the play to go do that work. That night, Sidney Poitier, who was my understudy, took over the part. That was the very night when some scouts from the Broadway [neighborhood in New York] area was doing a play, an all-black version of the Greek tragi-, play [by Aristophanes] called 'Lysistrata', and they wanted black actors and actresses. And they came to the American Negro Theatre to see who was performing. They saw Sidney Poitier, and he was hired and went to do this play called 'Lysistrata'.  It was a terrible play, and it lasted I think only one or two performances. But in one of those two performances, Hollywood [California] had come to New York looking for a young actor to play opposite a young star who was becoming quite popular in America at 20th Century Fox [movie studio]. His name was Richard Widmark, and the film was called 'No Way Out' [1950].  And they went scouting in New York, they saw--they went to see 'Lysistrata' to see the black actors in the play. And they saw Sidney, and they flew him immediately to California, gave him a screen test with Richard Widmark, and he got the part.  And that's how Sidney Poitier became a star.  I've always reminded him that his greatest moment was based on garbage.
Speaker 1: In garbage.
Speaker 2: Don't play garbage cheap ever.
Story_ID: 3215
Speaker 1: One of the reasons you had to work at night was that you had a family, as well, you had--,
Speaker 2: I was married [to first wife, Marguerite Mazique].
Speaker 1: --you were married.
Speaker 2: I had a family.  Two little girls [Adrienne Belafonte-Biesemeyer and Shari Belafonte-Harper] coming into the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I continued to pursue my studies, and I had wonderful classmates at the New School [University for Social Research, New York, New York]. I had social research--I left the A.N.T. [American Negro Theatre] to go study, and in the New School in New York, my first group of classmates were [actors] Marlon Brando, Walter Matthau, Bea Arthur, Tony Curtis, just to name a few. And in the richness of this social theater and these experiences, I visited the jazz clubs not too far from our school. And going down there every night, I became a friendlier face. And on the nights when the club wasn't filled, the manager would let me go and sit at a table, and I would get to talk to the musicians and befriended them and told them what I did and where I studied.  And they took up an interest in what was going on in the theater in this friendly exchange in environment.  On one occasion we did a play by [John] Steinbeck called 'Of Mice and Men', and the guy who ran the club, who was very friendly to all of us, said, "Look, I heard you sing in the play. Why don't you learn a few songs and come on down and be an intermission singer.  And while we seat people, you can sing and entertain them until the main acts go on." And I said, "Well, that's better than robbing a bank, I'll tell you."  So I learned--they gave me a piano player. [Albert] Al Hague was the name of the piano player, a powerful, very respected and revered player. When I walked onstage to sing and he was--it just to be he and I, two of us. Before I could open my mouth, up walked Charlie Parker and then up walked [Maxwell] Max Roach, and then up came [Thomas] Tommy Potter, and then a reluctant Miles Davis came right behind that. And the first time I ever sang publicly before an audience, an American audience for pay was--my backup band was the Charlie Parker band.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And their generosity and their support launched me in ways that became critically acceptable on the music scene.  But in those days, if you became known as a pop singer and you were so anointed, it was very hard to make a shift of image. At night, I would go to the Village Vanguard and to the Café Society downtown, and I saw Woody Guthrie for the first time. Then, I saw Leadbelly, and then I saw [Joshua] Josh White. And then, I saw [William Lee Conley] 'Big Bill' Broonzy. And I began to hear the black voice in song in a way that I'd never heard it before. I'd heard it in gospel. I'd heard it in spiritual music. I'd heard it, certainly, singing the refined music of the cultured world that Marian Anderson and Paul Robeson sang, but never quite the way I heard them sing about the plight and the conditions of working people. And it immediately struck a chord in me, and I saw in it my place of expression.
Story_ID: 3216
Speaker 1: "In my garden--,"
Speaker 2: From the beginning, Harry Belafonte shared the versatility of his range and style from classical--,
Speaker 1: "And when the saints--fa, la, la, la, la, la, la--go marching in--fa, la, la, la, la, la. And when the saints-,"
Speaker 2: --to jazz.
Speaker 1: "Yes, when the saints go marching in, oh Lord, I--,"
Speaker 2: He sang to the young.
Speaker 1: "Hush, little baby. Don't you cry."
Speaker 2: And to the downtrodden.
Speaker 1: "I don't want no hardheaded woman to see to me, Lord, Lordy, gonna see to me."
Speaker 2: He was playful.
Speaker 1: "Woo--,"
Speaker 2: And just plain silly.
Speaker 1: "There's a hole in the bucket, dear Liza, dear Liza. There's a hole in the bucket, dear Liza, a hole."
Speaker 2: Harry Belafonte sang of love and betrayal.
Speaker 1: "Still, be saying she loved me, but I believe she lied."
Speaker 2: He sang of hope and despair.
Speaker 1: "What a morning when these ties begin to fall."
Speaker 2: He used his platform to educate.
Speaker 1: Many of the songs which our children sing, at least what I'm familiar with, was written by a man who spent most of his life on the chain gang. His name was Huddie Ledbetter, commonly known among those who loved him and cared for him as 'Leadbelly'.
Speaker 2: His genius lie in his ability to reach all people and yet expose mainstream America to African-influenced music.
Speaker 1: Well, I felt that my music, my folklore, my culture had a great deal to offer, and I like to be a catalyst for the purpose of bringing to our audiences artists from other countries, and I like to be the artist that is able to go to present to the world community the best that we have to offer in America.
Speaker 2: "That's got his own."
Story_ID: 3217
Speaker 1: Here you are, Harry, twenty-seven years old, and you become one of the most recognizable African American faces in America in that time. And you'd won a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for theater excellence], but you were also blacklisted. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was hounding you. And here you are, and you have--your second daughter, Shari [Belafonte-Harper], was born at that year. Where were you with all the celebrity, and what--how were you going to use this celebrity?  Remember, this is 1954.  We have the Brown vs. Board of Education [Topeka, Kansas], the groundbreaking desegregation act upheld by the Supreme Court. We're a year from the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott. Here you are right now with all your social activism, with everything you are right now--you've become.  How are you going to position your celebrity?
Speaker 2: I still went back to Harlem [New York, New York], where I lived, and I still performed for the sleeping car porters and for the mine workers and for the unions and down at the maritime workers and the international garment workers, women and people. Wherever there was struggle, I made sure the voice of my art was there. Now, when I won the Tony [Award], there was a ritual in American television that every Sunday after the awards were given earlier that week, the winners of the award would be displayed on the 'Ed Sullivan Show', which was the largest and the most powerful television program we had.  Now you have to understand that Ed Sullivan, like Dorothy Kilgallen and Walter Winchell and a host of journalists--white journalists, working for most powerful publications in Americam were, supporters of the blacklist, they were campaigners of red-baiting [the action of accusing someone of being a communist] and reactionary politics.  And I sat with him, and he pulled a piece of paper out and began to read a list of all the things I had been accused of doing or saying or belonging--places or institutions I belonged to.  And when he got through, he says, "That's the list." And I'll never forget, I said to him "Well, let me first of all hasten to inform you that your list is incomplete and that I would gladly afford you the rest of the names because maybe one day, you'll find it necessary to send us a contribution for the work we're doing.  But if I'm accused of being unpatriotic, the insult and the shame of it defies me. How can you call on those of us who have committed ourselves to the war to end fascism and to defend this country and democracy. How can you in just a few short years call us traitors? That in itself is unacceptable. And if you're saying that my struggle and my commitment to the struggle against legal segregation and racial definition and drawing these lines that you've drawn is my offense, then wait 'til you see what's to come. There is no deal. I don't know how to dismiss my relationship to this cause and the things that I do. What you offer is not viable. I will not--cannot and will not change or sign, as they would require that you do."  You sign a declaration. I didn't do it.  And I said, "I'd have loved the opportunity to appear on your show, and have my work put before America but that's the price. That's the price. I'm out of here," and I left.  And that was in the morning, like, around 11:00 [A.M.].  At 4:00 [P.M.] that afternoon, the very same agent who picked up the phone there, he called me and told me that I was on the 'Ed Sullivan Show'.
Story_ID: 3218
Speaker 1: You became involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and what few people realize, and just a side--a mention, that you were one of the principle funders that began the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC. When we talk about the evolution of the Civil Rights Movement, we move from 1954 through that period, the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott, SNCC into a radicalized movement with young students became involved, became organized in 1959, people like [Robert] Bob Moses, like Stokely Carmichael, Fanny Lou Hamer. All those were part of this new group of civil rights workers who were, who were--demands were much stronger, much more strong in another way and added another voice, which [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] supported. Talk to me about your relationship with Martin Luther King. When you met--when did you meet Martin Luther King, and what was that relationship like?
Speaker 2: When he called I was quite taken with it, he was coming to New York. He was going to be speaking at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem [New York, New York]. From that moment on, the more I became involved with him, the more I found myself not just being a spokesperson and funding many of the things in which he was doing, but I found myself becoming part of the planning group.  And I became deeply, personally involved with his welfare and his destiny. The first thing was to put his life in order and to take care of his economic affairs.  And because he was extremely sensitive to how he would be critiqued if he showed any affluence or any access to affluence, we had to be very careful because he would accept no money at all from the movement.  He made $8,000 a year as a preacher, which is hardly enough to get a mousetrap.  And here he was, having all these responsibilities heaped upon him.  So I told him that from that day forward, I would be responsible for his family economically, that he should never worry that they would want for anything, including a guaranteeing of college education for all his children, and that he'd only have to worry about languishing in jail as long as he elected to stay there, but that there would always be bail bond money available to release him instantly if that was part of the strategy.
Story_ID: 3219
Speaker 1: Belafonte's involvement with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was not the first instance of his social activism. Previously, he had used his emerging success to bring a controversial subject matter to American audiences as with the racially charged 'Island in the Sun' [1957].
Speaker 2: "In your heart, deep down inside, don't you still think of us as slaves, as a stupid, ignorant people?"
Speaker 1: "That's a lie!"
Speaker 2: "No Mr. Fleury, that is the truth!"
Speaker 1: And 'Odds Against Tomorrow' [1959].
Speaker 2: "Get wise to yourself, Ingram. You're just another black spot on Main Street.
Speaker 1: "Shut that ugly mouth of yours, Earle. Get in the car."
Speaker 2: "Some day, I'm going to snap off your poisoned head."
Speaker 1: For Belafonte, the social consciousness of the movies he produced in the '50s [1950s] actually led to an even deeper role in the Civil Rights Movement of the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 3220
Speaker 1: Whenever I'm in the office, I see the one picture of you joking or laughing with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. It is such a very gentle, such a beautiful picture of just two extraordinary men. And I want to talk a little bit more about that, you know, that relationship because it's--in playing the role that you played, I mean people do not understand fully the role that you played at that particular point in time in the Civil Rights Movement. But not only the Civil Rights Movement, you told me a story--I remember when we first met in 1982 when I was performing [Athol Fugard's] '"Master Harold"...and the Boys' at Yale Rep [Yale Repertory Theater, New Haven, Connecticut], you told me a story about meeting Father [Archbishop Trevor] Huddleston in London [England] in 1960. Now, this is long before anyone on the national scene had talked about the apartheid. This is long before Nelson Mandela's long imprisonment, as well. And yet you were there at that moment, in front, and putting yourself on the line, putting your career on the line to make a statement about justice.
Speaker 2: I got home about two or three o'clock in the morning, with my bride [second wife, Julie Robinson-Belafonte]. And the concierge told me that there was a man waiting for me in the lobby. He had come with these three young men from South Africa, and he was seeking to have asylum, political asylum for them because their lives were at stake. They had rebelled against the condition in their country, the apartheid system. They dared to make a film or be in a film called 'Come Back, Africa', which had shown in Italy. His name was Father Huddleston, who eventually became well known to the world as Nelson Mandela's very close colleague and ally, and was one of the leading advocates on behalf of the freedom of black South Africans. But through Father Huddleston, I then felt compelled to get more into what was going on and began a clandestine letter-writing relationship with many of the people in South Africa, including Nelson Mandela, who was in prison. So I embarked upon this rather active political campaign much to the displeasure of the Hollywood [California] studios, and they created their own blacklist, their own special filter through which much of my life had to pass.  And because of it, they tried to pit me against Sidney [Poitier], and neither of us would have it. Sidney was not quite as up front on these issues, or out front as I was, and we discussed it often.  And we felt that as long as I had the capacity to do what I was doing, that he should hold the Hollywood front and try to continue to develop his powerbase there.
Speaker 1: So, so you continued to perform and make movies, but a different kind movies, like you said, than the movies in the '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 3221
Speaker 1: Harry Belafonte's movie career recommenced in the 1970s with the movie 'The Angel Levine' [1970], where he played an out of character angel.
Speaker 2: "Alright, now, I'm going to tell you something He can't do anything for your old lady. There ain't a bag of medicine he's got can do a thing, not a pill, not a needle, nothing."
Speaker 1: In 'Buck and the Preacher' [1972], a movie about three recently freed slaves, Harry teamed up with his old friend Sidney Poitier, who directed the film.
Speaker 2: "How'd you find me?"
Speaker 1: "I asked your horse."
Speaker 2: Two years later in 1974, Harry joined forces with Sidney Poitier and Bill Cosby in the hilarious movie 'Uptown Saturday Night'. Unfortunately, it would take another eighteen years before Harry Belafonte would appear on the screen again. This time, it was in 'The Player' [1992], where he met director Robert Altman.
Speaker 1: Harry's main purpose is to accomplish things, to make things occur. I don't think his ego is in any way set in his own persona.
Speaker 2: 'The Player' led to a role in the movie 'White Man's Burden' [1995], starring John Travolta. And then, Robert Altman cast Harry Belafonte as the character Seldom Seen in his movie 'Kansas City' [1996].  This role gave Harry the platform to showcase his acting talents.
Speaker 1: "You know why Blue's gone and you're still here?  'Cause I want you here. I'm not sure I got everything out of your ass I'm gonna get."
Speaker 2: Harry is more than an actor. He knew exactly the kind of character he wanted to portray--ruthless, dictatorial. He brought a truth into it that gave him power. He should have had an Academy Award nomination.
Speaker 1: "He must be in some sad shit to have to be holding up colored people. What am I going to do with you? I'll think of something."
Story_ID: 3222
Speaker 1: Harry, you know, it's difficult to place or capsulize all that you mean, all that you've done within this short period of time. We know that you're working on [a miniseries based on books by Taylor Branch] 'Parting the Waters [America in the King Years, 1954-1963]' right now.  We know that--and it's sequel 'Pillar of Fire [America in the King Years, 1963-1965]'. We also know that you're involved with a project that I'm involved with in East St. Louis [Illinois], a revitalization of East St. Louis. So these are the kinds of things that are happening all the time with you, you know. You're always thinking. You're always moving to the next stage, and I'm always trying to bring others along. It's easy for me to sit here and talk to you forever because I've been so influenced by not the way in which you've taken your art and made that accessible to all the--to the fight for freedom and justice in the world. That's the one thing that's the kernel of my relationship with you and what it's been from the day--the first day that I met you, or from the first day that I heard about you or the first day that I saw you. I saw that, and I hope that other artists were influenced by that, whether they're my age at right now, or if they're young artists because at twenty-seven years old, when you had all the choices available to you in the world that they place us in as--and that suit that they put us on as artists, you chose to fight for justice and freedom.  You made a conscious choice to (unclear). And what are some of the things that you see happening in the world right now?
Speaker 2: In the height of what is considered to be the greatest economic boom in the world's history, we're sitting also with some of the greatest human suffering ever known to mankind. There are thirty-seven million people in the world affected with HIV/AIDS [Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], of the thirty-seven million, twenty-four million on the continent of Africa. Were this to be Europe, were there to be twenty-seven million people afflicted on that continent, were there to be ten million orphans running about the mountains of the Alps and through the streets of France, what would we say?  While there will be many who pursue lofty intellectual thoughts on the subject. I'll put it squarely on the table that first and foremost in the critique is race.  It is racist, racist, racist.  Now, our pharmaceutical companies, this country have not understood its mission.  Nor the reason for such success is meant to be an application or the uplifting of human beings. What makes all of that even more critical is that black people have not found themselves in this equation. When you look at all the young black artists today and the black athletes, and even those of the black middle class and upper middle class who have attained enormous wealth and positions of power, you find that they are only tokenly committed to lending their resources.
Story_ID: 3223
Speaker 1: You've just returned from Jamaica, where you were responsible for funding the 'U.S.[A.] for Africa' movement. We're going to go to a clip.
Speaker 2: Throughout his career, Harry Belafonte has been an outspoken activist, championing humanitarian causes worldwide. In 1985, Belafonte united an impressive list of fellow artists for the historic recording, 'We Are the World'. Raising millions to aid African countries experiencing cruel drought and famine.  Today, Belafonte remains at the forefront of human rights activism in his current role as UNICEF [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund] Goodwill Ambassador.  Only the second American to hold this prestigious title, Belafonte travels internationally to influence policies that benefit children all over the globe. Belafonte's integrity and dedication in support of global human rights has earned him the respect of world leaders. His numerous awards and honorary degrees are validation of Belafonte's commitment to the betterment of human kind.  A consummate entertainer who has used the stage to celebrate the human spirit, Belafonte has been recognized for inspiring our nation's cultural landscape.  He received the prestigious Kennedy Center Honors Award for Excellence in the Performing Arts in 1989, and 1994, Belafonte was awarded the National Medal of Arts, one of the highest honors in the entertainment industry.  Harry Belafonte's most valuable honor comes from his family--his wife of over forty years, Julie [Robinson-Belafonte]; children Gina, David, Shari [Belafonte-Harper], and Adrienne [Belafonte-Biesemeyer]; and three grandchildren ensure Belafonte's family life is as rich and fulfilling as his public life. With unwavering determination and energy, Julie and Harry often travel the globe together, lending their service to the cause of millions in developing countries.  One of the world's foremost entertainers and activists, Harry Belafonte personifies the meaning of legend. In recognition of his grace, artistry, and lifelong commitment to service, The HistoryMakers salutes artist, activist, humanitarian, Mr. Harry Belafonte.
Story_ID: 3224
Speaker 1: We're about to close now, and, and certainly it is, it is too soon, too early to close. But I'm going to ask you almost a rhetorical question about how do you want to be remembered, because everything that we've seen and everything that we've talked about has suggested how you want to be remembered.
Speaker 2: A thousand years from now, I won't even equate. Nobody will even know I was here. But that's all right. What is important is who knew me while I was here, and what did I do to touch their lives in a way that brought them to a better place. It is true that I have paid a price for the kind of commitment that I've made. I've been in jail. I've been denied opportunity. I've been denied access to certain places of power and certain money and all that, that seems to be everyone else's goal. I say that there has in fact been no sacrifice. As a matter of fact, from where I was born in poverty in Harlem [New York, New York] to an undereducated mother [Malvine Belafonte], to an absentee father [Harold George Belafonte, Sr.], shifted and shunted back and forth to the Caribbean among plantation workers under the most grueling of conditions, it is a miracle that I find myself in the place where the world even knows I exist, let alone wanting to hear what I have to say. But the rewards that I've had in the face of all of that has been denied me or whatever abuse there may have been is the fact that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was one of my closest friends, and he was also called a communist, and he was also denied.  And now, we sit in a world that celebrates him for having walked through it, and his presence is a national holiday.  When Mandela was in prison, everyone said my relationship to him was supporting of communists and that it was anti-American, and that I was involved with terrorists.  Well, there is no force going into the 21st century that commands as much respect globally from every level of human existence as does Nelson Mandela, and he calls me "Friend."  When I look upon all the artists whom I would have loved to have shared moments with, who denied me and dismissed me because I was too much of a burden for them, it meant that they would have, perhaps--taint their acceptability by those they sought to be anointed by.  I do not feel that loss at all, because I have a great and profound relationship with a man named Danny Glover who is one of the finest human beings I know.  And knowing you, you would have never have embraced me if I had been anything less than what I really am.  When I look at all the--looking at these film clips with all these awards and the presidents and the popes and the queens and the celebrities of the world and the institutions, one would see that as a personal tribute, I see it entirely another way.  I see it as having stayed the course, and everything I've done since I was a child, of everything my mother put before me as the objectives of life that had to be met, I have been anointed by all these people by saying that my choices were correct. They give me validity in terms of the things I believe in and the things that I represent, which makes those things honorable.  And I'm very glad I did them, and I'll continue to do them until I die. That's what I want to be noted for.
Speaker 1: Ladies and gentlemen, Harry Belafonte. Thank you, Harry.
Story_ID: 3225
Speaker 1: The preceding program was produced by The HistoryMakers which is solely responsible for its content.
