Story_ID: 317586
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Joe, middle initial is N, which stands for Nathan, Ballard, B-A-L-L-A-R-D [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard].
Speaker 1: So, it's not Joseph?
Speaker 2: No, it's Joe.
Speaker 1: OK.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 27, 1942, Meeker, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: At the moment, I'm a businessman.  I'm an entrepreneur.  I run two companies.  I am the founder, president, and CEO of The Ravens Group [The Ravens Group, Inc.], which is a full service management company, and I'm the president and CEO of TRG Construction [TRG Construction, Inc.], which is a general contracting firm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and at one time you were the forty-ninth, uh--?
Speaker 2: Well, prior to that I spent thirty-five years in the [U.S.] military.  My last assignment I was the forty-ninth chief of engineers of the [U.S.] Army Corps of Engineers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 30, 2005.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Here in my home, which is at--
Speaker 1: Well, you can just say what town it's in, in Maryland.
Speaker 2: In Davidsonville, Maryland.
Story_ID: 317587
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's kind of a warm-up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, fish.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say probably dark, and black, would probably be my best color, even though some folks say that black is not a color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, springtime of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Anywhere where there's water.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  "Get over it," (laughter).
Story_ID: 317588
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay, fine.
Speaker 1: And I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, Clark, C-L-A-R-K, Ballard [Bernice Clark Ballard].  Clark is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 21.  I think she's eighty-two, so what would that be?  Let's see--1922, yeah 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in a little place called Lecompte, I think, Louisiana, which is right outside of Alexandria, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, in terms of the ancestors?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been involved in that in the last couple of years, so I probably can go back at least two, maybe three generations.  I'm trying to capture all that before she passes on.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any stories about what they were doing two and three generations ago?
Speaker 2: Well, stories that came from her.  They lived in this little town of Lecompte [Louisiana], Meeker [Louisiana], Alexandria, Louisiana, which is a farming community, at least it was back in the '20s [1920s]--mainly primarily sharecroppers--where they shared the land with white families and raised cottons, and shared the products---and raised cotton and sugar cane, things of that nature.  So, it was primarily an agrarian society, if you will.
Speaker 1: Now, did they go further?  Do you remember slavery, or Civil War, or Reconstruction?  Any stories from that era?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother, I can recall stories that she recounted about her mother in slavery, and living on various farms and that's where the name--well, we're talking about my father's side, Ballard came from--which was actually from a white family where they were slaves.  During the Emancipation Proclamation, they picked up the name Ballard, which is a very unusual name for blacks.
Speaker 1: Now, on your mother's side, though, are there any stories that come down from your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not that I recall, not that dealt with slavery or Emancipation Proclamation.  I don't recall any of those stories.
Speaker 1: I know Louisiana has a lot of--
Speaker 2: Well, a very rich history of that.  But on my mother's side, I don't recall her ever talking about it, or my grandmother.
Story_ID: 317589
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you said on your mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] side, there were primarily farmers and sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did your mother tell any stories about growing up herself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did.  She grew up in a rather large family, with a number of sisters and brothers.  I think it was twelve of them, and then she was the third oldest daughter and married at a very young age, like fifteen or sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: That wasn't unusual in those days
Speaker 2: No, it was not unusual at all, but she married at fifteen.  She would tell me stories about picking cotton and working on the sugar cane farms and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Can you think of a good story, I mean, something that's been passed down and told a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, the stories that we always thought were pretty funny was when--to use her phrase--whenever my father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] would come calling at night--we have pictures of her, we still have those pictures, and she was a beautiful young woman with long, flowing black hair down to the center of her back--and my mother was medium brown complexion, and she took after her grandmother who I suspect was a mulatto generations back, she would talk about how my father would come over to talk to her father and to visit with her brothers, but she knew all along that he was more interested in her than anything else.  So, there were quite a few stories told about how she sort of strung him along until finally he popped the right question (laughter).  And, it was for years later she told him, well you thought, you know, you'd captured me, but we knew along she and her mother would plot how they were going to ensnare him, if you will.  So, those were the interesting stories, but I don't recall any stories about any particular hardship, simply because to her, it was a happy moment.  I mean, life was what she knew it, and years later they grew up, and probably never traveled any more than three hundred miles away from where she was born--even today, with occasional visits up here, but by and large, she never left Louisiana until she was probably in her late fifties or early sixties.  So, it was a simple life, but it was a very happy life.  I mean, they had plenty of food, shelter, and she had a husband and kids.  So, she was quite happy, and remains so even today.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the community around her was a pretty stable community?
Speaker 2: Very cohesive, and primarily relatives.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a chance to go to school there?
Speaker 2: My mother went and finished, if I recall correctly, the sixth grade.  She went to the sixth grade-- sixth or seventh grade, and of course if you recall in those times, the first priority was getting the crops in, not necessarily school.  So, she never really attended, and I don't think any blacks did down south, for four years--as we know a year today--in school.  You attended school once the crops were in, and those types of things, because if you remember, as I told you, her family was primarily sharecroppers, so in order to eat and maintain a place to live, they had to produce--get the crops in.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it was occasional schools?
Speaker 2: It was occasional schools.
Speaker 1: And when there was no work--?
Speaker 2: There was no work, you went to school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 317590
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is--I'm a junior--his full name is exactly as mine.  It's Joe, middle name is Nathan, N-A-T-H-A-N, Ballard [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 21, 1921.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in the same area, Lecompte, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There are quite a few stories.  My father grew up in a family that today, you would call them middle class.  And, they were a little bit better off than my mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] side of the family.  The matriarch, the leader of my father's family, was actually my grandmother, Louise [ph.].  She had three husbands, and as she was prone to say, she buried two of them and the only grandfather I really knew was--my great grandfather--was her last husband.  But prior to that in her early age, she had two husbands, both who met an untimely death.  One was farm related, and the other one was killed in, as she said, a row house--a juke joint.  So, as you know, back during those times, it was rather violent times.  Men tended to live hard, play hard, and they died young, and he was one of them.  But, she talked about working in the homes of white families.  In her early age, she spent a lot of time doing that.  And, she would tell us the story of how we came about the name Ballard.  I was always curious about that, so before she died, I spent time, I would ask her where the name Ballard came from.  And, it really came from a white family that was French descendants, so really some people would call it Ba-llard, rather than Ball-ard.  It was this family that she worked for, her mother worked for, and her grandmother and, all the way back.  So, even when emancipation took place, that family still stayed sort of close--close connection, and the best I could understand was this plantation was somewhere near New Orleans [Louisiana], I'm not really sure--probably in Plaquemines Parish or someplace.  That's one of the things I'm still trying to find out, exactly where that plantation was.
Story_ID: 317591
Speaker 1: But, she [Ballard's paternal grandmother, Louise Ballard (ph.)] told the stories of the lynchings and the beatings, and the field hands, and all of those stories that we've read about over the years, and they were still very vivid in her memory, not that she recalled an awful lot of that because of her age, but the stories that were passed on to her from her mother.
Speaker 2: Okay, now are there any particularly interesting stories that you remember, as such?
Speaker 1: Not that really immediately pop into mind.  All of those stories were interesting to me, simply because it was all new, so I had a great deal of interest as I was always interested in history, but nothing that would pop out as especially memorable.  Most of the stories were the stories that we've heard told countless times about life on the farm and working for white families and dealing with things of that nature, but nothing sensational or rather horrific.
Speaker 2: It doesn't have to be sensational or horrific, because sometimes just a story about how you deal with these white people in a home situation--I mean, it could be a tricky thing, you know, to do, how you actually deal with them.  But I don't know, it might be a good story there.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I just have to tell it the way I remember it, and the way it was told to me.  But, many of the stories surrounded, really and truly, survival.  Okay, survival.  How do you survive and--the things that she used to tell me was how she stayed away, stayed out of the clutches, if you will--of some of the males in the homes that she worked on, because sexual harassment, as we would know it today, was a sort of rite of passage.  They figured that we have a right to do certain things, or say certain things.  And, the things that she would say, was how she managed to avoid that, which I suspect was one of the reasons they sort of married early.  It gave you a little bit of a form of protection, but not very much.  She used to talk about those types of things, and, dealing with her sons, and teaching them how to be--the word she would use--respectful.  In other words, no eye contact--the typical things we've heard about which made life growing up down south a very, very tough time.  I was fortunate enough to see some of that, because I was born in the '40s [1940s], and I can remember very well when we moved from the little town of Meeker [Louisiana] into the great big city of Oakdale [Louisiana].  We can talk about that a little later--at my age, but coming out of that environment--because I was born into that environment--born on a farm, a sharecropper--my dad was a sharecropper until he left and moved into the city.  So, those are the types of stories she told.
Story_ID: 317592
Speaker 1: Did your father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] talk about growing up?  Did he have a lot to say about growing up in the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And going to school, and so forth?
Speaker 2: Well, my father never went beyond the third or fourth grade.  And, we can talk about how he learned to read later, because that's a more interesting story.
Speaker 1: Well, how did he learn to read?
Speaker 2: I taught him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I taught him how to read.  I didn't realize he couldn't read.  We received three newspapers, and I never forget there were always newspapers and magazines around the house, but many of the magazines were, as he would say, would be picture magazines, with a lot of photos.  Life magazine, if you recall, Look, and those type magazines.  A little newspaper, a little periodical called Grit which kids sold--I don't know if most people remember Grit.
Speaker 1: That's right, they used to advertise for you to sell Grit on the back of comic books.
Speaker 2: That's it, and we had kids--I later became a Grit salesman.  I remember receiving the newspapers through the mail.  The local newspaper there in the town where we were living was the Morning Advocate, which was a Baton Rouge [Louisiana] newspaper.  So, we always had newspapers. And, Sundays were the best because of the Sunday comics, and so it was very visual.  And, I guess if you don't know how to read, you can do what I call picture association.  You look at the action and you can imagine what the person would be saying.  But, every Sunday, he'd ask me to come and read the newspaper for me, read the comics to me.  And, I guess I was ten or eleven years old, maybe twelve, I can't remember exactly how old I might have been--and my mother [Bernice Clark Ballard] said to me, she pulled me aside because I soon grew tired of it--it was boring to me, sitting up there reading a newspaper (laughter), and so she told me, she said, "You know your father don't know how to read."  I was astounded by that.  I mean, I really was astounded by that, but today I can't explain to you why I just decided I was going to teach him to read.  So, every Sunday, it became a ritual.  I would point to the words and say--and then eventually, I think, at some point he realized that I was teaching him, and that I knew that he didn't know how to read.  But, it was something that we never really talked about.  And, so from that up until I went away to college, I read to him.  And, the Bible--we would read from the Bible almost every evening.  That's the reason why even today, I really know the Bible (laughter), because I would read it to him.  And, after a while, he began to pick it up and could read pretty doggone well.  I told him I'd sign his name, because he used to make a mark.  So, I taught him how to sign his name, how to write his name out and sign it, which was a big day for him.  So, that was always a proud moment, when he has able to write his name.  And, then we became, you know, the very best of friends, I think, from that.  It was a type of bonding.
Speaker 1: That's a good story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 317593
Speaker 1: Can you describe your father's [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] personality--your father and mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] personality, I guess, and who do you take after, do you think?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--you know, that's a hard discussion--I mean, a hard thing to say, who would I take after.  I think I have a little bit of the best and the worst of both.  My father was a large man, just as I am.  I'm really the runt of the litter.  I'm six foot three [inches], but my father was about six foot four and a half [inches], so he was really a very, big man--very muscular, not fat, just a big person.  He was never obese, just a very solid man, but, probably one of the kindest and the most gentle persons I've ever met.  I can truthfully say that I've never really seen my father angry any more than one or two times.  When I was disciplined, he used to tell me all the time, "Well, it's going to hurt me worse than you," because most of the time, I was usually the one getting the tanning, and probably well deserved, but most of the time when that happened it was because my mother said, "He did this, so you take care of him," so he would smack me around a couple times (laughter) to satisfy her, and as I got older, it became a little bit of a game between the two of us.  But he was not the disciplinarian in the family, my mother was.  So, my mother is a very strong person, and I wouldn't say domineering.  She always gave in to my father out in the public and every place else.  I mean, if he wanted to do something or didn't want to do it, he normally had his way.  But, she had a way to bring him around.  So, he was the provider.  He worked hard, brought his paycheck home, and did all those other things.  He wasn't a drinker.  I don't think I've seen my father take a drink ever.  So, alcohol wasn't something that was prevalent in the house.  But, my mother was very strong.  There were six of us, myself and five siblings, and so she set the rules, and when we got a little bit out of hand where she didn't think she could handle us, she always used my father as the big threat (laughter).  He would walk in, and I mean, he was so large and physical in his presence--the boys--we didn't get too much out of hand.  And, as a result, I think my love of family and my kids and all--I got that from my father, the gentle side of me.  But, the aggressive side, definitely I got that from my mother, no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about how they met before, you know, how your mother, you know, kind of plotted on him (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly right (laughter).  She laughs about that today.
Story_ID: 317594
Speaker 1: Now, where do you fall in the six--?
Speaker 2: I am the oldest.  I'm the oldest of the six, and the first born.  I have two other brothers, and the youngest child was a boy, his name was Ray [ph.], and Ray is deceased, this past December.  I have three sisters, so it was me, a sister Marie [ph.], a sister Louise [ph.], a brother Willie [ph.], a sister Betty [ph.], and a brother Ray.
Speaker 1: And, you say you were the runt of the brothers?
Speaker 2: I'm the runt of the brothers (laughter).
Speaker 1: How big are the other two?
Speaker 2: My mother [Bernice Clark Ballard] was the grand height of five foot two [inches], maybe five foot three [inches] in her better days.  My father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.], as I said, was six foot four and a half [inches], but if you look back at his family, they were all big men, so the boys were fortunate to pick those genes up, but my father was six foot four and a half [inches], Willie, my middle brother is somewhere between six foot five [inches] and six foot six [inches], and, Ray, the youngster, I think Ray was maybe six foot seven [inches].  So, I'm six foot three [inches], but I used to tell them all the time, I was the meanest and the biggest, so I kept them in line (laughter).  But, they were--so when my father and three of us would get together, I mean, we were a large family.
Story_ID: 317595
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God, I have many childhood memories.
Speaker 1: So, what's the earliest one, what's the first thing you can remember?
Speaker 2: That I can go back and remember?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, this is going to sound funny to you, but the one childhood memory that I have--well, I have a couple that goes back to this farm that I told you we lived on [in Meeker, Louisiana].  And, it flashed back to me about three or four years ago, and it just suddenly was there.  And, I said, why would I remember that?  But, we were on a vacation and the place where we lived didn't really have a tin roof, if you know what a tin roof house is.  Most homes back in the South at that time had a galvanized roof, and you've never heard a sound until you hear the rain falling on a galvanized roof.  It is the most unusual sound in the world, but it's sort of hypnotic in the way it is.  Suddenly, I can recall very vividly, lying in my bedroom in this little farmhouse where the rain was beating on this tin roof, and the thunder and the lightning--it just frightened the hell out of me, and I can remember bolting straight up in the bed and screaming, and my mother [Bernice Clark Ballard] coming in and telling me that it was the rain.  And, that memory, I mean it was triggered by the sound.  I can even remember the little room, and the wallpaper on the wall.  And, believe it or not, the wallpaper--it was something that was from the newspaper, you know, the colored ads--so, they put that on the walls.  And, I asked my mother about that.  I said, "Did you--," and she said, "Oh yeah, that's what we did," because it was just a clapboard house with cracks, so we put sort of a..., and I said, "Well, how did you do that?"  And, she said it was with the flour and the paste, you make a paste, and put this newspaper on the wall, and it sort of kept the air from coming through.  But, that memory, like I said, I couldn't have told you if you had asked me the same question three years ago.  I wouldn't have remembered it.  Here I am in my sixties--and this rainfall--so that is one of the memories.  The second memory was, my father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] had a passion until the day he died, which is still my passion.  He loved to fish.  And, I can remember very often, and it's a very vivid memory, and I used to ask my mother about it, and she said yeah that's what you all would do.  And, I guess, I was five or six years old.  We moved when I was in second grade, so I was five or six years old.  I would get up early in the morning with him on Saturdays, and we would go out into the backyard--the backyard was really not a yard, it was just an open field (laughter) and we would dig earthworms.  And we'd walk across the field, and I remember crossing over, and there was a pigsty, where we grew these hogs, and walk across the field and down to this river.  We would fish the entire morning, and would catch fish.  So, he would teach me how to fish, and how to take them off the hook.
Story_ID: 317753
Speaker 1: All right, well, we were talking about fishing before--
Speaker 2: What we were really talking about--yeah, I'm finished with the fish story, but those early memories of my childhood and the things that I can recall is unusual.  I can remember making butter, the ceramic jar, the paddle, sitting there and doing this thing at a very age.  I mean, as I later found out from talking with my mother [Bernice Clark Ballard], we all had a role to play, so if you were not in school, you did chores.  So, making the butter--the thing that I remember so vividly was out in the backyard, we had this large black kettle, or cauldron, or whatever it was that set up on some stones, and this thing was used for a number of things, and it was always kept pristine.  I mean, very clean.  I remember my mother having us to use a scouring stone--I don't even know exactly what it is, but it was a very abrasive rock where you just scrub the thing after use to make sure that it was kept clean.  But, we fried when it was slaughtering time and butchering time.  We would fry cracklins.  Today, you would call them pork rinds-(laughter)--cracklins, in that big pot.  But the thing that I remember about it was the sheets and things of that nature that were white, she would put them in this pot with the boiling water in something called lye.  Never even said today (laughter), but it was a caustic salt that bleaches things, and I can remember using the long pole, and she would tell me, "Don't get the water on you, now," and would move the sheets around in it, and when you would take them out, I mean, they would be sparkling white.  And, the one thing that I think I learned from my mother then, and she talked about always, was cleanliness.  I mean, the house was always clean.  We scrubbed the wooden floors and then, you know, the sheets and everything.  And so, even today I just have a thing about things being in order and clean and all of that, and I learned that from her--you pick up, you hang your clothes, up, you do all these things.  So, those were many, many memories that I had as a youngster before we moved to Oakdale [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 317754
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, too.  Can you describe the--Well, you've described some of it already, but what was your neighborhood like, and were there neighbors, and what were some of the sights and smells and sounds of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, now I've two sets of memories on that.  When we were out living on this farm prior to moving, and it was a rather large farm, the sharecroppers were all family--I mean, my aunts and uncles all lived there because it was a family.  We sort of gravitated to--my family did, wherever my grandfather and grandmother was.  That's where her sons and daughters were.  They didn't travel very far away from home.  They worked, and they came back.  I grew up--I was raised--this old saying about being raised by a village, well it wasn't a village.  I was raised by a large, large, extended family (laughter), all blood.  And, every one of them had parental rights to my behind, (laughter) so, I would get whipped from one end of the community to the other, so I guess in many ways I was a mischievous little boy that was constantly out there doing things, but full of love.  We moved from that farm in--I was seven years old, so, 1949, 1950--to the town of Oakdale, Louisiana.  And, Oakdale, if you look at a map of Louisiana, you would find that Alexandria, Louisiana is almost right in the center of the state.  Louisiana is shaped like a boot, so right in the center of the state is Oakdale.  About forty miles south--I mean, the center is Alexandria [Louisiana], but forty miles south of Alexandria is a little town called Oakdale.  So, you see we were not very far from where my roots really started, which was about forty or fifty miles.  And, what had happened is my grandmother on my mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] side, and my grandfather, moved to this little town of Oakdale to look for work.  By that time, sharecropping and the farms was dying out in the '50s [1950s] because mechanization had taken over.  So, you had the large cotton combines that was coming in and harvesting the crops, so you really didn't need a lot of sharecroppers to do that.
Story_ID: 317755
Speaker 1: And then they [Ballard's maternal grandparents] moved to Oakdale [Louisiana] to find work, and Oakdale was a wood town.  What I mean by that, pulpwood, paper, paper plants, and so it was a lot of factories in the area, and a large factory called--I think it was run by--the company today would be Tenneco [Tenneco Chemicals, Inc.], makers of turpentine, pine oil, and those types of things.  The common name for it would be a naval store, but they would manufacture those things out of wood products.  So, my father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] and grandfather and eventually, the whole clan, sort of moved to Oakdale.  To get to the heart of your question, what was the neighborhood like, we moved on a little street called Holliday [Street], and even today, to the right of me, I had three families of cousins.  Directly across the street from me was my mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] oldest brother, her next sister, the sister next to her and her family, and then if you go straight across the field, there's an open field.  To the next street, was my grandfather and grandmother.  So, those two blocks--everyone on that street was related.  I had uncles, cousins, aunts, and it was really a little community within a community.  And, I can remember things like, at the time, they raised their own crops.  We had a little plot right next to us there--our home, the present place where my mother still lives.  It was about an acre and a half, and at least half an acre of that was a vegetable garden.  So, we raised things like, you know, carrots and onions and cabbage, and stuff we used.  And, between my grandmother's house and the other area--my grandfather had purchased a huge amount of land when he moved there, because land was dirt cheap and it was down below the railroad tracks so it was easy to buy--and as a result he had just given this land to his kids, which included my mother.  The two acres came from my grandfather.  He owned it, so he just deeded it to us, to his daughter.  But, things like raising hogs, raising gardens, and the smokehouse--so, I grew up with that.  So, when you talk about the sound and the feel, the sound was a lot of laughter and camaraderie, if you will, and a lot of love because it was all family.  It wasn't--you know, everyone knew everyone, so as kids we all played together and was in and out of homes, and you sort of slept and ate wherever (laughter).  So, it was a great environment, and it was an environment that I grew up in all the way up until the time I finished high school [Allen Parish School for Colored Youth, Oakdale, Louisiana] and went away to college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And, it's sort of disappearing today for a lot of reasons, but back then, dirt streets, I mean, outhouses--because the city utilities--we had electricity, but--and city water, but the sewer didn't come until much later.  I would say by the sixth or seventh grade I was able to walk to school.  The school was about a mile and a half away, so we walked to school every--
Story_ID: 317756
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Allen High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's A-L-L-E-N?
Speaker 2: A-L-L-E-N High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It used to be known--it was named after the parish because in Louisiana they have parishes rather than counties, and the parish was Allen Parish, but it was the Allen Parish--I want to get it right--it wasn't Correctional, but it was the Allen Parish School for Colored Youth [Oakdale, Louisiana] (laughter).
Speaker 1: For Colored Youth, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it later became the high school, but this is where all of the colored youth attended school, and it started in the, I think, in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] it was established, but I can remember that school.
Speaker 1: How big was it, and how many students?
Speaker 2: It was a large school, and it was more of a campus.  If that school was still in existence today, you would think of it as a small college campus.  I can remember it very vividly, with pine trees.  The main building was where the assembly hall, or gym, as we would call it, a gathering area, sat in the middle of the campus.  There was a stream that ran through the campus.  The setting was, it was just magnificent, and several white structures scattered about were where the classrooms were.  The principal--I didn't know him early then, but by the time I finished high school, I got to know him, was a professor--I never knew him by any other name--was Butler, Professor Butler [ph.], who came to that school at a very age, I think twenty or twenty-one, and he stayed--the professor--until he died.  He never really retired, and he died in his eighties, so he ran that school for sixty-something years.  And, as many of us say, we think the thing that really killed him was integration.
Speaker 1: I imagine it was a lot of tradition.
Speaker 2: A lot of tradition.  I mean, he ran the school.  He was responsible for the education of the black society in this little town of Oakdale [Louisiana].  And, no doubt about it, he was probably the strongest person of influence in that area.
Speaker 1: Even in terms of the preachers and so forth?
Speaker 2: Preachers and everything else.  Professor Butler, beyond a doubt, he was better educated than anyone, and he had some influence with the folks uptown, simply because he sort of made sure that we stayed in our place, and it was only when he began to lose influence as discrimination became--where he began to really lose influence was in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: That's when people were challenging discrimination?
Speaker 2: Ah, challenging discrimination, and I was a large part of that exposure.  And folks say, well what do you think happened, and I can tell you what I think happened to me.  This is my theory.  If you recall what happened in the late '50s, [1950s], in the late '50s [1950s], something came along they called television.  Okay?  And, television suddenly brought the world inside of the living room, and told black kids there's something else out there other than what's happening in Oakdale.  Okay?  Up until that time, my whole life was Oakdale, a little bit of Louisiana--I was fortunate enough because I played basketball, to travel a little bit, but no further than a couple hundred miles, at most, and never out of the State of Louisiana.  I didn't really leave Louisiana until I was about fourteen or fifteen years old.  And, this was the '50s, [1950s], because to travel, you needed a mode of travel, you most certainly didn't jump on a bus--if you did, buses were even--I mean you rode on the back, and that's the only way you got around, and flying was out of the question.
Story_ID: 317757
Speaker 1: Okay, so you talked about you got newspapers on a regular basis, and magazines.  And was radio popular when you were coming up (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Radio was very popular.
Speaker 1: You were right at the point where radio was supplanted by television, sort of.
Speaker 2: That's right, but up until that time, radio was the most popular thing around, in that family evenings were really centered around radio, and particular programs.  Whether the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] were playing--because at the time the Dodgers were--if you were black, your favorite baseball team was the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I mean, I remember.
Speaker 2: That's because of Jackie Robinson and the rest of them.  Your favorite team was the Brooklyn Dodgers, okay.  So, the Dodgers playing the Yankees [New York Yankees] was the thing, and my father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] has always been a baseball nut, so we would sit around and listen to the baseball game.  And, then were other shows, of course: 'Amos 'n' Andy' (laughter), because the skin was--it was a black-related thing, and I can remember radio shows such as 'The Shadow' (laughter), 'The Creaking Door,' and all these things as kids, because when my folks would go to bed, we would turn the radio on and would sit there and listen at these things, because radio was a great thing.  Of course, you'd take the sound and you could imagine anything.  But, this thing came along called television, and my uncle, my mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] oldest brother, we called him Uncle Buddy, his name was Joshua Thomas [ph.], but everyone called him Uncle Buddy, was one of the few uncles that had finished high school, so he was educated.  I use that word, quote, unquote educated (laughter), as they would say.  But, his education allowed him to make a better living, so he always had the largest home.  He was the first one to get a television, and it was a little tiny thing, but we would gather around.
Speaker 1: About what year did he get his television?
Speaker 2: Late '50s [1950s].  Mid-'50s, [1950s] I would say, thereabout.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is when you're in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, grade school or middle school, or high school.  Yeah, high school.  No, middle school, because I finished high school in 1960.
Speaker 1: So, this was '55 [1955] or '56 [1956] maybe?
Speaker 2: '55 [1955] or '56 [1956] when the screen was about eight to ten inches.
Speaker 1: A little round one? Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a little round one, and the television set itself was huge (laughter).
Story_ID: 317758
Speaker 1: My grandmother--I could--she just could not--I can remember my grandmother and my grandfather--my grandmother would sit there, and it [television set] just dumbfounded her.  How is this possible, you know, to see these people moving around inside.  It just blew her mind, and so we would sit over there--and then the favorite shows of the female was something--I'm really going to date myself--called 'The Life of Riley.'
Speaker 2: With William Bendix, right?
Speaker 1: William Bendix.  'Life of Riley,' Sid Caesar show ['Your Show of Shows'], with Imogene Coca and Sid Caesar and, of course, 'Amos 'n' Andy.'  The nights that the guys would go over and watch things, was the 'Fight of the Week.'
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  Pabst Blue Ribbon beer--
Speaker 1: And Gillette.
Speaker 2: Gillette.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And we would sit over there, and it was that type of thing--you know, he would open up his home, and we would sit there and watch TV.  It was all family.  Eventually, it began to proliferate, and I mean, the whole idea of television--but getting back to what changed, it was just watching that.  And, with the advent of communications, in the black community we soon learned that the world was a little bit different, and it was television and things that really, in my mind, that made a catalyst for this, because what was happening in Mobile [Alabama], and the idea of what took place on the bus, suddenly was in your living room.  You not only heard about it on the radio, but you could see it, and the fact that it was in the newspaper didn't matter, because we didn't control the newspapers, as we don't today, but the camera doesn't really lie--you see what you see.  So, when you began to see this, and at the time now, you've got to remember that in the '50s [1950s], you're suddenly graduating a large number of kids.  Education was beginning to proliferate in the black community, and with education comes awareness to reading, and watching television and seeing things like this.  So, by the time I arrived in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], the revolution had started.
Story_ID: 317759
Speaker 1: Now, now, I want to take you back to grade school, before we get you further (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, take me back to grade school (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  I really loved school, and the idea of books and learning.  My favorite teacher in the whole wide world, today--I guess we would call her English lit [literature], but she taught a number of classes, was Mrs. Glenn [ph.].  And back in those days, one teacher taught everything.  She taught the three R's, the reading, writing and arithmetic.  She taught all that.  But, Mrs. Glenn and Mrs. Washington [ph.], and let me just tell you a little bit about them, because those two people, and one other gentlemen that we can talk about in a minute, all had the greatest impact on me and really helped shaped a little bit of who I am today, at least who I would like to think I am today.  Mrs. Glenn taught me the love of reading, and she introduced me to all of the classics.  So, I can remember in the seventh and eighth grade reading books of Greek mythology, and I never forgot it.  I can still talk about it today, and I love it, but all of the books of Dickens [Charles Dickens], and all of the classics and 'Moby Dick' [Herman Melville] and all--I read them all, because she would assign them to us, and we would read them.  Just to digress, the name of my company, the insurance company, is The Ravens Group [The Ravens Group, Inc.].  Most people in this area think that it's because of the football team.  No, no, no, no, no.  It all goes back to the poem by Edgar Allen Poe, 'The Raven.'  I learned that poem from Mrs. Glenn.  I was assigned my author for that period, she would assign each student an author, so we would have to research, learn the work, talk about it, stand up in front of the class, and speak about it, and little did I realize it was from that experience that I was never intimidated by a camera or standing in front of a crowd, because I learned to do that at a very early age.  And, I would submit to you that most kids, they're not exposed that way.  But, Mrs. Glenn--now, by the time I was in high school, my favorite teacher was Mrs. Washington, and Mrs. Washington taught me to really dream about things.  She would take us--her favorite students, I guess, the ones that she figured had certain abilities--but I was fortunate enough to be one of her proteges.  And, we would attend the local theater and 'Julius Caesar' 'Ben-Hur' the old ones, those movies, and she would talk to us about those movies, and we would read the books about the Roman Empire, the fall of the Roman Empire, and things of that nature.  So, it just was amazing, and it wasn't the normal stuff.  And then, she would give us books.  I still have some of those books today.  If you look in my library, I still have books today that she gave us, 'Jane Eyre' [Charlotte Bronte], for an example.  Most people--that book was written in what, the '40s [1840s], and we read that in high school [Allen Parish School for Colored Youth, Oakdale, Louisiana].  So, it was that type of thing, and so I had this passion for information.  It was like a sponge to me.  I will read anything, from trash to the best of books.  I just read them, and I love to read.  I read every single day.  But because of that and my knowledge--and I think, in many respects it helped me throughout my life--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I knew the truth of what--I could read it for myself.
Story_ID: 317760
Speaker 1: Now, were you--did you take, like, leadership duties in school?  I mean, were you, like, a leader in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--it was amazing.  I was never one to raise my hand and say, "I'll do it," you know, I stepped out, but my peers would say, "Well, Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard] will do it," and I never said no.  I was class president of all four years of my high school, freshman right through.  I never ran, I just got elected, and I was very active in scouting [Boy Scouts of America].  I went all the way up through Life Scout.  The only reason I didn't become an Eagle Scout was because of this requirement to swim a certain distance, and at that time we didn't have swimming pools.  Most of my swimming, I had learned out in the lake and the rivers, so I never received my swimming merit badges, so I never became an Eagle Scout.
Speaker 1: The troop was based in the school?
Speaker 2: In the community, and we had several individuals, and as I mentioned, there was another individual other than those two ladies that was very instrumental and had an awful influence with me.  But, that Boy Scout troop was started by an individual by the name of Anderson, Mr. Jessie Lee Anderson [ph.], who's still alive today.  He lives in Asell, Washington [ph.], and suffers from Alzheimer's--he and his wife--and I talk to his wife probably once every two to three months--she'll call, or I'll call her.
Story_ID: 317761
Speaker 1: Finish telling us about Mr. Anderson [Jessie Lee Anderson].
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Anderson was not from Oakdale [Louisiana], and I really don't recall how he and his family ended up in this little town.  He was actually from the northwest--Oregon, Washington State, someplace out there.  I know right now he's living in Washington State.  But, he had served in the [U.S.] Navy and he was one of three or four entrepreneurs in this little town, a business owner.  And, he ran a repair shop, and fixed things such as irons, and toasters and electrical items and things of that nature--a skill that he had picked up in the Navy, because he had served in the Navy.  The thing about the Anderson family, they had three daughters--a set of twins and Joanne [ph.] and Billie Jo Anderson [ph.] and then the oldest daughter was Marva [ph.], but they had three sons, and the three sons had this big basketball goal field.  So, I would spend a lot of time over there playing basketball.  I guess I was fourteen or fifteen, and I had just really began to discover girls, so my attraction wasn't so much the basketball field, the basketball goal, it was those two twin daughters (laughter).  And, Mr. Anderson sort of figured that out; he knew it.  So, one evening he came home a little bit earlier than I anticipated.  This is not a risque story, but so, I'm sitting out in the back with the twins, and so he came around the house, and he said, "Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], come with me," (laughter). I said, sure.  So, he walks me over to the shop, and he said, "You know, if you're going to hang around this house chasing my daughters, then you're going to make yourself useful."  And I said, "What is that?"  He said, "You're going to work here in my shop.  I can't get those lazy sons of mine to get involved in this, but do you want a job?"  This was the first time someone had asked me about a job, other than working in the cotton fields or something, so I said, "Yes sir," and he said, "Here's the cord."  I will never forget, and it was an electrical cord, and he said, "There's an iron.  I want you to take it apart and put this cord on there."  It didn't take me long, and I'd never repaired an iron before, so he said, "Plug it up" and I plugged it up, and it worked.  I was hooked (laughter).  I was hooked.  Forget the twins, I was in that shop--he would have to chase me home, so I learned to fix things like televisions, radios, and irons and toasters, which is why I'm an engineer.  And, he began to talk to me about going to college, and I said I'd never dreamed about going to college.  I had great grades, but college just wasn't on the scope.  My parents [Bernice Clark Ballard and Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] had really never talked to me about it.
Story_ID: 317762
Speaker 1: Were there any other--any students that you knew of that went on to college from your schools?
Speaker 2: A few of them, but they all became school teachers, the few that had it.  They came from--you know, I would say out of every graduating class, maybe two, three, four students.
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: The typical class was forty--graduating class--that made it, forty.  That would be a typical size class.
Speaker 1: Did Professor Butler [ph.] encourage people to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was more of an affordability thing.  The whole idea of the concept of getting scholarships and all of those things in the '50s [1950s] just didn't occur.  His biggest thing was, finish high school, get you through high school.  In the '50s [1950s], if you were a high school graduate, you did all right.  Yeah, and so, he wanted folks to get through high school, and the average student, I would say, we would lose on average--and I'm only guessing this--I don't know--was probably 10 percent per year from freshman through senior year.  So, you start off--a typical freshman class may have been seventy, eighty students, really large.  But, by the time you went into your senior year in that graduating class, probably 50 percent of them over the years they'd lost, for a lot of different reasons--working, marrying early, and stuff.  So, you would just lose them.  The attrition rate was horrendous by the time you finished high school.
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Anderson [Jessie Lee Anderson] was actually talking about going to school--
Speaker 2: About going to college.  And, so I began to dream, and he would talk about it, and at the time, Mrs. Washington [ph.] was still in my life, so she was encouraging me to go off to school.  And, I still hadn't--I guess by this time I was a junior--fifteen or sixteen, a junior in high school--and I remember Mrs. Washington insisting that we take an IQ exam in the high school, because we hadn't really had one before, to sort of gauge--  And, there was something called a Kudis Preference Test [sic. Kuder Preference Record].  I don't know whether you remember that, but the test is still around.  And, what it really was, it wasn't so much to gauge your intellect, but to gauge your--it was more of a vocational aptitude test, what are you better suited for.  And, it's a blind test, because you use a pen, and it tracks the things.  I was always interested in that test (laughter), and that's the reason why I can remember it.  It said that I had an aptitude for the technical side, which was my primary aptitude, and the second one was something that's probably more akin to law, in which I had an interest, but Mr. Anderson was pushing me on the technical side.  So, to make a long story short, he convinced me to try my hand at something he used to call electronic engineering, which later became--well, I was an electrical engineer.  And, I ended up at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], because Southern was the only school in the state that had a school of engineering.
Story_ID: 317763
Speaker 1: Now, now, let's go back a second to high school [Allen Parish School for Colored Youth, Oakdale, Louisiana] before we get you to--now, you were president of your class?
Speaker 2: I was president of my senior class.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, then I was the salutatorian.  I wasn't the valedictorian.  A young lady did that; I mean, I had other interests (laughter).  I didn't have perfect grades, but--
Speaker 1: You say you played basketball?
Speaker 2: I played basketball, ran a little track.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played a little baseball.
Speaker 1: All right, so your graduating class, you say it was about forty?
Speaker 2: In my graduating class, it was forty-two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so how did you decide on what school to go to?
Speaker 2: Well, if you're from Louisiana, and you attended school in-state, you had a choice really at that time, of public schools, I mean state-supported schools, of Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] or Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And, if you went to Grambling, Grambling didn't have a school of engineering.  And, most of the folks that if you attended Grambling in those days, you were going there to be a school teacher.  Grambling was a college; Southern was a university.  So, Southern had a school of law [Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], school of engineering, things of that nature, that was well-respected, and I knew that if I wanted to be an engineer, I would go there.  I had some offers, small offers--basketball--not really a lot of money, but from other schools.  And, I had some interest from Grambling for playing basketball.  My classmate--my classmate, if I had gone to Grambling, would have been Willis Reed [Willis Reed, Jr.], so this was the time.  My classmate at Southern in basketball was a guy by the name of [HistoryMaker] Bob Love, Robert Love, who played for the Bulls [Chicago Bulls].
Speaker 1: One of the greatest forwards.
Speaker 2: Forward.  So, Robert Love and I played against each other in high school basketball.  He's from Lake Charles, Louisiana, and I was from Oakdale [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Did they call him Butterbean then, or was that something later?
Speaker 2: No, we sort of named him Butterbean in high school.  Yeah, so Robert "Butterbean" Love.  He's a great guy.
Speaker 1: Now, he had a real severe speech impediment at one time, but he's overcome it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an interesting story about how that happened.  We can do a sidebar on that on how he overcame that, and all.  It is a tragic story that turned out to have such a tremendous upside to it in Chicago [Illinois], but that's the way it was.  In high school, I sort of naturally gravitated towards Southern.  And, the only other school you could have attended was Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana], but Dillard was more of a semi-private school.
Speaker 1: Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] was private, or was it Catholic?
Speaker 2: Catholic school.  So, Dillard and--but those were the four primary schools that you could attend at that time.  Attending schools in northwest Louisiana, southwest Louisiana, LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was sort of out of the question, I mean, back then--no.
Story_ID: 317764
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get any kind of scholarship to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I--because of my grades, and things of that nature, I had a couple of small scholarships from the state, and a couple of other places that sort of helped me along.  It wasn't really enough to go.  I soon learned, after a year, to forget about basketball.  I didn't have enough money to be an athlete, to deal with engineering and all those things, so I played at basketball for one year (laughter), and--
Speaker 1: So, you say they wouldn't give you enough scholarship money to play?
Speaker 2: I didn't have an athletic scholarship.  I played a little ball, but--and at the time I don't think Southern had enough money for, you know, to give full rides to all of the student athletes.  It just wasn't, they just didn't have that type of financial aid.  So, I can remember my father [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] driving me up and off-loading our things into the dorm, the dormitory, and him telling me, "Well, you're going to have to help yourself, because I don't really have enough money to--I've paid your tuition for this semester, and I need to save your tuition for next semester, but I don't have a lot of money to be sending you spending money."  So, that extra cash just wasn't there.  But, I was a very resilient person at that time.  I didn't worry about it, I just wanted to get to school, which is what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did you find Southern, I mean, what kind of impact did it have on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, at that time, this was in the '60s [1960s], the summer of 1960, I'd begun to venture out a little bit, and I had, I'd worked that entire year, because when I made up my mind I was going to Southern, I worked that entire year, stashing money away.  So, when I walked onto the campus, I probably had $300 or $400 in my pocket, which was a lot of money at that time and then, my tuition was paid.  So, there I was.  I think I was pretty mature for my age, and you know, I'd learned certain things, so I found that Southern University was a large university, a very sophisticated university back in those days (laughter).  You had really two classes of students, the haves and the have-nots.  It was just as simple as that.  There wasn't any average student, you either had plenty, or you had nothing.  And, I was in the nothing stage.  I didn't have a car, didn't have a closet full of suits, and this type thing.  My life was tennis shoes and jeans and sweatshirts.  But, I was happy and it was just a fun university.  When I say fun, we had serious professors, we had great folks there, and probably 60 percent to 70 percent--and I'm almost certain I figured it accurately--of the professors there were Ph.D.s.  So, you know, just about everyone was a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors there that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, dean of my school of engineering, Thurman, Dean Thurman [Henry L. Thurman, Jr.], was one.  A Professor Saucher [ph.], don't ask me how to spell that, I'm not really sure, who taught me thermodynamics and fluid.  We had Professor Green [ph.].  I mean, it was just, it was a large number of things.  I can't think of any professor that...
Speaker 1: Was that Lorenzo Greene?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Lorenzo.  This Professor Green taught--was it English?  Yeah. Was it, did Lorenzo teach English? I can't remember his first name.
Speaker 1: Then, maybe I'm getting it mixed up, but I thought there was a Lorenzo--
Story_ID: 317765
Speaker 1: The thing that I remember most about Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was, first of all, I got a good education there.  But, it was the students that I met, and the folks that I met, that had the greatest impression on me, that later went on to do interesting things.
Speaker 2: Who were some of them?
Speaker 1: Well, probably--(laughter).  I tell this story.  This individual was more on the dark side--and later on his life was one of the engineering students--this guy was an architectural engineer student.  He played at football.  I'm going to tell you his name in a second, because you'll know his name.  And, he came from an upper class family in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and was the quintessential nerd.  His name was Hubert R. Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], and you say, I've never heard of Hubert R. Brown (laughter).  I know you haven't, but Hubert R. Brown--so write that name down--Hubert R. Brown.  He struck out with girls, and I mean, just--I need to describe him, because this is an interesting story.  And, I think you wanted some anecdotes, and that sort of tied into things.  Hubert R. Brown stood about six foot two [inches] and was light complexioned.  Like I said, he came from a very nice family, and just didn't fit in.  He just didn't.  And, so the group of us who hung around there with dark shades--we were just getting into things like afros and dashikis and all of this; in the '60s [1960s], we began to explore other options.  And, one evening, we were sitting around in student union, and Hubert was there, and he made a pass at this young lady, and she turned him down cold, so naturally all of the guys, we got a big hoot out of that.  And then, at that time when you talked to a young lady, you were rapping (laughter).  You're beginning to pick up on what I'm about to tell you who this guy is.  You were rapping, and not rapping as you know it today, with the lyrics.  So, I said to him, "Hubert, I know what the R stands for in your name:  Rap."  And Hubert Brown became H. Rap Brown.
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Speaker 1: That is quite a story.  He later dropped out of school, came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and had a brother that was teaching architectural engineering up there at Howard, and the rest is history.
Speaker 2: Well, that is something.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We--those of us that know about it--one of my classmates, we were laughing about that just a couple of nights ago, a couple of days ago.  We said, "Can you imagine--Hubert Brown, H. Rap Brown."  Those of us that knew him said, "Nah, that's impossible."
Speaker 2: He's an enigmatic figure, even now.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Even now.  I mean, for many, many years, he was sort of an obscurity in Atlanta [Georgia], and then he was charged with this shooting.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: He's in jail for life now.
Speaker 1: I don't think he'll ever see freedom again.
Speaker 2: Just last week we were in Atlanta, and [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni's poem about being chosen by Rap, you know, this poem when they were in the movement, was read.
Story_ID: 317766
Speaker 1: It was an interesting time, during that time.  We were talking about the college thing, because the revolution had really started.   Everyone was trying to find his way to express himself, including me.  I had thrown away the clean-shaven look and had a beard, and hair out.  My wife [Tessie Ballard] didn't see my eyes for, when I was dating her, for probably two years.  I never took my dark glasses off (laughter), day or night, except when I was asleep.  So, the first time her folks met me, they saw me with this plaid jacket.  I will never forget that.  The shirt--it was more of a sweatshirt.  The necktie was on it, because there was no collar, and jeans--
Speaker 2: A necktie with a sweatshirt?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  And, it was on a Sunday, and I'll tell you how that came about.  And, my sneakers, you know, you just wore them, and no socks.  We just wrapped them with tape.  That was the look, I mean, this was beatnik, was the word at that time.  But it was quite serious.  You know, I'm a founding member of the Southern University jazz club, because we sat around listening to jazz and quoted poems and stuff, and so, it was just an interesting time at that time--you know, drinking wine, but it wasn't violent.  It was that group, and conversely, that was the group that were mainly the folks who were in the Kappa Fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] (laughter), and the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] who were just the opposite.
Speaker 2: Continental suits and all that?
Speaker 1: They had the continental suits, the skinny ties and you know, that look, and then you have the other guys who were just out there doing things.  But the one thing that we were all totally focused on was the revolution, I mean, the eradication of discrimination and all, and walking and the marches and stuff--marching, cattle prods-did all of that, sat in demonstrations in downtown Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  And, the leaders of that was guys like, I remember Bobby Saucer [Reverend Dr. Bobby Saucer], who was a minister in New York.  You may have heard of him.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: S-A-U-C-E-R.
Speaker 2: S-A-U-C-E-R?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bobby Saucer.
Speaker 2: Were you in the group that was--?  I know one of the Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] presidents kicked all of the students off campus because of a--
Speaker 1: No, this came later, I mean, came earlier.  And, they just went back and picked up their degrees, by the way.  Southern gave them all their honorary undergraduate degrees.  One of the ladies that was fairly--that lead that, and was very much involved in it--she's now a Ph.D., she has a Ph.D., is Juanita Harris [ph.].  She works on the--she's very big in Washington [D.C.] politics.  Yeah, but, no I wasn't one of those.  But, I participated in ROTC, Reserve Officers' Training Corps.
Story_ID: 317767
Speaker 1: Now, even with the beatnik look and everything, you were in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because for the first two years, it was mandatory for everyone (laughter), and, how I ended up in ROTC, if you want to digress into that for a minute (laughter), I was still living that life, and living large and was traveling--I mean, during summer school.  I was determined to get out of school as quickly as possible, and Vietnam [Vietnam War] was looming.  I had no idea about, no aspirations at all, about staying in the [U.S.] military.  That was the furthest thing from my mind.  I didn't really care about the military.  I was working as a waiter and a maitre d' at a place called Marico's Bar and Lounge, which was rather popular in the Baton Rouge [Louisiana] community, Scotlandville.  And, I had every dream of becoming an engineer or something for someone, and making lots of money.  That's what I wanted to do, and the military, I just wanted to get out of Louisiana as quickly as possible.  So, going into my junior year [at Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and I'll never forget to this date, a fellow by the name of Charles Robinson [ph.], who was from my home town, he and I had purchased this old car together.  He could drive, and I couldn't (laughter).  I couldn't drive, and here I was a junior in college.  But, I'd never really owned a car, but he could drive, and we purchased a car from his mother.  And, another very good friend of mine, a young fellow by the name of Jimmie Brown [ph.].  Charles Robinson and Jimmie really loved the military, I mean, that whole ROTC persona type thing.  And, I was just glad to be through with it, I mean, it's over with.  So, that last semester, my junior and senior year, no ROTC, I was quite happy.  They decided they wanted to try for advanced ROTC, and they had taken the exam to do this.  It's raining cats and dogs (laughter).  We drive over to the place where the exam--and it's a rather cool night--and so, I said, "I'll go in."  So, I walk in, and the sergeant that was administering the exam, he said, "Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], if you're going to stay in here, you'll have to take the exam, otherwise, leave," (laughter).  So, I said, "I'll take the exam."  And he told me, "There's no obligation.  If you pass, there's some things we'll send to your home, you have to sign, and your mother [Bernice Clark Ballard] and your parents have to sign for it, and all this type stuff.  So, I said okay.  Well, even today, you sit down and give me a piece of paper and an exam, without thinking, I'm just going to go through it.  So, I took the exam, and immediately forgot about it.  And, we left.  A month and a half later, I swing through my home town.  I had been working someplace, and I'm thinking, maybe it was Seattle, Washington, I don't know--some summer job.  And, I'm there picking up some things and my mom said to me, "By the way, the paperwork came from the [U.S.] Army, and I signed it and sent it in," (laughter).  So, I said, "What paperwork, what did you sign?"  And she says, "I don't know, but they said they'd pay you twenty-seven dollars a month," (laughter).  And, I said, "I don't know what you're talking about."  It never dawned on me that was the stuff.  So, I'm there, and I'm going through the line, and I pass right past the ROTC desk and Professor Bell [ph.], Sergeant Bell, I think it was Bell, if my memory serves  me correctly, he said, "Ballard."  They all knew me.  He said, "You need to come over here and sign up for your classes."  I said, "What are you talking about?"  He said, "Well, you passed the exam, you're in advanced ROTC."  And I said, "I don't think so."  He said, "Well, your mother signed the paper".  And I said, "I don't care, but I didn't sign the paper."  So, now they're trying to talk me into doing it, and then he said, "Well, you know, you still have chances to opt out."  He lied (laughter).  Because, once I signed, that was a commitment.  He said, "We'll pay you ninety cents a day."
Story_ID: 317611
Speaker 1: So, well, so--
Speaker 2: So, we were talking advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you found out (unclear)--you were in the advanced ROTC. They tried to get you to sign up?
Speaker 2: Well, I did, and what really tipped me into that direction was, at the time, the Vietnam War was really kicking off, and then many of my friends were being drafted.  There was no guarantee with your grades, but if you dropped out of school--they wouldn't draft you right out of high school.  But, if you dropped out, for any reason, grades or whatever, man, you were gone.  So, he said, "Well, join our ROTC, the war in Vietnam is probably going to be over, you know, you have two more years, and this thing will be over with."  What I realized was, that thing was just getting started (laughter).  So, to make a long story short, I joined the ROTC, and little did I know that it was probably one of the best things that ever happened to me.  I'm talking about in terms of how I ended up where I am today, because of that decision.  So, I signed up and I spent the next two years in ROTC.  Even though Truman [President Harry S. Truman] had ended segregation in the military, you still had that assimilation of blacks that was really going on in the '60s [1960s] because the revolution had really just not only swept across the country, but it swept right into the [U.S.] Department of Defense, where the blacks were determining access to their share of promotions and things of that nature.  So, it was a good time for me to come in, because I was on the forefront of that wave of change that was going on in the [U.S.] military, and was enough of a rebel to carry that right into the military--that whole idea of change rather than servitude, for lack of a better word.
Story_ID: 317612
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit to just ask you about what the conditions were like in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  We were talking about Reverend Jemison [T.J. Jemison], and some of that.  Had things, by 1960, started to change?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  In 1960, I can remember--and as I was telling you about driving and all this type stuff--I remember going into the courthouse with a friend of mine to pay a traffic ticket, and really looking--here's a courthouse in the capital city of Louisiana (laughter), and there was one bathroom down in the basement, and one water fountain.  All the other bathrooms and water faucets said white only.  So, in the '60s [1960s], it still was a very, very segregated society; white only for this, and, the places like restaurants, and stuff like that.  They served blacks, but you went around to the side window.  It was carry-outs.  There were very few places where you could go in that served blacks and whites and where blacks could have a seat.  So, it just didn't exist, not in the '60s [1960s], not in Baton Rouge, not in Louisiana.  The buses still had the white line on the floor.  And, if you got on the bus, you sat at the back of the line.  This was in the '60s [1960s].  Now, by the time I graduated from college, that had changed, but it was through this march--I participated in marches where we marched from the campus of Baton Rouge at Southern University [South University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is in a little suburb called Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], to the ten or twelve miles to downtown Baton Rouge, with the dogs, the water hoses, the cattle prods, and the rubber batons.  Oh yeah, yeah.  I lived through that.  So, Southern University was this little enclave of change that was set in the middle of this predominantly black community called Scotlandville that was surrounded by this white community they called Baton Rouge.  So, there we were trying to break through, and the way I look at it, using a military metaphor, but to break through this barrier in the black community, because really and truly the folks that were not--it wasn't only the whites that was resisting change, but it was many people in the black community that was resisting change.  And the reason for that, is that when you create change, you know, you always have to find a place, and really and truly, they didn't have a place--why are you changing this--you're disrupting my job and everything else, so, don't rock the boat, so to speak.  And, we were determined to rock the boat, and eventually, as you know, history will tell you, the entire black community became galvanized also, and became part of the struggle.
Story_ID: 317613
Speaker 1: In 1963, you went to the March on Washington.  Can you tell us how that happened?
Speaker 2: Well, the--at the time, you know, we were still--I was still very active in this, and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was just such an overwhelming influence.
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this.  Did you all have an organization, a black organization on campus, and did it have a name?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't really have a name.  It was just students.  We had leaders, Saucer [Reverend Dr. Bobby Saucer], and--he's the only one I can really remember which sticks out.  But, we had folks that was very active in getting us organized, and talking about it.  So, it was just really a topic of discussion.  And, I would say that we really had three groups of folks.  You had the very serious, die hard folks that was bound and determined they were going to have change.  And most of those folks came from, to use the phrase that we used at that time, from up North, from north of the Mason Dixon line.  And, then you had folks like myself, for example, I didn't have a leadership role in that, but I sort of got caught up on it, and I believed it in my heart passionately that this was something that I wanted to be a part of.  And, then you had the other groups that just sort of was pulled along by the momentum of the thing.  I can't really say that they were that much of an activist.  But, I had other friends.  Probably, the closest friend I had was a guy by the name of Preston Carter [ph.].  We called him Slick.  Slick was from New Jersey and was a true revolutionary, and he's deceased, and it's interesting how he died in history.  But, he was my roommate, and I guess if Slick was alive today, I would call him--you might say that he was--some people would--but I don't know what you would call him, but he had these ideas about America and the unfairness of it, of the whole situation and how we had to revolt and change the society, and things of this nature.  So, we would listen at this.  He later died fighting with Che Guevara.  He left school and joined that revolution.
Speaker 1: He was very serious?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was very, very serious about things.  So, the whole atmosphere on Southern--Southern was a tough nut to crack--Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], as it is now, but even more so back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  It was a preeminent university.  I mean, the president of the university was Felton G. Clark, who was the son of the first Clark [Joseph Samuel Clark], and he and his father both ran that university for decades.  I mean, I don't really don't know how many years they ran it, but at the time, Southern University was built, ran and controlled in the image of the Clarks.  And, the Clark family, President Clark, was very light in complexion, straight hair and he just didn't want to rock the boat, and, he felt very strongly about it.  He ran Southern University with an iron fist, but the momentum on the campus, I think, is eventually overwhelming, and it wasn't only happening in the university, it was happening outside the gate and everyplace else.  And it just overwhelmed the whole situation, overwhelmed him, as it did this country.
Story_ID: 317614
Speaker 1: Things were really intensifying in 1964 when, I know, they had a Freedom Summer in Mississippi in '64 [1964], and that's when they really pulled you into the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was pulled into the ROTC, but you know, this was a good thing for the military, and I think it was a good thing for the country.  You know, I'm a strong proponent of the military, unlike a lot of us--a lot of blacks don't believe that the military is the right thing--and my philosophy today is a little bit unchanged from where it was then after I began to find out what this military thing was all about.  You cannot escape the military in society--in this society--in any society.  Okay, if you're going to remain free, you'd better have a strong military and at that time, we still had the draft that was going on.  And, the military wasn't entirely an organization of minorities.  It was more white than it was black, and it was only after the event of Vietnam [Vietnam War] when the rich and all started to evade service, then we eventually got rid of the draft a little bit later on.  But, yeah, it was an interesting time for me, of doing this thing in the military, and it was really a selfish act on my part, because I was doing it primarily for the money and to evade the draft, not for necessarily the love of the military.  The love and appreciation of the military didn't come until much later, and I still was quite an activist with a very huge chip on my shoulder, and was quite angry about a lot of things that was happening in the country and to people, in particular, the black people.  So, as it is today, my life was sort of filled with contrasts, you know, of what I felt in my heart and doing what I needed to do in order to survive, and everything else.  So, that's the way it was for this young guy in his--nineteen, twenty years old, (laughter) trying to figure out where he was, and who he was.
Story_ID: 317615
Speaker 1: So you found--did you find advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] training useful at that time, or were you still kind of resistant?
Speaker 2: No, one of the things that advanced ROTC was doing for me, was giving me an opportunity to learn something about leadership, something about self-discipline as an individual, and I soon learned through advanced ROTC that I couldn't solve every problem with my fists.  Yeah, where before, I can't say I was violent, but I was prone (laughter) to get physical, simply because, you know, the whole idea of debating and compromising and doing all these other things, wasn't something that I had learned to do.  So, the military taught me the value of teamwork, of compromising, of thinking beyond the immediate, and weighing the impact of your most immediate action and how is that going to impact you later on.  So, the [U.S.] military sort of forced that upon me.
Speaker 1: Some kind of strategic thinking, I guess?
Speaker 2: Strategic thinking would be the word.  And, so, I soon learned that, and I think that has paid huge dividends for me.  And, I think the biggest thing that I walked away with from the military--even though I didn't realize this until much later--was how to use the power of strategic thinking and persuasive arguments to advance your cause without losing the identity of who you are, and yourself--how to work within the system without compromising your own principles.  You don't have to cave in to what you perceive the system that you're trying to change, but if you work within it, you can change the system.  I mean, once you're in the room, you're there.  Okay, then it matters a lot about what do you do you after you get in the room, and then just to fast forward, that type of thinking and learning would pay tremendous benefits for me thirty years later as I grew in refinement--that type of long range thinking and planning.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there anyone at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] who was a mentor to you in terms of the ROTC?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I--there's no individual that just pops up to mind, that pops up as a mentor.
Story_ID: 317616
Speaker 1: So, you know, automatically, after you graduated in 1965 [from Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], January, '65 [1965], you went right into the [U.S.] Army as a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: As a second lieutenant.  I had every intention of going in and doing my two years, and leaving.  If you want to go into that, we can talk about that a little bit.  But, I was fortunate enough to be assigned into the Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers], and at the time, I didn't realize that the Engineers sort of picked me, I didn't pick them.  The Corp of Engineers was probably one of the most segregated branches of the [U.S.] military.  A large number of their officers were West Pointers.  Even today, 10 percent of the graduating class from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] get their first preference, and the overwhelming majority of them choose the Corps of Engineers.
Speaker 1: Why is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, the Corps of Engineers is a unique branch.  Unlike the infantries or corps of artilleries throughout the Army, the Corps of Engineers actually was organized by George Washington [President George Washington] before there was a Union.  The Corps counts its birthday one year before the Army, and it's fact; it's in history.  The first chief of engineers [Richard Gridley] was appointed by George Washington when he was fighting the Brits, and the engineers as a group, their role on the battlefield was, they built the trenches and the fortifications and those type things, for the infantry.  And, then, after the war [Revolutionary War] was over, the engineers stayed around.  West Point was created to train engineers and surveyors for the nation, and for the Army.  That was the purpose.  And, at that time, we were still in the midst of pushing west, as a country.  So, the construction of roads, the expiration of the territories, the charting of rivers and all, was done by engineers, and most of those engineers were trained and came out of West Point.
Speaker 1: So, engineers built bridges, and--
Speaker 2: Built the bridges, the roads and all of those, so it was military engineers who did most of those things.  And--
Speaker 1: Whoever reads about the Civil War, reads about the engineers arriving first, to construct stuff, huh?
Speaker 2: To construct fortification barriers and ramparts, and all kind of bridges, and all of those type things.  And, so, that was the purpose of West Point.  So, that tradition still continues today, so a number of them came into that branch.  And, it just really weren't very many black officers in the Corps of Engineers.  My entire thirty-five years in the Corps of Engineers, and probably 90 percent of my assignments, I was the only--we were the only black family that was in that organization.  So, when I went to a company, I was the only black second lieutenant or black captain, or black major, and it just, that's just the way it was.  So, it was constantly one of me adjusting to the situation.  And, you know, I faced constant discrimination when I first entered the military.
Speaker 1: We talked before we started about the southern nature of the American military, and--predominated by southern people, especially in higher ranks.  So, you were like a pioneer in the mid-'60s [1960s] I guess, going through this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was when--when I went to Vietnam, as I look back, and I can't recall any more than one or two blacks in any of my units.
Story_ID: 317617
Speaker 1: When did they send you to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I was in Vietnam in--I joined the [U.S.] military in 1965.  I went to Vietnam in 1966.  So--
Speaker 1: Where did they send you, and what did you have to do?
Speaker 2: I ended up in a place in--I was in the combat zone--I ended up--my first duty assignment was in a little town of Quinhon [Quy Nhon, Vietnam], Q-U-I-N-H-O-N.  It's in the central part of Vietnam.  If you look at Vietnam, it's sort of elongated, but the dividing line just sort of cuts the country in half--North Vietnam and South Vietnam.  Quinhon was a coastal city.  My job was as a platoon leader.  I did a lot of road construction, bridge building--things of that nature, and infrastructure development.  I spent most of my first tour based out of Quinhon, in an area called Nha trang [Vietnam], N-H-A-T-R-A-N-G, supporting the 1st Cavalry Division.  And, I spent time cutting landing zones for the combat forces' field artilleries to come in.  We built dining facilities, and it was really great, because I had time to practice my engineering.  We built the first troop-built ice plant, I mean, ice cream factories.  We just built stuff, and I did everything.  I mean, we did the construction, I did the design--it was just really--and also, we fought.  I had soldiers to die.  But I really matured in Vietnam.  That was my first tour, and my second tour when I came back, I was a company commander.
Speaker 1: Now, when was that, when did you come back?
Speaker 2: I came back to Vietnam in 1966.  Yeah, I was home only for a year, and I went right back (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, in '66 [1966], you were there the first time, right?
Speaker 2: I was there '66 to '67 [1967], and '68 [1968] to '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 317618
Speaker 1: Now, somewhere between the tours in '68 [1968], you were in Memphis [Tennessee] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, right?
Speaker 2: Well, this was the interesting, interesting story.  I had returned from Vietnam, and I was on my way to Belvoir, Virginia, right outside of Washington, D.C. to attend a course of studies that we call the advance course.  I was driving up in a little Volkswagen Beetle, and it was a bright day--I will never forget that--morning, early morning.  I stopped at this gas station just outside of Memphis and as you drove through, if you were a [U.S.] military man, there was a couple things you always carried.  You made sure that you had a uniform in the back of the car hanging in the window, so that if the cops saw it (laughter), they didn't stop it.  And, my officer cap was in the window, and I was pumping gas and, it's like I never will forget it--I'm pumping gas, and at the time back in those days, the radio station was playing, and it broke in with this sound, "Bulletin, bulletin, bulletin."  They don't do that anymore, but they did it then, and we sort of stopped.  And, the announcement came on that Martin Luther King had been assassinated, and it was the most grim moment of my life.  It was like everything froze in place--black, white, it didn't make any difference.  It's like all the air had just been sucked out of the room, and I'm pumping gas, and the thing is overflowing, and I turn the gas off, and the blacks around there, there was a couple of women, they began to cry and sob.  The whites were just--nothing.  I mean, nothing happened.  And, I remember putting the pump in, paying for the gas, getting in my car, and I want to cry but I can't cry.  But, I'm just totally confused.  And, as I approached Memphis, I was probably an hour, an hour and a half away, and I approached the city, and at that time the National Guard was out.  And, the City of Memphis was surrounded.  I mean, riots were taking place, I mean, it was just unbelievable.  And, then I remember being stopped by the military.  They asked me where I was going.  I showed my military ID card, and they saw the uniform, and they flagged me through.  I remember going, getting through Memphis, and it was a tough trip, because I was stopped by barricades every ten or fifteen minutes, it seemed.  So, I managed to get through Memphis.  I called my wife [Tessie Ballard] and told her where I was.  So she said, "What are you going to do?"  And I said, "I think I'm going to try to make it to Richmond [Virginia]."  And, so she was concerned, "Well, don't stop."  So, all the way through I'm listening to the radio, and things are happening.
Story_ID: 317619
Speaker 1: It is now late in the evening when I'm approaching Richmond [Virginia], and Richmond was beginning to have some problems [after the assassination of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so I decided, well, drive on.  And, I will never forget it, right outside of Richmond on highway 95 [Intersate 95 (I-95)], if you've ever driven that road, there's an area near Fredericksburg [Virginia] where the road is a rather high hill.  And, if you look sort of due north towards Washington, D.C., it's just a clear view.  You don't see Washington, because of the trees, but you can see a long distance because you saw above the trees, and I remember looking across, and the sky was just orange in color.  And, this was at night, and I'm saying--and I'd made that trip many times--and I'm saying, "What is this?"  And, as I got closer and I got to Fredericksburg, I began to realize what I saw.  It was the city, burning, that I could see for almost ninety miles.  And, it was a different feeling, because I'd been to Washington as a young second lieutenant when I first came into the [U.S.] military, and can remember walking from the bus station along Massachusetts Avenue and 12th Street, 12th, and you going over to the jazz clubs, and all of the families that live along there--it was just a--I mean, it was a beautiful city--you could stop and join in the barbeque and drink beer and all this other stuff.  And then suddenly, to get into the city and realize that they'd burned that area from Florida Avenue, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], all the way back--it just--I don't know, it was just a different, different feeling, but I can recall that so vividly.
Story_ID: 317620
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and you coming into D.C. [Washington, D.C.] when the riots were--
Speaker 2: When the riots were burning.  And, the--so, so, I lived through all of that, but probably the defining moment for me personally--this is a couple of--several weeks after the death of King, but the riots were still going on, and things was happening in the city.  And, they had mobilized the National Guard and folks, so this officer came into the class, class of studies, and I guess it was probably twenty or thirty minority officers in the class, and they mentioned that they may have to mobilize the officers to go and handle the troops--to go and put down rioters and looters, and all of this type stuff.  And, I'm saying to myself, "I don't think so."  You know, it was--of course, I didn't necessarily agree with some of the looting, but I definitely agreed with the cause.  And, I had some problems about whether or not I could go out and eventually pull the trigger on a black kid, or anyone that was doing these things, and I knew that I couldn't do that.  I absolutely knew that I couldn't do it.  And, so the group of us got together that day, that night, and we said, "What are we going to do?"  You know, do you disobey an order in the [U.S.] military and do these things?  So, we decided that if called upon, we'd just have to decline.  Well, fortunately for us, it never happened.  They never put that test to us.  But, it pointed out to me, again, something that I knew already, but brought home real strong, that you can't hide who you are.  You are who you are.  No matter whether it's a firefighter, policeman, military, what have you, sooner or later who you are comes to fore, and you just have to make a decision.  And, so I made that decision that who I was as an individual, as a person, was far more important to me than a particular job or a particular situation.
Story_ID: 317621
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  We've heard a story in California--who's the director we interviewed whose father was a chaplain?  He's a television director, we were on the set.  But at any rate--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was it [HistoryMaker] Oz Scott?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  Oz Scott is the father of the chaplain in the [U.S.] Army, and he talked about how there was racial--racial tensions had reached a head where he was stationed, and they sent Davis, Bill Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Oh, the veteran?
Speaker 1: Yes, to them, and he gave them a speech about how they were soldiers first, and Negroes second, something like that.  And, the chaplain, of all people, stood up and said, "No, I don't think we are," (laughter).  And, it was a big deal to challenge Bill Davis.  He said it was kind of a defining moment, you know, for him, for his father, and when his father told him the story, basically the message was, you're black first.
Speaker 2: One of the trainings that we used to receive as a young officer--and it's a southern writer, and I can't remember the name of it, but he wrote a book about you are what you were when.  And, the whole premise of that statement, is that you are who you are, and the only thing that will ever change you would have to be a significant emotional event.  It had to be a defining moment to knock you off of the path about the change.  And, I thought about that a lot, and I fully realized, and I accept that premise, is that you can get so comfortable in your niche and who you are--it's like the middle class black that had never heard the word nigger and had never been discriminated on, but the first time it happened to him, it comes as such a significant shock to him, that you go, "Whoa," and suddenly he realized that he was black, and that he will always be black, no matter what--I don't care how much money he has, how much status.  Eventually, that's the situation.  And, so now, it never bothered me anymore once I really came to the idea that I was the first black general of the first black this, because if we're going to move ahead of the paper, someone's got to be first.  It's what do you do with it when you get there, and then--that's just my philosophy.  That's a digression (laughter), I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's all right. It's valuable.
Speaker 2: --but I really feel strongly about that.
Story_ID: 317622
Speaker 1: But yeah, I went through--we went through that.  And, it did happen, but to be in Memphis [Tennessee], to be in the audience when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gave the speech, I Have a Dream and to see the change in--I guess D.C. [Washington, D.C.] is a microcosm of what was happening in this country, so to see a whole community, a whole way of life, vanish in an instant--it happened that quick, trust me.  It happened in days, that a whole way of life was just gone.  And, the neighborhoods of Washington, D.C.--there was a very popular nightclub by the name of, oh boy, Bohemian Caverns [Washington, D.C.].  It still exists today, but before, the individual that owned it--and it was really the place to be in D.C.  [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, I think, recorded 'Wade in the Water' there, and a couple of other places--but that individual, and for the life of me I can't remember his name, but I got to know him very well because every night that I was free, I was in the Bohemian Caverns listening to jazz, live jazz (laughter).  But, he basically bankrupted his business supporting the march [March on Washington].  It was that important to him.  And, to see neighborhoods disappear where folks were sitting on the stoops and brownstones that kids are now buying today and paying fortunes for, but at the time it was all black neighborhoods.  And, no violence, no crimes--people sitting out in the yard barbequing, drinking beer, talking.  I would pass by, and they would say, "Hey, soldier boy," and I would stop over and have a beer.  That was the way of life in Washington, D.C., and it disappeared.  It disappeared.  We can get back to it, but I've always felt that desegregation and the movement was all very positive things that were very good, but the unfortunate part about it was, we didn't manage it.  White society managed desegregation, on their own terms.  So, we got what we wanted in principle, but we lost in terms of the ideal of desegregation--you know, we were never fully integrated into that society.
Speaker 2: I know many lament the loss of community that came with desegregation.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying.  We lost community, we lost relationships, we lost a lot of the culture, and we wouldn't be here today talking about this if we hadn't lost that, because it would have been handed down.  So, I still have a great deal of sadness in my heart about some of the things that disappeared.  When I return to my mother's [Bernice Clark Ballard] home, to my home, and stand on the front porch and look at what happened to all this land that my grandfather owned, and the homes that I helped my dad [Joe N. Ballard, Sr.] build--the home that my mother is in right now, I can remember as a small boy as he was building that thing--throwing in the hammer and doing these things, as he and my uncles and cousins built that house.  And, today the young folks--excuse me for saying it, they don't have a clue.  They don't have a clue about how that community got there and why it's important for them to know that, and who they are, or anything else.  And, that's a sense of loss that somehow or another, I don't know if it ever can be recaptured, but, I spend a lot of time trying.
Story_ID: 317623
Speaker 1: Now you went back to Vietnam in eighty--I mean, in '68 [1968], '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Now, did you have--I have to ask you this, because I was wondering--you're in the [U.S.] Army, but did you have any reservations about the war?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any reservations about the war until my second tour.  You have to realize, you know, Vietnam [Vietnam War] is no different than the Iraqi war [Iraq War] is today.  You trust in the leadership, and you believe that the leaders have a high order of purpose, so Vietnam was to eradicate communism and this threat, and I'm not ashamed to say, I bought into that, and so did the rest of this country.  Okay, but it was only later until I began to question, "Well, wait a minute, you know, if we have the strongest country in the world, why is this little tiny country threatening America, and what is this all about?"  And, the thing that brought it home to me, there was a company commander--but it was the body bags, and it was who's fighting this war--and this is truly a war that blacks and minorities fought.  We lost a tremendous amount in that country, that is, in Vietnam.  That is still resonating today.
Speaker 1: I think I heard once that 60 percent of the casualties were black soldiers.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether it was 60 percent or not, but I know--
Speaker 1: Forty percent of the Army--
Speaker 2: --that's fighting in Vietnam, because you remember, now this was--the volunteer thing hadn't really started, but there were a lot of folks that were fleeing to Canada and other places.  They were not being drafted.  The folks that were being drafted were the folks that couldn't afford not to be drafted.  Okay, but I did know my company was predominantly minority, so, as a result when I took casualties, it was the law of the numbers that says that there was going to be minorities that die.
Speaker 1: Didn't a lot of them see the Army as an opportunity because of--?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a couple of things that existed in the Army that a lot of folks don't realize.  It was join the Army or go to jail.  So, if you committed a crime, you went before the judge, and the judge said, "Join the Army," and the Army was taking them.  So, a soldier walked into my office--there was a company commander, and I looked at his pocket and reading it, and there you are from Hoboken, New Jersey, and you just got picked up for petty larceny or whatever, and you're in the Army.  And, he said, "Sir, I had to come into the Army, or go to jail."  It wouldn't happen today, but it was happening then, that's a fact.  So, the military had always been a haven, in many cases, back in those days, for folks who didn't have any alternative--they didn't have the college, or the money to go to college, et cetera, et cetera, plus you could learn a skill.
Story_ID: 317624
Speaker 1: I began to really, really question why we were in Vietnam, and I'm saying, yeah, I know we're fighting for freedom, and I'm still having problems back home.  This is late '60s [1960s], and as I was telling you a story before when we were talking earlier, about me arriving back into Seattle, Washington, and here I am a senior officer now, first lieutenant, in a snow storm.  I walk up to the counter, and the guy takes one look at me, and put the closed sign up, and tells me, "We're closed, nigger," (laughter).  Okay, so the resulting act of violence on my part (laughter) did earn me a first class seat all the way from Seattle, Washington to New Orleans [Louisiana], because I wouldn't tolerate it, I just wouldn't tolerate it.  So, the airline realized for public relations and all this type stuff, let's get this crazy lieutenant and folks out of here--but this is coming back from Vietnam [Vietnam War], and we're being spit upon and called baby killers and all of this type of thing.  The whole mood of the country had turned 180 degrees.
Speaker 2: Did you encounter any of that type of thing yourself, coming back?  Did anybody insult you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah--this incident at the airport.  It was no longer a thing of pride to put the uniform on and walk out in public, so if I was not in a military environment, I didn't walk out in this uniform, of course not.   And, of course, you find yourself constantly defending your actions, and things.  Because I was in Vietnam, at that time, everyone wanted to know, as if I was there, if you remember this horrific incident of the Vietnam colonel executing the guy on television, with the shotgun shot to the head.  Okay, here again, the role of television, in carrying the story, changed things.  And I would tell folks, what you're seeing on television--yeah, that's happening, but it's not really the whole essence of what's going on in that country, but you know, I'm not anti-media, but the good stuff, the calm stuff, don't sell ads (laughter).  No, it's the bad stuff.  And so Vietnam changed--yeah, I encountered a lot of that, yeah, sure did, so much so that I decided to leave the [U.S.] military.  So, after my second tour, I found myself in Chicago [Illinois].  The military was really going through some tough moments, and I decided that I had other options.  I was young enough and everything, so I left the military.
Speaker 2: So, you actually left?
Speaker 1: I left the military.  I left the military, and was heavily recruited by a number of folks.  But, I went to work for Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company].
Speaker 2: Okay, now when was this?
Speaker 1: This was--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]?  After '69 [1969], or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: No, this is--this is sixty--yeah,'69 [1969].
Story_ID: 317625
Speaker 1: --So you wanted to work for Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company]?
Speaker 2: I went to work for Illinois Bell in Chicago [Illinois], 225 West Randolph Street (laughter).  I was in charge of--I was recruited--the Bell system was under court order to do--to fully integrate, and bring on some diversity.  And, they were able to drive that simply because, as you recall, the Bell family had a number of military contracts and governmental contracts, so the equal opportunity law--and they needed to do something.  So, I was recruited and brought on as a middle manager.  I knew some other things.  During that time, I integrated Des Plaines, Illinois, without knowing that I integrated Des Plaines (laughter).  When I decided to leave the military, we were looking around for a place to live.  My wife [Tessie Ballard] was working as an account receivables manager for a pharmaceutical house in Northbrook, Illinois.  And, I was looking for a place that was close to the rail commuter lines.  What is it, Northwestern [Union Pacific Northwest]?  There was a train there that went into the city, so I saw this ad that said--because I was looking for a place to rent--and I saw this ad that was very close to the commuter line.  We drove over and I saw the address, and said, "Boy, this is ideal, it's within driving distance to Northbrook."  There was a Catholic school in the neighborhood and a Catholic church about two miles away, because we were Catholics, born and raised in New Orleans [Louisiana] there.  And, so, I drove out to this lady's house and--it wasn't Waukegan [Illinois], where she lived, but Oak Brook [Illinois], I think, yeah.  So, I drove out to her house and rung the doorbell.  I called and told her that I was interested in the house, so she says come out, and you know, she told me how much the down payment would be, the deposit.  So, I drove out (laughter) and when she opened the door, she looked at me, as if to say--well, she was Jewish--she looks and me and she's got this weird smile on her face--and she said, "Please tell me that you're Joe [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard]," (laughter).  And I said, "Yes, I am."  And so, she said to come on in.  So, I went in, and she's middle-aged, and I remember sitting there with her, and she brought out tea and cookies (laughter).  So, I'm sitting there in this home drinking tea and coffee, and she's talking about everything about the house.  Now, I just wanted to rent the place and get out of there.  And, so, she said, "Have you been to Des Plaines before?"  And, I said, "Well, we drove by and looked at the place."  And, she said, "You're coming out of the [U.S.] military, right?"  And I said, "Yeah."  And she said, "This is going to be a shock for them."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  And she said, "I'm going to let you rent the house."  She told me how much money she needed, and I gave her a check.  And, so on the way out, she told me, she said, "I think it's just only fair to tell you, you're probably going to be first black family to live in Des Plaines."  And I said (laughter), "You gotta be kidding me!  Des Plaines, Illinois?"  You know. This is the, what, almost the '70s [1970s]?
Story_ID: 317626
Speaker 1: We moved in--
Speaker 2: That's the home of the original McDonald's, there in Des Plaines [Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right.  We moved into this place--and I'm telling you about how I'm always flirting around on the fringes of history and not realizing--we move in, and as it turns out, I found out years later, I am two and a half blocks--I used to walk past the house every day to go--past the place of Gacy.  Remember the guy who killed the folks and had them buried under the--?
Speaker 2: John Wayne Gacy.
Speaker 1: Gacy, John Wayne Gacy--
Speaker 2: Mass murderer.
Speaker 1: And, I used to speak to the guy.  I would see him every day, not realizing, here's this guy who was killing people and burying them under the house (laughter).  So, that's where we lived.  And, after we moved in, we didn't realize until several weeks later--my wife [Tessie Ballard] finally convinced me, you need to change our banking account and open up a local bank account.  So, we had an on-post military banking account at Fort Sheridan [Illinois].  So, I walk into the bank, and I'm there opening an account, and the bank branch manager came over, introduced himself, and said "Mr. Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], we want to welcome you to the community."  And, I said (laughter), "How do you know who I am?"  And he said, "Well, I'm going to be honest with you, sir.  We've had a discussion here in the city council.  We talked about how we needed to welcome you into the community and not let anything happen to you and your family."  So, I said, so that's why the constant patrol--the police.  It turns out, this lady, a wealthy Jewish lady, she wasn't about to let anything happen to us.  She had a number of properties and a lot of money in that town, and she had called and told them, "This is what I'm doing, and you all better not let anything happen to this family," (laughter).  Can you imagine?  Here's Des Plaines, Illinois--one of--I guess this city's fairly integrated today, but it wasn't then.  Everyone knew us.  We were babes in the woods--didn't have a clue (laughter). I thought that was funny.  We used to laugh about that quite often.
Story_ID: 317627
Speaker 1: How long did you work for Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company]?
Speaker 2: I worked for Illinois Bell for six months, six or seven months.  It was a great job.  I was in charge of one of the divisions.  I ran the division that they called plant, and my facility--I had all of the operators and all of the inside stuff on the telephone exchange system downtown.  I had about 170 operators and the work crew was all mine, no management.  I'd gone through--they'd put me through management training for about two months and all that.  So, I'd go up and have dinner with corporate management.  At the time, the Sears Tower [Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois] was being built, and there again, history.  And that was in my area, so part of my job was working with the sales team to sell them the Bell equipment.  Bell was just beginning to talk about breaking up the Bell system, and you had other companies--there was a Japanese company that was coming in that was selling products, the PBX [private branch exchange] system, for handling all this.  So, I had put the little team together, and my military training--so, I'm there briefing the corporate higher ups, and I'd made my own charts--and they'd never seen charts like mine.  I will never forget that (laughter)--I'm sitting there--of course, the [U.S.] military, I mean, you have swoops of arrows and objective points and also you told the story in both pictures and in words.  And, the dress code was a little bit different, because then it was un-pleated pants--blue, gray, black pinstripes, no other colors.  No other colors, no pleated pants, no (laughter), no straight bottoms.  So, here I am with my pastel shirts and stuff, and trying to make it, but my protector--God knows I can't remember his name--he was my mentor, and he was the president of the Bell system there.  And, I would go up once a week and have lunch with him, because he wanted to make sure I was okay.  He absolutely loved me.  To make a long story short, we made the sale, and suddenly I became a hero.  Well, I came home one evening--but I was bored stiff--and I don't mind telling you, I was bored stiff.  It wasn't challenging enough.  I hadn't learned to relax after coming out of the military and just take it for a ride.  A one martini lunch had turned to four.  Yeah, I was not happy, and I came home one evening and my wife [Tessie Ballard] plopped a basket of mail in front of me, and she said, "You need to take care of this stuff."  And in there, I found this long, brown envelope from the [U.S.] Department of the Army that says, "Dear Captain Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], we would like for you to return to active duty based on your exemplary record."  I still have a copy of that letter someplace in my file over there.  "And, we will send you to the graduate school of your choice."  That was the hook.  So, I didn't tell my wife anything (laughter).  So, I went to the office the next morning, and I called, I called the [U.S.] Army, and they said sure.  So, we negotiated and I ended up going to the University of Missouri [University of Missouri-Rolla; Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri] and getting a degree in engineering management, another rather fortuitous moment in my life, but that's the way that worked.  So, I came back on active duty after having spent five years, and I made a decision then that, okay, stay in the military, retire as a lieutenant colonel, do twenty years.  So, I only had fifteen more years to do, and I stayed thirty.
Story_ID: 317628
Speaker 1: Tell the story about Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company] before we go further.
Speaker 2: Well, I had many, many stories, but since I was really being forced upon the system, because I told you that, you know, Bell was--they picked me not because I was qualified--I was, and they realized that, but primarily because I was black, and they wanted black managers and middle managers, so when I took over the shop, I replaced the guy that really knew--just thought--that he was going to be in that position.  He was an Italian guy, Gigliano [ph.], I will never forget his name.  Everyone called him G, so he became my assistant, but there was an awful lot of hostility on his part, and he was not a happy camper.  But, as I told him, I don't run the Bell system, I'm just trying to make a living, just like you are.  But, they had some rather insidious ways to make life difficult for me.  The one that I never will forget--I always stayed ready to go on Sundays when the Bears [Chicago Bears] were playing, and whenever the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] were playing, especially when they were playing St. Louis [St. Louis Cardinals], because of the rivalry.  Because what most people don't realize, even today, most of your telecasts come through the telephone companies.  The microwaves go in the telephone companies, and then that trunk line goes over to television station, okay.  So, when the trunk lines would come in from the microwave systems at that time--Bell owned all of the microwaves, so when the games would be--they would come in through the trunk line, and there's a little bitty cable called a jumper cable that's the size of a good sized piece of spaghetti, that tied the trunk line to the computer that distributed the games and the signal.  All you had to do was go and pull that, and the game was off the air (laughter).  Okay, and the first time that happened--I'm sitting there watching the Bears game, and boom, they're off the air.  And, I'm naive, I'm not realizing that the sabotage is in my shop, until my boss is yelling at me, "God damn it, Ballard [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard]," so, I'm cutting trail.  I mean, this game is down, man, a good thirty minutes, or longer.  So I get in, and I knew enough about the systems, and I walk in, and everybody's just sitting there.  I mean, my workers, they're cooling it.  So, I walk straight in, and walk over to the trunk lines, because I knew the system pretty well, and sure enough, there's the cable.  So, I grab the soldering iron and put the thing back on, okay, and I didn't raise too much hell.  So, it happened the second time, on a Cubs game.  So, when I went in to fix it that time, the next morning I called Gigliano and the evening crew together, and said, "Trust me, one more time, and you're all fired, you're gone.  I'll get another crew.  But every time we get this game knocked off, I'm going to fire whoever the foreman is, is gone, you're out of a job."  I never had any more problems.  But, I knew it was, I mean, it was constantly, constantly that.  So, my entire period at that time was that I realized that I could never be one of the boys, because I knew we're never going to be accepted, okay, and you better be strong enough to stand up and make what happens--what you say you're going to do--you'd better be strong enough to make happen.  Fire them.  And, no excuses.  So, they pushed me on another instance, and I ended up firing a guy.  And, here again, my senior mentor made it stick.  The union tried to get involved, and all of this type stuff, and they said, "No, it's disobedience, he's out."  So, I always used to run up on those type things--it has nothing to do with your ability, but it has a lot to do with your race and what you are.
Speaker 1: One of the insidious plots, you know, when the Cubs were playing St. Louis, or--
Speaker 2: Or the Bears.
Speaker 1: That's cold (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's very cold, because you know you're going to get the maximum attention--not so much from the games.  The people who get upset about the games, that's not the real folks that raise hell.  It's all the revenue lost because the commercials--I mean, it's the car dealerships and everyone else--those were the folks, because these were folks that's paying.  You know, that's revenue to the station, okay.  And that's really the way the telephone company was making money, not from the homeowners, yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so they knew where the leverage was.
Story_ID: 317629
Speaker 1: We left off last time, we were talking about you going to the University of Missouri [University of Missouri-Rolla; Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri], earning a degree in engineering.
Speaker 2: Engineering management.  The [U.S.] Army took me back, and sent me to the University of Missouri.  I was fortunate enough that my record was very good; I had an exemplary record, and so, the army invited me to come back, as they were inviting a number of people, because the [U.S.] military had been really devastated by the loss of--talking about Vietnam [Vietnam War], drugs.  There were a lot of drugs--this whole way of doing things.  At that time, we had slowly started going to a volunteer army, so it was just a number of changes that was taking place.  We had started talking about the volunteer army, so this restructuring, if you will, after Vietnam, had a major role.  So, I ended up back in the military and back at the University of Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that was about 1970, you re-enlisted, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1970, 1971.
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from the University of Missouri?
Speaker 2: I left the University of Missouri in 1971, '71 [1971], '72 [1972].  It's in my bio there.  It's a long time (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after you got your degree?
Speaker 2: I ended up going to Fort Belvoir, Virginia, going to Fort Belvoir, working in research and development, because my degree was in engineering management, so I had to go and perform that duty.  I spent a couple of years doing that, and then the volunteer army had taken place, and recruitment was now a hot, hot topic, just as it is now, trying to convince folks to join the military.  And, the secretary of the army then was a guy by the name of Bo Callaway.  And, he came up with the grand scheme of putting officers out in the field to manage the recruiting effort.  Prior to that, all of the recruiters out in the field were enlisted folks.  Because of the draftee army, you just needed folks just to get them inducted, once they, I mean--through the process.  But, now you had to sell it, and convince them to come.  It was a sales job.  So, I was selected to go to Detroit [Michigan].  Here again, race was the factor.  They took a look at the demographics--and where the number of young folks and the propensity to enlist--they tried to match this new sales guy, me, to fit that profile.  I will never forget, I received this call, I'd been at Belvoir about a year, and my graduate assignment--we had just moved into a new house, and I was called by the Department of Army [U.S. Department of the Army], and they said, "You're going to Detroit."  And, I'd been told that I was going to be there for two years.  And, here I am, a year's up.  So, I rebelled, but eventually the Army has a way of getting its way.  But, they wanted a combat veteran, which I was--two years of Vietnam, engineering or technical degree, which I had, and black, which I am (laughter).
Story_ID: 317630
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so there, I find my way to Detroit [Michigan] to take over this recruiting force.  And, Coleman Young was the mayor.  We were having problems in a little place called Hamtramck [Michigan] in that area, and all the other little surrounding communities.
Speaker 2: It's a little Polish enclave.
Speaker 1: It's a little Polish enclave in Detroit, and Lee Iacocca was heading up, was still with General Motors [sic.] at the time, he hadn't left to go with Ford [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan].  And, the [U.S.] Army sent me off to a sales course put on by Xerox--Xerox Learning System--where they teach you how to sell.  Another valuable thing, because I learned how to close the deal at Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  Most people didn't know how to close the deal, so I learned how to not only sell, but close the deal.  And, so we went through that course--four weeks of learning, of sales training by Xerox.  And, so then I headed to Detroit to train my troops, my soldiers, how to sell.  And, then I was given the privilege of hand picking who I wanted.  So, I had a recruiting station in Hamtramck, so you can imagine who I sent to Hamtramck.  I wanted Polish recruiters, white ones--I put them in Hamtramck (laughter).  I put white ones out into Grosse Pointe [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Grosse Pointe, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) and so you know the area, and all, and I convinced the Army, my boss at that time, General Montague, to allow me to grow an afro, rather than a close haircut, because we were going to the high schools (laughter).  So, they allowed the black guys to have the close haircuts, and I allowed my white guys to grow their hair a little bit down to the ears and down to the collar, and we'd put on the--no fatigues, but the dress blue uniforms and stuff.  And, we hadn't made objectives, I mean, we hadn't met our quota, in fifteen, twenty years, seriously.  And, I made it my first month.  And so, all at once, I'm a hero (laughter) to my boss.  But we had a recruiting station, I had all of Detroit, and we had an office in Mount Clemens [Michigan] and a couple other places, but, always a hot commodity.  There was a lady by the name of June Brown who had, she was a local television personality, and the Detroit Free Press at that time--and it's still a very popular paper, it has grown, but at that time it was printed in green, green paper, yeah, light green paper, Detroit Free Press, a very distinct newspaper.  So, I had a little bit of a column there and my television show, 'Meet the Captain' [ph.], and I had a little radio program.  I used to sign autographs (laughter).  But boy, did we put people in the Army.  And, it was just fun for me, because it was selling, so I spent two and a half years doing that--but that was the fun part of my military.  And, I continued to get promoted until I made lieutenant colonel, and I finally hit twenty years, and said, "I don't know, I think I'll get out."  And, I began to look around for a job, and the Army said, "Well, we're going to make you a battalion commander, and send you to Germany."
Story_ID: 317631
Speaker 1: Now, but what year is this now (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is--this is--now I'm--this is in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], I guess, twenty years, yeah. Eighty-nine [1989] or something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so this is in the--no, it's not '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]--
Speaker 2: I came back--remember, I only had to serve fifteen years, because I had five years already.  I came back in--this is '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Right. Nineteen eighty-two [1982], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, now we were in Germany.  My kids were of age, and the promotions--I had no early promotions, just regular promotions, due course, nothing spectacular, just interesting career assignments.  I spent time in Korea and Washington, D.C. and served in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], and all of that.  As I said, nothing really spectacular that would distinguish my career from any other things, so I went off and commanded in Germany, and was immediately selected to go to this prestigious school [U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania].  So suddenly I realized, ah, maybe the [U.S.] Army is sort of fast tracking me on something here.  So, my mentors in the [U.S.] military at that time, and I began to pick up mentors, primarily black mentors and some white ones, were telling me, well, stick around, you know.  But probably the most significant mentor that I picked up was when I was a major, and had left recruiting.  I went to the 101st Airborne [101st Airborne Division], a very prestigious division, and I was in that division where I met the most amazing person that, up until that time, that I'd met.  The first time I saw this man, I knew that there was something special about him.  I mean, he had a presence about him.  He was this colonel hot shot that had just come out of Washington, D.C. and they made him a brigade commander.  This was with bird colonel.  Up until that time, I hadn't seen many bird colonels, and here's a bird colonel in this division, and everyone is talking about him, and it was Colonel Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell](laughter).  And even then, it was something special about him, I mean, the way he talked, and the way he carried himself and everything.  So, I got to know him very, very well, and would have conversations with him, and he would talk to me about politics, doing well, learning your craft.  He had these rules about leadership and, also, and I'm watching it from a distance, and I'm seriously beginning to think that maybe--maybe I should stay around (laughter), but I still hadn't decided.  So, I left there and went off to another school, came back, went to Korea and came back to the Pentagon.  Now, I'm coming up to this Germany assignment--and I ran across Colin Powell a couple other times, and now he's a brigadier general and now--these types things, and so I'm saying, okay.
Story_ID: 317632
Speaker 1: I began to meet other blacks, and suddenly, you start seeing black generals.  Up until that time, you really didn't see black generals.  I'm beginning to see black generals, Ike Smith [Isaac D. Smith], Johnnie Wilson [Johnnie E. Wilson], all of these guys, and I'm thinking, well, okay.  So, now I have to make a decision.  I'm coming out of Germany, I'm going back to the Army War College [U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania].  If I accept the Army War College, I have a two year obligation.  Now, I'm in excess of twenty years.  So, are you going to leave, or are you going to stay?  And, things are happening in the [U.S.] military where the military has suddenly realized the value of ethnicity and why it was important to have black generals and black colonels, and all this type stuff.  And, I'm still not sure, because even though I'd had great assignments, I really hadn't hit this home run yet, in terms of the assignment--no early promotions, no promotions before my peers or anything like that.  So, they send me back to the Army War College, and I end up after finishing that school--
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is in 1984.  So, '84 [1984] to '85 [1985], I'm attending the Army War College in Carlisle [Pennsylvania].  Now, the Army War College is at the pinnacle of military education, because that is the school where they teach you strategic planning.  That is the school where they really begin to hone your skills to be a military thinker and planner, not just war fighting, but to learn how to interact with other armies, to learn how to interact with nation states, to be more of a political animal, if you will.  And, that is the school where they're telling you that you are fit to be an army colonel with potential for general officer.  Your training is over with; now it is payback, when you finish that school.  So, when I was selected for that school, one year into my battalion command--normally, you get selected, if you're going to be selected, after you complete battalion command, probably one or two years later.  But, I was selected very early, and so, then sent back to take over the assignment--I was a detailer of all the colonels in the [U.S.] Army.  In other words, you didn't go anyplace unless (laughter) I did it, so--so, now I am back into an organization called the Military Personnel Center, and I'm working in colonel's division, and I'm in charge of engineers and a group of other colonels.  And, I'm still trying to decide whether I want to stay in the military (laughter).  I had not committed, even after seventeen, eighteen years.  This is now '85 [1985], '86 [1986], and I'm there for two years, because I'm still a young colonel, lieutenant colonel.  And, finally I entered the zone for O-6, full colonel, and brigade command, and lo and behold, the first year that I'm eligible for colonel, I make it.  The first day that they take a look at my eligibility for brigade command and all, I end up on the list.  And, the Army then sent me off to the most prestigious engineer brigade in the Army, which also happened to be the largest brigade in the Army.  I ended up going to the 18th Engineer Brigade, Karlsruhe, Germany.  It is a huge brigade--
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: --eight, nine thousand folks.  This is '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 317633
Speaker 1: I had a German unit associated with me.  I was in charge of construction for all of Germany--roads, buildings, ranges, you name it.  And, I was also the community commander, which is in essence the mayor of the city called Karlsruhe--Karlsruhe, Germany.  So, I had a very prestigious job, only the second black to have held that job.  The first black was a gentleman by the name of Charles Williams [Charles E. Williams]--Chuck Williams, who now is in charge of infrastructure in the embassy building, for Condoleezza Rice, in the state department [U.S. Department of State].  So, I had this job, and it's saying, "Joe [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], you need to make a decision here," (laughter).  So, that's when I suddenly said, "I'm committed."  When I was selected for that job, my wife [Tessie Ballard] had been telling me all along, she said, "You have a chance," and that's when I finally decided, after all of that time, that I am really committed to the [U.S.] military, and I really began to crystallize all of these things of sitting outside of the door, knowing how the games were planned, listening to all of the rules, and I decided that I wanted to be a general officer, and to go as far as I can.  Because, I will tell you, selection for general officer rank, I don't care what anyone tells you, general officers pick general officers.  And, it doesn't have anything to do with rank or your jobs or anything else.  It's how you play the game; it's a very (unclear) situation.  And so, at that time anyone could probably do the job of general officer, so they picked the folks that understand how the game is played, and it's always been that way.  And, when I made that decision, it was as if my career suddenly just took off.  I was selected for brigadier general one year into that brigade command [18th Engineer Brigade, Karlsruhe, Germany].
Speaker 2: That was in--?
Speaker 1: I went into the job in 1988.  I got selected for brigadier general in '89 [1989], even though I didn't know it.  I didn't find out about it until 1990, because it took some time, but what I'm saying is, I was selected--my boss at the time was General [John] Shalikashvili [John Shalikashvili] who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a Polish gentleman, who was a very good friend and a strong mentor.  That was my tactical boss.  My community boss was a brigadier general who later became a four star general, by the name of Johnnie Wilson [Johnnie E. Wilson], a minority.  And, so things began to come into play, and that's what happened.  I don't know how much time we have left.
Speaker 2: I guess we can still--about two minutes.
Speaker 1: That sort of sent me on the way for what I think was the next ten years or twelve years to be the most important ten or twelve years that I've ever spent in my life, for things that happened that allowed me to grow as an individual, to make tremendous impacts on black society, and do so some very interesting things that we can talk about, which is an entirely different subject, but that sort of got me there, and which lead to interactions with presidents and heads of state, and just fascinating things---
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that we can talk about.
