Story_ID: 33421
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is James Timothy Boddie, Jr.  I'll spell, J-A-M-E-S, T-I-M-O-T-H-Y, B-O-D-D-I-E, Jr.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father was James Timothy Boddie, Sr., a Baptist minister who was ordained at seventeen [years of age].  He was born September the 16th, 1900 and he passed away November the 22nd, 1963, the same day that President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated.  He was the pastor of Shiloh Baptist Church in Baltimore, Maryland.  That had a membership at that time of about 6,000 people.  We--I was born on November the--I'm sorry.  I was born on October the 18th, 1931.  Presently I'm eighty-one years old, will be eighty-two this October.  This is 2013.  And--
Speaker 1: Well you're answering some of the questions I was going to ask which is good but I want to make sure we get them in order.  The--your date of birth, October 18, 1931.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Where were you born?
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 2: At 340 West Dolphin Street which no longer exists.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm a retired brigadier general in the United States Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 29th of January, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At 3301 Forest Way, Plano, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33422
Speaker 1: Now before we got into depth, there are fight lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, a good steak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've traveled so much all over the world I don't really have a favorite but I have had some great times down in the Island area.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the--
Speaker 2: St. Thomas for example, Grenada, you name all of the--Virgin Islands for example.  We--my wife and I traveled to all of those places and we really enjoyed ourselves, particularly on cruises.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's five o'clock somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: That's an old fighter pilot statement.
Speaker 1: Five o'clock somewhere, and what's the significance of that for a fighter pilot?
Speaker 2: Well happy hour.  I'll leave it at that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 33423
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately.  Then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Emery Mae Moore, that's E-M-E-R-Y M-A-E M-O-O-R-E.  That was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June the 25th, 1906.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, ATL [Atlanta].  Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  I mean how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can go back to her father and her mother.  Her father was born in Atlanta, Georgia, I believe 1871.  And her mother--well let me give you his name.  His name was Reverend James Arthur Moore.
Speaker 1: Now was he a Baptist--?
Speaker 2: He's a Baptist minister there in Atlanta.  He pastored Wheat Street Baptist Church in Atlanta during that period and--
Speaker 1: So--well that's a famous church in Atlanta, Wheat Street Baptist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.] for one point in time was his assistant pastor before he went to Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well Wheat Street is on Auburn Avenue, correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe it is, yeah or was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think Auburn Avenue is now M.L. King [Avenue], is it not?
Speaker 1: They still call it Auburn.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it will be Auburn in this--there's a museum along the way and you know--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's been quite a while since I've been in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, they may have that sign above the Auburn Avenue sign.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's the, you know of course the home of Dr. King's grandparents.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Ebenezer--
Speaker 2: Well they, my mother and Alberta Williams who was the daughter of Reverend Williams who pastured Ebenezer Baptist Church lived diagonally across the street from each other and they were inseparable friends, went to Spelman [College, Atlanta] together and so forth.  And the two families were just close, very close over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you're--so your grandfather is Reverend James Arthur Moore.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was Rossie Strickland, R-O-S-S-I-E Strickland, S-T-R-I-C-K-L-A-N-D. She was also born in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now can you go back any further on your mother's side to your great grandparents?
Speaker 2: I have only seen pictures but that's, of my great-grandfather on her side.  But I don't have any recollection of her grandmother.  But her father, her grandfather was--I just don't know what he was, because he used to wear one of these turban type hats and if I had to make a guess I would say he was probably from the Middle East somewhere.
Speaker 1: He wore a turban and he actually--
Speaker 2: One of those brown hats like a hajj hat that you see over in the--
Speaker 1: Or would he have been in the Moorish Science Temple like that or--?
Speaker 2: I have no idea but his last name was Moore.
Speaker 1: Was it a maroon hat?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With a tassel?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the tassel. I was just a--there was one of the Civil Rights [Movement] gentlemen, Reverend--I just can't recall his name but used to wear a hat like he did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the Moore then was, was that to signify the Moors of North Africa?
Speaker 2: I have no idea but that was his last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it sounds like he might have been in the Moorish Science Temple or maybe one of the Masonic groups wearing the hat or--but you have a sense that he actually was a foreign national, something like--?
Speaker 2: I don't know because he was not black as we know blacks to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he speak with an accent?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because I was very, very small when I last saw him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the tradition of your grandparents would either, I would think that their parents if they were in the United States were born into slavery, I would guess.
Speaker 2: Well it's about that, like 18--my grandfather was I think born in 1871 or thereabouts.
Speaker 1: So it would make it very likely that his parents were born you know around the time of the [American] Civil War.
Speaker 2: Oh of course.
Speaker 1: Or before.
Speaker 2: Oh before, yes definitely.  I've tried to go on Ancestry.com but I could not pull up anything on his father.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is on the Moore side?
Speaker 2: Moore side, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33424
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how Reverend James Arthur Moore became a Reverend, who mentored him and who brought him along?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I never asked him that question and I knew him well.  But I do know that he was a minister there in Atlanta [Georgia] and then he moved to Kansas City, Kansas and he pastured the Baptist Temple there in Kansas City on, I believe it was 7th Street or 7th Avenue 'cause he lived at 1964 Thompson Street.  I could always remember that.
Speaker 1: This is called the Baptist Temple?
Speaker 2: I believe it was called the Baptist Temple.
Speaker 1: In Kansas City.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know.  I don't know exactly of course but I would think that there would be written information of anybody who was a pastor of Wheat Street [Baptist Church, Atlanta] that being such a--
Speaker 2: That was back in the day though.
Speaker 1: --a powerful church.  Yeah, it was way back in the day.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But Wheat Street's been important for a long time so--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --I would guess that you know--any rate, now did your grandfather go to, you know if he went to college or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I have no idea of his education.  But he was a well-learned individual because he set up what they called the Moore System in the Baptist, National Baptist Convention.  And the Moore System was a system of accounting for churches where you could--we had envelopes where you could put one side for benevolence and the other side for the church support.  And of course he had the associated ledgers for that particular system and of course it was used throughout the United States for many years and many, many churches until such time that the, I guess the computer age came upon the world and of course naturally it was easier for them to, that is the churches to use the computerized systems that came along later.  But the Moore System was well known throughout the Baptist church and that's on a national level.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is big too, the National Baptist Convention is the largest black organization in the world, still is you know.  So that, you know and they were using his accounting system--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for--
Speaker 2: A number of years.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, yeah that's something.  And then the name of the famous pastor of Wheat Street is escaping me now but he was a doctor, Dr.--you know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: He was pastor when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a boy growing up, Dr.--famous civil rights leader in his own right with Benjamin Mays and all that--
Speaker 2: For goodness sakes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can, I'll think of it later.
Speaker 2: Abernathy?
Speaker 1: No, oh no, no, not Abernathy.
Speaker 2: Okay, it was after--before him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well before, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr.--well I'll think of it but let's go on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 33425
Speaker 1: So your mother [Emery Mae Moore], she was, she kind of, so she grew up fairly well off [in Atlanta, Georgia] I would think with a--?
Speaker 2: Comparatively speaking I would say, yes.  She and Alberta across the, Alberta King, Alberta Williams King, I'll put it that way, went to Spelman [College, Atlanta] together and graduated together.
Speaker 1: Now Alberta Williams King, this would be Dr. [Martin Luther] King's--
Speaker 2: Mother.
Speaker 1: --mother, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Mama King.
Speaker 2: Daddy King's [Martin Luther King, Sr.] wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the lady that was, she was assassinated actually in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Both my mom and she died the same year.  I got to tell you a quick story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mom developed breast cancer in 1975 and Mrs. King, Alberta King, wrote my mother a postcard and she said, "Dear Emery, I'll be at the National Baptist Convention in New York this year and I will stop by, I'll see you before the summer is out."  She was assassinated in June, I believe it was, 1975 and my mother died in July.  So they saw each other.
Story_ID: 33426
Speaker 1: So your mother [Emery Mae Moore] grew up in Atlanta [Georgia] and in--where did she go--your grandfather [Reverend James Arthur Moore] go next?  He went from Atlanta to--he went out of town, then he came back, right?
Speaker 2: No, he went out of Atlanta and he went to Chicago [Illinois] and then from Chicago to Kansas City [Kansas].  I missed that part because that's where my mom and dad were married, in Chicago.  And--
Speaker 1: And then Kansas City.  And did he eventually come back to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, he never did.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so your mother grew up in Atlanta, Chicago and Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Well actually I would say Atlanta and Chicago because shortly thereafter my mom and dad married and they--
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was out of high school when she--
Speaker 2: Oh she was out of college.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she and Mrs. [Alberta Williams] King [mother of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] graduated from Spelman [College, Atlanta] together.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: About growing up.  Well she was the oldest of five siblings and they have all passed because my mother as I said earlier was born in 1906 so she would be fairly, like 103 years old I believe about this time, somewhere along that line.  And of course it varied.  She lost a brother, Howard, when he was very young.  He was hit by a street car riding his bicycle and he was about seven or eight years old then.  But her brother, her oldest brother, James Leroy Moore was a minister also and he pastored in Coffeyville, Kansas, Sewickley, Pennsylvania and Baltimore, Maryland where he pastored Sharon Baptist Church on Carey Street for a number of years.  And of course it seemed like because we were in Baltimore, most of the Moore family gravitated to Baltimore eventually.  My grandfather, her father came to Baltimore, her brother James Leroy Baltimore and pastored Sharon Baptist Church.  And Virgil Moore, her other brother, came to Baltimore and lived there and passed away in Baltimore years later.  So I guess the Boddie family was more or less the focus of her family because we were there for many, many years.
Story_ID: 33427
Speaker 1: For example, dad [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] started out at Shiloh Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland] in--I'm sorry, started out at Union Baptist Church in Baltimore.  Back in the, I think it was 1928 when he got there and he--
Speaker 2: Well let's kind of, let me go to your father's side formally then since you're going to tell the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And your mother [Emery Mae Moore] I guess, what did she come out of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '28 [1928]?
Speaker 1: I believe it was, yes.
Speaker 2: Is that--1928?  Okay.  So now, go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: Yeah, same as mine, James Timothy Boddie, Sr.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: September the 16th, 1900.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born in Darby, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Darby, PA.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about his side?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 1: Well my [paternal] grandfather [Jacob Benjamin Boddie] was born in Nash County and--
Speaker 2: Nash County, Pennsylvania or--?
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry, Nash County, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at Rose Hill [plantation?].  It's the area specifically where the Boddie clan started basically as slaves.  And I guess back in 1900, he decided to leave the South and travel--he was a minister, self-taught and decided to leave the South and venture North.  And as a part of his life during that period he was a missionary Baptist and he pastored all over and preached all over the Darby area.  You put a big circle, maybe a 25, 30 mile circle around Darby and he eventually left Darby and went to New--Sheldon, New York in 1900 shortly after my dad was born.  And in 1903, his wife [Martha Branch] passed away and--
Speaker 2: Now what was his name?  I'm sorry, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: His name?  Oh I'm sorry, Jacob Benjamin Boddie.
Speaker 2: Reverend Jacob Benjamin Boddie.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Did you know the origin of the name Boddie or--?
Speaker 1: Actually it's Irish.  I have a plaque around here somewhere that gives you the British--but now we came, that name came from the white side of the family, our slave owners.  And of course they are very prominent in certain pockets of North Carolina.  As a matter of fact they founded a university there that is the white Boddies, that I can't recall the name of it right now but they do have a family reunion every year with the black Boddies and the white Boddies.  Now my grandfather--
Speaker 2: They founded a college or a university?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, near Rose Hill?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  As a matter of fact that side of the family, if I recall correctly, started the Hardy Restaurant chain.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Hurry on down to Hardy's where the burgers are charcoal broiled, that's the commercial.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the white Boddies founded Hardy's.
Speaker 1: I have not met any of those folks yet but we plan to do so in the near future, we being the Jacob Benjamin Boddie side of the Boddie clan.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So they have a black and white reunion every year, huh?
Speaker 1: Those folks do, yeah.  But we have--the Jacob Benjamin Boddies have a reunion every three years.
Story_ID: 33428
Speaker 1: Your [paternal] grandfather [Reverend Jacob Benjamin Boddie] is a Baptist preacher as well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And okay, so your father [Reverend James Timothy Boddie, Sr.], I guess he grew up in the church, Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes and he was ordained at seventeen [years of age].  Then he left Sheldon [New York] and went down to Lynchburg Seminary in Lynchburg, Virginia where he got his Bachelor of Arts degree and his Bachelor of Divinity degree and then eventually went to Colgate University Divinity School in Rochester, New York where he--that's where he got his B.D., I'm sorry.  I misspoke.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it Bachelors of Divinity, is that--?
Speaker 2: Yes, at Colgate, Rochester Divinity School.  And then after that he married my mother [Emery Mae Moore] June the 25th, 1928.
Speaker 1: Now did your father have any stories about growing up, about what it was like growing up in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh he had a big family.  There were two mothers of Jacob--I mean two wives of Jacob Benjamin [Boddie], my grandfather because his first wife my dad's mother passed away when he was three years old.  And of course his step mother who I only knew, I never met his mother because she passed away in 1903 and I wasn't even on the horizon back then.  But bottom line is the grandmother I knew, believed lived until 1942 I think and she was Mary Gertrude Smith.  That was her maiden name.  And incidentally she was the first African American woman to graduate from East Stroudsburg University [of Pennsylvania] which is now a part of the University of Pennsylvania system.  And they have dedicated a monument in her honor at the flagpole at the entrance way of that university.  And she graduated by the way in the same year, 1903, that my grandmother [Martha Branch] died, my blood grandmother died.  Now the union between Martha Branch which was my grandmother and Gertrude Mary Smith, there were twenty-two kids born, my dad being the oldest living.  Of those 22, 15 lived to adulthood.  Quite a number of them passed away in childhood and at birth.  I have one uncle on my dad's side living today and his name is Daniel Webster Boddie, retired attorney living in Rochester, New York.  He's ninety-one [years old].  And basically he's the patriarch of our family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were saying that out of the 22 children, only 15 of them lived.  Is there any story about what kind of--what they died from?  You know if they died from something similar or different things?
Speaker 2: No.  Some were--some passed in childbirth.  Some--in fact one of the brothers had appendicitis and died from that.  I just don't know all of the details about the young ones that passed away.  But all the rest were--passed away from usually diabetes, as a result of diabetes I should say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father [Reverend James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] decided early that he was going to be a minister?
Speaker 2: A preacher, yeah minister, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a preacher.
Story_ID: 33429
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Reverend James Timothy Boddie, Sr. and Emery Mae Moore] met?
Speaker 2: I don't really know--oh yes!  Dad was holding a revival and he started singing this song, "I don't know what I'd do without the Lord," which he basically composed himself.  Well my mother was sitting there at the piano and she heard, you know she got--she heard the song and then she started accompanying him and from that point on a union was made and eventually they married.  And my mother was a classical pianist but she devoted all of her life to the church and she was the deputy musical director for the National Baptist Convention eventually and that was you know some years later after their marriage.  My dad was the president of the Maryland National Baptist Convention for many years and that's why he was very involved in the National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During his lifetime.
Story_ID: 33430
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' parents [Reverend James Timothy Boddie, Sr. and Emery Mae Moore] personalities, their dispositions, their senses of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they interacted with other people, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm a combination of both of them really.  As a matter of fact, I was lucky.  I--my wife was exactly like my mother.  She complemented my dad in every aspect whether it be interpersonal relationships with his congregation, whether it be supporting him as a musical pianist, organist and so forth, choir director.  But she was totally supportive of him.  And I was fortunate in that my wife was almost a carbon copy personality-wise of my mother.  Now people don't admit that but sometimes that's the case and I was very fortunate to marry one of the grandest ladies on earth really, beauty inside, beauty outside, really a gorgeous person.  She passed away 23rd of December, 2011 so it's been little over a year that she's been away.  That's why I won't take you back in my man cave because she wouldn't allow me to have it looking like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33431
Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met her at Tuskegee [Alabama].  I came back from North Africa and I have to tell you this story for the record.  I was stationed in North Africa in Tripoli, Libya, Wheelus, W-H-E-E-L-U-S Air Base in Tripoli, Libya which was the USAFE, that's United States Air Forces in Europe weapons center.  And there we trained all of the pilots in gunnery, bomb delivery and so forth there at Wheelus Air Base.  The weather was good and the units would rotate year around from Europe to Wheelus.  Well I was there for forty-three months on a thirteen month tour because I just enjoyed the flying.  I was flying everything there because I was running standard valance tests on all the aircraft that were coming out of maintenance.  So I was flying the F86 the F100, the B57 and the T33, four airplanes, made it a point one day to fly all four of those aircraft in one day.  Anyhow the bottom line is I had bought a car, Mercedes by the way, 190SL that at the time fit my personality 'cause it was a two door roadster, coupe.  And my boss said you know we have to take, deliver an airplane to Getafe, that's Getafe, Spain where they rehabbed our aircraft, the F100.  So he said why don't you take this aircraft to Getafe so that you can get up to Europe and get your car to the port?  I said okay.  So I flew up to Getafe and one of the maintenance people there took me to Madrid [Spain], actually to our own air base.  And there I was waiting for passenger service to let me know that I could hop a flight.  Well I waited and waited and waited for about eight hours and I said this is crazy.  I looked, I could see all these transport aircraft coming in and out but nobody was letting me get on board you know 'cause you know I was a passenger.  Finally I said I'll walk over to base ops.  So I go to base operations and I see this black major standing there, looks like he's filing out of a flight plan.  So I walked up to him and introduced myself.  You know I was as lieutenant at the time.  No, I was a young captain, excuse me.  I just made captain.  And anyhow I met him.  Turns out he's a Tuskegee Airman and when I introduced myself I told him I was trying to get up to Europe.  He said you've come to the right spot.  He said I'm on my way to Wiesbaden [Germany].  I thanked him very much and I got on that C47 and in fact he said well where are you headed after this?  I said I'm going to Tuskegee [Alabama].  He said Tuskegee.  He said I just left there as the commandant of--I mean as the professor of air science.  He said you've got to meet Mattie Dwiggins.  And seriously, everywhere I stopped and I told people I was going to Tuskegee, everybody said you got to meet Mattie Dwiggins. So what happens?
Speaker 1: You met.
Speaker 2: I go to Mattie, I--the guy I was replacing at Tuskegee, his name is Larry Roberts, Lawrence Roberts, okay.  Now that name doesn't mean anything to you but you know his daughter, Robin Roberts.
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: Robin Roberts was in the crib when I got to Tuskegee and of course Larry asked me to come to dinner. So I went to dinner one evening at his home.  I met Lucy Marian, his wife and of course as I said little Robin was in the crib, a bassinet or whatever you call those little things.  And she said are you single?  I said I am.  She said, well you need to meet Mattie Dwiggins.  Okay, so we have dinner and the doorbell rings while we're having dinner.  She happened to be an instructor on the staff at the vet med [veterinarian medical] school.  She's a veterinarian.  So she asked the same question, are you single?  Yes.  Well you've got to meet Mattie Dwiggins.  So hey, I was hooked.  I've got to meet Mattie Dwiggins.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here but we'll pick it up.
Speaker 2: Okay, Mattie Dwiggins, that's the spot.
Story_ID: 33432
Speaker 1: Okay.  So everybody's telling you about Mattie Dwiggins.  You're at this dinner party [in Tuskegee, Alabama].  Now this is the third, fourth person--
Speaker 2: Like there was somebody in Baltimore [Maryland] that said the same thing and I just--I can't remember who that was. But everywhere I talked to somebody about where I was going, well you got to meet Mattie Dwiggins.  Well I didn't know it at the time but Mattie was the assistant dean of admissions so quite a number of people knew her and of course she was a very beautiful woman so you wouldn't forget her if you ever met her you know, that sort of thing.  Well what had actually happened, I was on my way to Nellis Air Force Base to the fighter weapons school and my assignment was changed to go to Tuskegee.  And I, oh boy that was really bad news for me cause you know I'm a fighter pilot and I didn't want to get up on a platform and teach school, basically that's what it amounted to.  But what had happened, I had to get a picture taken real quickly when my assignment was changed so they could have a picture of me there on the campus so they would know who I am.  Well--so that I could pass the smell test or whatever.  But anyhow she--somebody showed her my picture.  I think it was Larry Roberts [Lawrence Roberts] by the way.  And of course here's this gaunt, big mustache guy you know and she said, hmm, you know one of those kind of things.  But it turned out that I was--I went shopping for some soup.  You know all of us fighter pilots always had a hot plate somewhere and you know to get a quick snack or whatever.  So I go to Bulls Supermarket, it was a supermarket there in Tuskegee and as I walked in I saw this lady that I hadn't seen since high school.  We graduated from high school together.  "Jackie, what are you doing here?"  "Well I'm married to Coach Lefwich [phonetic]."  He was assistant football coach and we just had a grand time right there in the entrance way, now like fifteen feet away from the entrance, talking about what we had been doing for the last seven, eight years.  Well while we're talking, the door opened and this fabulous creature walks in.  I said who in the world is that?  She said that's Mattie Dwiggins.  Thank you very much.  So that made me, Monday morning, have Larry make certain that I met Mattie Dwiggins.  So on June the 13th, 1961, we met and that was it.  We met and we were together from that point on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's how we hooked up.
Speaker 1: Now we got to talking about this because of the--you said the qualities that she had that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were complementary to you--
Speaker 2: To me.
Speaker 1: --just as your mother's [Emery Mae Moore] were to your father [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.].
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, carbon copy to say the least.  What she, my mom did for dad Mattie did for me.  Totally in control of the house, the family and I didn't have to get involved except maybe now and then with some disciplinary activities if you will.  But mom had it all under control but she just at that point, those points in times she just wanted my inputs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33433
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you now how many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fit in the line up?
Speaker 2: Okay, I had an older sister.  She passed away from cancer, breast cancer in 1996 or let's see, I'm sorry, 1997.  And she was the oldest, Marcia Lorraine Boddie, graduate of Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio where she got a degree in sociology and medicine.  I'm sorry, sociology and music.  Then I have a sister, Vashti Ophelia Boddie Roberts who's in Menifee, California.
Speaker 1: Now did she marry one of the Roberts--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  These Roberts are from--
Speaker 1: Not this--different Roberts, okay.
Speaker 2: --from Louisiana, Opelousas, as a matter of fact, Louisiana.  And she has a Ph.D., she's a doctor of educaton from USC [University of Southern California].  And she has taught in the California school and college system ever since she arrived in California back in the late '50s [1950s].  My brother is a medical doctor who lives in Atlanta [Georgia] and is a gastroenterologist in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: That's the one that's 6'8"?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's my little brother.
Speaker 1: And what's his name?
Speaker 2: William Leon Boddie.
Speaker 1: William Leon, okay.  Okay, is that--?
Speaker 2: Those are my siblings, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you fit in, you're the--?
Speaker 2: I'm the second.
Speaker 1: Second one, okay.  All right you're the second one after Marcia, all right.
Speaker 2: See, Marcia was born in 1930, I was born in 1931, Vashti was born in 1935 and my brother Bill was born in 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33434
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An--?
Speaker 1: An earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: People don't believe this but neither did my mother [Emery Mae Moore].  I remember when I was a young kid, I described it to my mother where my bassinet was and the first animal crackers that I ever had.  And I was in a crib at that point in time, and of course she never believed it but I believed it because I remembered it.  And I couldn't have been more than six to eight months old at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33435
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in, largely in Baltimore [Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We left Baltimore when I was seven [years old].  We spent five years in Germantown [Maryland], came back when I was twelve and from twelve on, you know I went to junior high and high school and then from there Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, Germantown.  Well can you, well considering you know Baltimore and Germantown, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well in Baltimore I went to a totally segregated school.  As a matter of fact we had the west side of Baltimore, well the east side and the west side and each side had separate schools for black kids and white kids.  And of course it was based at that time in my view, based on where we could live.  In other words, Baltimore had restrictive covenants where black people couldn't live wherever they wanted to live.  But it wasn't until Mayor McKeldin [Theodore Roosevelt McKeldin], a dear friend of my dad's [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] got into office as mayor, he struck down all the restrictive covenants so that anybody could live anywhere they wanted to.  But basically when I moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that was my first experience with white kids--Caucasian, the Caucasian race.  As a matter of fact, the only time we saw Caucasians were on Christmas cards and we didn't have television back in those days.  And now and then when we went to town to a movie but there was never any association.  But moving to Germantown it was just completely in reverse.  I was really a minority because there are like three black kids in my class and all the rest were Caucasian and of course we got along fabulously.  There was never any problem back in those days whatsoever.  And then back to Baltimore it was just like going back to the Stone Age really.  But eventually my brother [William Leon Boddie] who as I said earlier I think was eleven years younger, he integrated [Baltimore] City College which was a high school there in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's an exclusive kind of high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--
Speaker 1: --you know across from Memorial Stadium.
Speaker 2: Exactly, you know exactly where it is, yeah.  He was one of the early people to integrate the school, and of course his total background was pre-med [pre-medical] and of course he went on to medical school after his college work.  He went to the University of Maryland in Baltimore Medical School, at Downtown Baltimore and graduated from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in Baltimore it was, I tell you what I miss.  It was just one of those things where as a child you remember.  You could get these frosty ice cream cones by guys on the streets you know and you had choices, you know the berry, the grape, the orange you know and they'd shake this on the shaved ice and it was good stuff back in the summer time.  And then we had what they call the "hucksters" or "arabbing," the guys that would sell vegetables on horse drawn carriages there in Baltimore and it was something.
Speaker 1: Oh, the hucksters, one of the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were vegetable salesmen and they had fresh vegetables on these horse-drawn carts.  And they had a certain yell that you knew who they were when they would come down the street.  But in Philadelphia--that was not in Philly.  You never saw that in Philly.  But another thing about Baltimore that was unique, we had gas street lights when I was a kid.  That was the first, I found out subsequently that was the first city in America that had street lights and that was different.  Now Philadelphia--
Speaker 1: So they still had them when you were growing up, gas lights?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  And in fact we had lamp lighters, they'd come down the street and light the lamps every night and let's see what else.  Philadelphia to me was a real cosmopolitan town more so than Baltimore.  To me it was cleaner, it was, and I say Philadelphia in particular because we lived in Germantown and of course that was a real unique place back in those days, cobble stone streets, some streets.  For example, Germantown Avenue, you had a street car that ran up and down Germantown Avenue and it was very elegant.  You had your own private stores, privately owned stores or shops there on Germantown Avenue.  And back in those days you didn't even lock your front door you know.  It was almost crime free.  And I say "almost" because I, I'm certain there was crime because you know there are people there.
Story_ID: 33436
Speaker 1: Now what did you like to do as a kid growing up?  What were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Strange as it may sound, I was interested in building airplanes.  And I had a friend of mine that lived down the street and we'd get all of these toys that I don't know why but you could have a submarine that would shoot a torpedo and if it hit the right part of the boat, the boat would come apart.  It was spring acted and it was very interesting.  And then I built--it was during the war by the way.  And I'd read these, I was--I could read by the way and I could--dad [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] would get the black newspapers like the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and when we got back to Baltimore [Maryland], the 'Baltimore Afro-American'.  But anyhow bottom line is I'd read about these exploits of the Tuskegee Airmen during the war and that just motivated me to build more airplanes or model planes and so forth.  And when I'd get tired of a model I'd go up the second floor out of my daddy's study and open the back window and fly the airplane out and before I'd release it, I'd catch it on fire and just watch it go down in flames.
Speaker 1: So you were about ten or eleven [years old] doing that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's exactly right.  And I guess it was in my blood to be an aviator.  And then if I can pursue this a little further, moved back to Baltimore and in 1947, yeah I was sixteen, a friend of mine who lived down the street who was a year older came by the house one day and said, guess what I did?  I said what's that?  Now this guy and I, we built radios, short wave radios and we were into photography.  And we were like ambulance chasers.  If there was a fire or an ambulance or a call that we could get to in a hurry, we'd go there with our cameras, take pictures and run the pictures downtown to the 'Baltimore American' newspaper.
Speaker 1: Now were you developing your own film?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a--I had my own dark room as a matter of fact.  And you know we'd get paid for it so that was some change on the side.  But then one day he told me--his name was Rosseller Whiting [phonetic].  Anyhow, he told me one day, he says guess what I did today?  I said what?  He said I took a flying lesson.  I said you did what?  Now I had to believe him because he was a good Seventh Day Adventist and I knew he wasn't pulling my nail, my chain.  So he said I've been flying.  I said the next time you go, I want to go with you.  He said okay.  So sure enough the next time he went it was like two or three weeks later.  We drove down to Harbor Field and it was French Flying Service which a bunch of veterans from World War II who had started this flying training company.  And I got in the back of this Taylor craft with the instructor and Rosseller.  Of course I had my camera with me.  We took off and I asked him if he would fly over Baltimore which he did and he flew around the house and I took pictures of the church from--and the parsonage where we lived next door from the sky.  Well when we landed that was it.  I had to start taking lessons too. So I started taking lessons and I finally got to solo--
Speaker 1: Now how old were you when you started taking lessons?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Speaker 1: Sixteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sixteen going on seventeen.  And I went--well first of all I applied to Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I took my college prep [preparatory], college entrance exams.
Speaker 1: Now we're flying too fast now.  I have to get you to go back a little bit now.
Story_ID: 33437
Speaker 1: Now just let me ask you a question.  Now where did you go to grade school and--?
Speaker 2: Okay, I went to--you mean elementary school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, elementary school.
Speaker 2: I went to good lord, Henry Highland Garnet School [Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: In Baltimore?
Speaker 2: --103.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. 103.
Speaker 1: Henry Highland Garnet [African American abolitionist and orator], named for a great hero.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: School 103, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and [Frederick] Douglass [Senior] High School No. 450.
Speaker 1: For grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh that was high school.  Oh, junior high, I missed junior high.
Speaker 1: Yeah, junior high would be--?
Speaker 2: Junior high was Booker T. Washington Junior High [School].
Speaker 1: Is that in--now where did you go in Germantown [Maryland], was that--?
Speaker 2: That was Eleanor Cope Emlen School, that was elementary too.
Speaker 1: Eleanor Cope, okay.
Speaker 2: E-L-E-A-N-O-R C-O-P-E.
Speaker 1: C-O-P-E.
Speaker 2: Emlen, E-M-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it is now called Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now that's in Germantown.
Speaker 2: Germantown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you came back you went to Douglass High School?
Speaker 2: Booker T. and Douglas.
Speaker 1: Booker T., okay Booker T. Junior High School?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Douglass High School.  Now tell me now, before we get you back to high school again I mean were there any grade school mentors that you had?  Any people that really took a keen interest in you or that you admired in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, interestingly enough there was a shop teacher called Mr. Reavis, his name was Reavis, R-E-A-V-I-S and he was like a role model.  He was a good guy, I mean when I say good he was a solid citizen as I look back on it.  And also there was a Mr. Seaborne, he was my homeroom teacher there in junior high.  Those were two I thought, dynamic individuals that really showed me what being a person was all about and they were good people.  I think they both have passed since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's in grade school.  And--
Speaker 2: That was junior high.
Speaker 1: Junior high school these two.  Okay, these two in junior high school.  Now were you, you said you read the '[Pittsburgh] Courier' and the '[Baltimore] Afro' and some other papers?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right.  And I knew there were black people flying airplanes but I hadn't met any at that point.  So that gave me a little inspiration but you know it got--as the years went on, I got more involved in aviation activities and-(simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 33438
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in school, high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was, as a matter of fact, I was a chem. [chemistry] major.  I was in--let's see that's high school.  I took Spanish in--Latin and Spanish in junior high and senior high and chemistry was really something I really love.  I can't think of my chemistry teacher's name unfortunately, but I think based on his teaching methods, nobody liked chemistry but me it seemed in the school--in my class.  But if you were in what they call 9--in 10A1 which was the class I was in, you had to take chemistry and of course I enjoyed it and finally wound up at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] as a chem. major eventually when I selected my major as a sophomore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you run for class office or anything like that in the school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Play sports?
Speaker 2: Football.
Speaker 1: Football, okay.  What position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the center, you were in the thick of the action?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right on the line.  And that's when we played sixty-minute ball.  I was middle linebacker you know on defense, yeah.
Speaker 1: On defense, oh okay.  That's a, yeah I don't think they've done that in so long now that hardly anybody even remembers that now.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That people did play both ways.
Speaker 2: And that was before we made--wore face masks too, leather helmet.
Speaker 1: How did you keep your teeth?
Speaker 2: Lucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see, so no class offices, no positions like that.  Did you make the honor society or anything, any academic honors?
Speaker 2: I can't recall no.  I was a, yeah I was an honor student when I graduated from high school but I can't recall you know they had a list of, they put an asterisk besides your name in the program and that's about all.  I was not the valedictorian or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were ready to graduate from high school, what kind of counseling--now this is during let's see, you, you're in high school from--
Speaker 2: '46 [1946] to '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: '46 [1946] to '49 [1949], this is the close of the war [World War II].  And this is the Truman [Harry S. Truman, 33rd President of the United States] administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues in the country when you were in high school?  And how did it, now were GIs coming back home and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they were coming back.  As a matter of fact I didn't realize the impact until I left and went to college.  And there was nothing I can recall right after the war that was significant to me except you know I was in college, in high school--.
Story_ID: 33439
Speaker 1: Now you were in high school when Jackie Robinson [first African American to play in Major League Baseball] integrated the major leagues?
Speaker 2: I saw, I went to Brooklyn [New York] and saw him play baseball.  My dad [James Timothy Taylor, Sr.] and his brother and his wife and I went to one of the Dodger [Brooklyn Dodgers] games and this was the one where Jackie stole third base, stole home from third base.  I can't recall who they were playing but I remember when it happened.  I was in right field stands looking down at the whole thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a dramatic moment.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they show it on television over and over again.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He did it more than once they said but that was a, that wasn't the World Series was it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no this was a regular game, regular season.  I don't think we could afford World Series tickets back in those days, yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's see.  Oh, I was going to ask you about Joe Louis [Joseph Louis Barrow, "Joe Louis", "Brown Bomber" boxing champ] too, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well he was the champ.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll never forget when he beat Max Schmeling [German boxer], we were in Germantown [Maryland] and dad had the radio on--Atwater Kent--radio console there in his office, his study as he called it and the fight was on and you couldn't make a sound while that fight was going on.  But you know that was his man cave as they called it.  And when Max Schmeling, when he knocked out Max Schmeling, man you're talking about, you see dad hoping around the room he was so happy but that was back in those days.  And I do remember the Hindenburg [German passenger airship LZ 129] in New Jersey.  In fact I remember going to the movie and actually seeing it on the newsreel.  You know how they'd have the movies back in those days.  You'd see--Saturday you know you'd go see a--they'd have a comedy, then they'd have the newsreel and then they'd have the main feature.  Well I saw that first newsreel of the Hindenburg which was a total disaster.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was, as I recall that was just before the war [World War II] or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was just before the war.  Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 33440
Speaker 1: In high school [in Baltimore, Maryland], so in high school you got the [President Harry S.] Truman administration--I mean how was your family politically oriented?  Were they Democrats or Republications or--?
Speaker 2: No, see my whole family started out as Republican, yes the party of [President Abraham] Lincoln you know.  But back in those days my whole family that is to say my father [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] and all of his brothers and sisters were basically Republicans because their dad [Reverend Jacob Benjamin Boddie] was.  He never preached about his political affiliation but it was obvious to all the kids that he was a Republican.  I don't think he talked about it much but I do know back in those days it was the party of Lincoln.
Speaker 1: So well when you came along I mean had people started to, I know they started changing during the FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 32nd President of the United States] administration.  Some black people were joining the Democratic Party.
Speaker 2: I've been a Republican for sixty-four years.  But that doesn't say-I said sixty-four or seventy-four--yeah I was a young Republican at eighteen [years of age] there in Baltimore [Maryland] and supported Mayor [Theodore] McKeldin who was a dear, close friend of my dad's.  And he was the gentleman as I said earlier in--that struck down the restrictive governance or restrictive--
Speaker 1: Covenants in housing.
Speaker 2: --covenants in housing yeah.  And my dad nominated him for the governorship and then swore him in, in Annapolis [Maryland] during his swearing in ceremony.  So he was Republican.  So it goes without saying that I got involved in the party back then in those days.
Speaker 1: Now did your father host a lot of gatherings of you know--local organizational--you know organizations or black leaders?
Speaker 2: The only-yeah, well sort of.  The only thing he was a board member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there under Lillie Jackson.  I don't know if that name is familiar to you--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --with the Mitchells and the Jacksons.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Lillie Jackson yeah that was the mother of Clarence Mitchell.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You got that correct. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, great Clarence Mitchell.  I'm just surprised, just a couple of months ago, Clarence Mitchell, III passed and--
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know he, much, he was what in his sixties, wasn't he?  Wow.
Speaker 1: Well he was 72, 73.
Speaker 2: Oh was he?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I knew he was younger than I but I didn't know exactly how much younger.  Had he been ill?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, well--
Speaker 1: It snuck up on--I just found out last week and I was shocked.
Speaker 2: Well a friend of mine sent me an email, let me know 'cause he knew I knew the Mitchell family quite well.
Speaker 1: And so your father was on the board of the NAACP with Lillie Jackson--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact I've got a letter somewhere in there.  In fact I pulled it up off of the internet.  I just Googled [internet search engine] my dad's name and son of a gun it just, the document then pop up.
Speaker 1: And you were saying when I came in, I asked you about Reverend [Vernon] Dobson [Baptist minister and civil rights activist in Baltimore].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vernon.
Speaker 1: Vernon Dobson.  You were very close to Vernon Dobson.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah and his brother.
Story_ID: 33441
Speaker 1: So at [Frederick] Douglass [Senior] High School [Baltimore, Maryland] now when you were on the verge of graduation, did you know you were going to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]?  I mean it was already set?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you about this story and it's a true story.  First of all I wanted to get out of Baltimore where I could do my "own thing."  So I applied to Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I applied University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia], I applied for Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College], I played--applied for Colgate [University, New York] and Howard and Morgan [State University, Baltimore], in that order.  Well the whole--I was a February graduate in '49 [1949] from Douglass [High School].  So I'm working all summer, put together some funds and sure enough I didn't hear anything.  So I said boy it's getting close.  This is like July, first week in August.  So sure enough I heard from Morgan.  That was the first school I heard from but that's right there in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: And so this is high school graduation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in what year?
Speaker 2: February of '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: '49 [1949] okay.  So, all right, so go ahead.
Speaker 2: So I'm waiting and waiting and waiting.  I said this doesn't make sense.  I've got to go to school somewhere this fall.  Well what I did--I says, well I've got some choices,  I've heard from Howard, I've heard from Morgan.  Of course Morgan was at the bottom of the pile needless to say 'cause I wanted to get out of town.  Well according to the directions I received from Howard, I said okay, you have been accepted to Howard University and you have to submit a $50.00 retainer and that $50.00 would be applied to your tuition you know for your first semester.  Okay, well I wrote the check out, put it in the mail and took it to the mailbox one block away on the corner, put it in there and within two hours the mail to my home was delivered.  I was accepted to every one of those other schools, every one of them.  The only one that had a condition was Temple I believe because I had to do some remedial English or something like that.  But that was you know nothing that I was concerned with.  But I was concerned with that $50.00 that was in the post box and I even went down there to see what time the mail was picked up 'cause I was going to tell the postman to give me my letter back.  They'd already picked it up.  Well then back in 1949, 50 bucks was like a third of my--it cost me, my first quarter was $122.00, something like that.  So you know that was a big lump and back then $50.00 was whoo--
Speaker 1: It was a major commitment, right.
Speaker 2: --big money.  That's right that was a commitment.  That's why I went to Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33442
Speaker 1: So Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] and you were telling me off camera that Mordecai Johnson, the president of Howard--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was one of your father's [James Timothy Boddie, Sr.] classmates at Colgate [University Divinity School, Rochester, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was ahead of my dad but they were at Colgate together back in the day.
Speaker 1: So I mean did your father try to influence you at all about where to go to school or--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, he left that totally up to me and so well you see I had, it's interesting.  I had my oldest sister [Marcia Boddie] at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] and then I had my youngest sister [Vashti Boddie] who had just accelerated all the way through high school so she was like a year, maybe a year, two years behind me.  So basically when I was a junior, my sister was a senior, my oldest sister was a senior at Oberlin and my youngest sister was a freshman at Colby [College, Maine].  And dad was a poor Baptist minister so that meant I had to--I know I had to work so I had a job at the post office at railway mails at night then during the day between classes I drove a fur truck and don't ask me when I slept because it was a full day experience just trying to get a nap here and there and working those two jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were at Howard University I guess one, during one of the many heydays of Howard and there were some of the people you mentioned, Mordecai Johnson who I've heard is a genius, was a genius.  Who else were some of your professors and--?
Speaker 2: Well Dr. Lloyd N. Ferguson [Dr. Lloyd Noel Ferguson, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker; first African American to receive a Ph.D. in Chemistry from University of California, Berkeley] was my organic chemistry professor.  He was well noted in the chemistry field.  He had done some work on explosives back in California some years ago.  He was probably my closest advisor and mentor because as it turned out I was a chem. [chemistry] major.  I started out as a zoology major but medical school changed its requirements and I did likewise.  As a matter of fact I spent an extra year just finishing up an extra course in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now were you thinking about going to medical school?
Speaker 2: I was pre-med all the way.
Speaker 1: Pre-medical, okay.  So you were going to be a doctor.  You just--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  In fact, I think I'm--that's why my brother's [William Leon Boddie] a doctor today.  I told him some years back after I was gone I said you, also like Dr. Johnson said, you need to go on to med school which he did and he's very successful there in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in pre-med I mean did you have a--who else taught you?  Lloyd, we interviewed Lloyd Ferguson about three years ago--
Speaker 2: Oh is that right?
Speaker 1: --before he passed out in California.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was out, back out in California, for goodness sakes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had lost track of him you know 'cause I hadn't gone back but I knew he had retired from Howard [University].
Speaker 1: And we even saw the plaque dedicated to him at Cal [University of California] Riverside or one of the California schools with the plaque out there for him.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.  Isn't that amazing?  But he was a good guy.  I'll tell you, he really took me under his wing and of course I aced his program.  I was an A student for him and--
Speaker 1: And did you all use his textbook at Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we did, yes, yes.  Yeah he was classic and for example, at one of his final exams he would say, given so many grams of carbon, so many grams of these other elements, how do you make 2-4-4 tri-methyl pentane in the equivalent amounts and what's your end result?  Now 2-4-4 tri-methyl pentane is gasoline.  So you're given certain quantities and then you have to go through the cracking process, chemically speaking, and then define how much that he's given you and how much would that yield.  And that's like a two hour exam right there, just that one question.  And of course I had studied exactly that type of question--for that type of question and it turned out to my benefit that he asked that particular type question.
Story_ID: 33443
Speaker 1: Now did you encounter any of the famous Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] Medical School people like Montague Cobb and Jack White and--?
Speaker 2: No, the only one I was close to was Dr. Mazique [Dr. Edward Craig Mazique].  I don't know whether you know that name or not.
Speaker 1: What's his first name?
Speaker 2: Edward.
Speaker 1: Edward.
Speaker 2: He's passed.  He eventually married Marguerite Belafonte after she divorced Harry [Belafonte; also a HistoryMaker].
Speaker 1: Harry, okay.
Speaker 2: His first wife Jewel--I was his nephew's roommate, Dr. Emery Mazique who is down in Houston [Texas] now and practicing medicine.  And we were blood donors when his two boys, her two boys were born there at Howard University Medical School.  And of course I've known Mazique for, since September the 26th, 1949 so that goes back a while.  We were freshmen together, roommates, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the other teachers there at Howard that you remember?
Speaker 2: Toni Wofford [born Chloe Ardelia Wofford, American novelist, editor and professor; received her Catholic baptismal name of Anthony at age twelve, changed her name to "Toni"] she was teaching English, Toni, oh god, Morrison.  Wofford was her maiden name.  Toni Morrison was teaching English.  She was a classmate also but she was a well learned person and she was able to get me to get up in front of an audience and speak.  Needless to say you know it was public speaking and that sort of thing.  So I got over that fear through her really and over the years I became a platform instructor you know needless to say because you teach all the time you're in the service.  You're teaching something to somebody for the most part.  Let's see, who else?  Oh god, I can't remember.  I had a math teacher--
Speaker 1: And was--oh I'm sorry, go ahead math teacher.
Speaker 2: I had a math, a calculus teacher whose name I can't remember.  He was good lord, this is a shame.  You know you get my age and you can't point out too many names even though you see their faces.
Speaker 1: What about Howard Thurman, was he still there at that time?
Speaker 2: I know the name but I can't say he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think the, some of the--well you weren't in the law school but I don't know you encountered any of the, those Howard lawyers that you know were active in the civil rights movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was trying to think of the president of my fraternity, B.B. Lawson, I don't know whether that name sounds familiar.  But he was one of the stalwarts there, he was a national president of Alpha Phi Alpha as a matter of fact and he was a prominent attorney during that period you know the civil rights period.  Yeah.  You think I would be able to remember most of these folks names but it's been quite a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33444
Speaker 1: Now you took ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] and that was a big part of going to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes I did, I was an ROTC student all the way through as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: And now some of your classmates I mean especially during this period were veterans right, a lot of veterans came back?
Speaker 2: Let me tell you that's why I quit playing football.  These guys came from out of the [U.S.] Army and they were living in the, what we call the Vet's Dorm over there off of 4th Street and these guys were huge.  I mean I weighed 195 pounds soaking wet and these guys were 240 [pounds].  In fact we would up with a 240 pound line and the biggest problem we had was getting killed during practice.  You know we guys, those of us who were under 200 pounds, we were lightweights in the eyes of those folks 'cause they were mature men.  We were just--we had just passed boyhood needless to say back in those days.  So I knew I couldn't last long.  You know I didn't want to get hurt irreparably so I just left the team so I only played one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should say played at it.
Speaker 1: So did they influence you in terms of the military at all, I mean the veterans and their stories?
Speaker 2: No, cause they were mostly enlisted.  See, these guys had finished high school, I guess most of them had.  And what they were doing, they were getting their college degrees under the GI Bill.  And they were living in what we call the Vet's Dorms over there, north of Cook Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're majoring in pre-med--
Speaker 2: They're not even there anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 33445
Speaker 1: You mentioned the fraternities.  That's, you know that was a big part of your social life I guess right?
Speaker 2: A big part of my life, yeah totally.  Andy Young [Andrew Jackson Young, diplomat, politician, activist and pastor] was--he, as a matter of fact Andy Young came to get me when I went over on the line.
Speaker 1: This is with the A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He was my big brother and he was the person that came to get me when we were going over probation as they call it.  One Sunday night he came to my room, knocked on the door 'cause he lived two doors down from me in Cook Hall.  He was a Cook Hall advisor, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your impression of Andy Young in those days?  Did you have any idea that he was going to--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there was no question about it.  He was brilliant, he was--as a matter of fact he was younger than most of us.  In fact, I think he graduated from high school and came to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] at sixteen [years of age], something like that.  And he was running, he was a track, he was hurdler by the way.  He ran track and one of the good guys really.  And you know you just knew he was going--and as a matter of fact you look at the college guys that I was with, they were no losers.  All of these guys made a contribution to not only themselves but to their communities and so forth.  Dave Dinkins [David Norman Dinkins, the first and to date the only African American Mayor of New York City] Mayor of New York, as a matter of fact, when you look at that tape you'll see Dave at a reunion.  We had a class reunion and he's on that DVD and let's see who else?  Of course there's Henry Lucas, he's passed away.  He was a prominent dentist out in California, like Head of the Dental Society, Henry Lucas.  We had a quite a number of the medical types that you know graduated from Howard during that, through that class say around 1967--'57 [1957] excuse me.  And most of them have retired because we're all in our eighties now.  But it's just one of those things that everybody basically was successful in all their walks of life, whether it be medical, dental, professors, that sort of thing.  So it was a good class and at the right time I should say.
Story_ID: 33446
Speaker 1: Is there a highlight of your college life at Howard [University, Washingtonm District of Columbia] that you remember, the biggest thing that happened to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, got commissioned, got commissioned in the [U.S.] Air Force which almost didn't happen.  There were eleven of us who decided to not pay our graduation fee, but you know we could have graduated, but that meant we'd have to come back and finish up where we were going to med [medical] school as a change in major.  So I just decided not to graduate when I was supposed to and did everything but pay fifty bucks [dollars].  There's that fifty dollars again, graduation fee this time.  So I delayed it a year and that's when Vernon Dobson [Baptist minister and civil rights activist in Baltimore, Maryland] and I, and his brother, I think--is it Howard?  What's his brother's name, do you remember?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Anyhow, we started commuting back and forth everyday Monday through Friday to Howard.  I'd drive a week, his brother would drive a week and his other brother--and he would drive a week and that's how we got back and forth.  This was, interestingly enough, this was before [interstate] 295 could take you to Washington, D.C.  You know the Baltimore Washington Parkway?  As a matter of fact we even rode on that thing before they blacktopped it cause they still had you know exits that you could get off and they finally finished it in 19--, had to be '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Did you have a car?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I had a Buick, Buick Convertible, 1940 Buick Century.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so getting--anything special about graduation?
Speaker 2: No.  It was pretty, real formal.
Story_ID: 33447
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were, you knew you were going to--is it Officer's Candidate School--?
Speaker 2: No, I was already--
Speaker 1: You were already an officer.
Speaker 2: I was commissioned.
Speaker 1: Yeah, commissioned, right.
Speaker 2: But the next thing that was going to happen I was going to pilot training.
Speaker 1: Pilot training, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So where did you go to pilot training and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went from Baltimore [Maryland] down to Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas for what they call pre-flight and that was basically a three-month get acquainted or orientation I should say to the [U.S.] Air Force where you, you know read the rules and regs [regulations] and they got, they lectured you, this that and the other.  And then you went off to pilot training.  And then pilot training for me was in, primary pilot training was in Bartow, Florida.  I never heard of Bartow, Florida till I got there and it was a very small town and it had an air field there run by civilians, civilian contractors.  And they were the guys that were training us to fly.  The interesting thing about it was during that period the--two things happened.  World--one was World War I was over, I mean World War II was over and the second thing, Korea [Korean War] was just about over.  So they were having a--they had a big recruiting program for pilots but then they shut it down and every Monday there was a line of people at the school secretary's office that were being washed out of the program.  So of about, I think there were 300 in my class and seventy of us graduated.
Speaker 1: 300, then seventy.  Wow, they just--so what did they--?
Speaker 2: Well see, that's not, there was--we were at three bases and as it turned out you know they--they were weeding people out of the flying training program.
Story_ID: 33448
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about how people were weeded out [of primary pilot training] or a close call that you might have had?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, in fact I have a Christmas card from my roommate and he asked me, said, "I still remember that guy who tried to wash you out of the program."  Now how he could remember that is beyond me, because it was racial.  It was obvious to everybody and it's a long story I don't need to go into right now but--
Speaker 1: Well that's the kind of story that makes this--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well what happened, I was the first guy to solo in my section and of course I'll show you a picture in there where I've got my white scarf on and the other guys don't because I did a solo and I had my white scarf on.  Well after you solo you go through what they call a landing stage.  Now the instructor who was supervising the landing stage, I had never had any contact with him or any association with him whatsoever.  Well what the landing stage consists of you make six patterns and six landings.  Now the lower the score the better you are.  If you get a score of 24, you fail the course.  You fail the landing stage.  Now if you get a red light and center round with a strobe light, that's six points immediately.  And then based on where you land in frontal mode or down you know 100 feet or 500 feet down you get graded on your landing.  Well I'm the last one in this group, in this landing stage to take off and I had gone out, my instructor and I had gone out and pre-flighted the airplane.  It was a Super Cub, Piper Cub type.  They call it a PA18.  And so finally it's my time to go out.  So I leave my instructor talking to our school secretary and I go out to the airplane, crank it up.  And what they did the way they had it, they had the major runway and at the middle of the runway is where you took off because you know I had a lot of space to take off.  Well you have no radios in those airplanes back in those days so you look at the traffic light.  The guy gives you a strobe light, a green flasher means you're clear to take off.  Got the green light, I take off.  But it's a closed pattern.  You don't go anywhere but stay in the traffic pattern.  So the first landing I came around final and I looked and I saw a red light, red, red light.  I said what in the world is going on?  I said maybe I've cut somebody out of the pattern.  So you know I looked around, I didn't see anybody so I took it around, that's six points okay.  I go back up, I said well maybe he thinks my pattern is too tight so I made it a little longer, came in, same thing.  I said what in the world is going--now I'm getting frustrated cause I don't know what's going on.  I came around again and I drug it in.  When I say drug it in, I made a big pattern, power on approach, landed three points right in front of mobile.  Taxied to the number one position, turned around and cleaned up the cockpit and I look and I get a flashing white light.  I said what does that mean?  I looked up on the decal and, cause I had never seen a flashing white light before and it said, return to the ramp and shut down.  So I did.  So I get out of the airplane, go back in the base, go back in operations and there is my instructor still at the same spot talking to this lady, our secretary.  He said what happened, the airplane break?  I said no, I got sent back.  Of course he didn't understand that either 'cause I was gone like fifteen minutes at the most.  So in comes this gentleman with the scores.  Now of course everybody's back that was in that landing stage so he's giving out everybody's score, dah-dah, dah-dah on down the list.  So he gets to my name and he says well, he called me Boddie [pronounced Bo-dee].  He said Boddie you did thus and so, thus and so, thus and so.  He had me down to actually six landings.  I said to him, I said you obviously have made a mistake 'cause there was a 267 and a 276 in the pattern, you know the tail number.  And he said no, I got it right here, black and white.  Well then first of all I knew there was no reason to argue with this guy.  It's a Friday and maybe cooler heads will prevail Monday.  And of course my instructor's right there, he's listening to the whole scenario.
Story_ID: 33449
Speaker 1: Any how, Monday morning comes around and of course before you do any flying whatsoever the instructors have a meeting and of course students are waiting at the table for the instructor to show up.  Well the door opens and I look at the door, the first guy comes out, he looks all around the room and looks right at me, the next guy, same thing.  I said, oh Christ, here it goes.  So sure enough when my instructor came to the table he said okay guys, you go pre-flight the airplane, you do this, you--sent everybody away from the table but me.  And he said, you're going to fly with the unit commander Mr. Wells.  I said okay.  He said you--this is because evidently there were some problems with the landing stage.   I said obviously.  And he said, just give him the kind of flight that you've been giving me.  Okay.  So I go to Mr. Wells, report in a military manner cause I knew he was a reservist.  And he explains to me that okay, we're going to go out and do a landing stage.  I said okay.  And he briefed me on a couple of other things and then he says, okay, airplane is all pre-flighted?  I said yes sir.  So we get in the airplane and go to the number one position and look down there and get a green light and I take off.  And I'm going to stay in a close pattern like I was Friday.  This is Monday now.  He said no, no, no, let's go out and do some air work.  Okay, never briefed me on any air work or anything but I, hey that's okay.  I can do that too.  So we go out, I do a stall series for him, you know straight ahead stalls, climbing, turning stalls and then finally I'm doing another turning stall and he takes the airplane and puts it in a spin and I said gee whiz, I've never seen this done off of a stall series before, but that's okay.  Then while we're in the stall series he opens the door.  It's a clam shell door you know it will go, blam, blam, blam, cause I can't get to it easily so I have to reach back behind me, pull the bottom up and lower the top and then clamp it shut because he's the only one that you know can get to it easy cause it's right there in front of him and behind me.  Well then as soon as I close the door he says you got the airplane and we're going through like a thousand feet and you're not supposed to spin below two thousand.  Anyhow, I recover the thing and soon as I recovered it, he says forced landing.  So I looked around and I saw a corn field and I lined it up, I lined up with the corn rows and we are not supposed to go below 500 feet.  So I put the carburetor heat on and all that sort of emergency procedures if you will.  And so we're coming down and there's 800, 700, 600, 500, 400, 300.  We're down to 100 feet and he pours the coal to it and it coughs.  The engine doesn't start.  I said oh Jesus we're going to hit the--and it caught.  You know just before we hit the ground or the corn rows and he said let's go home.  I didn't have any idea where home was because we had been doing all these maneuvers and so forth.  Any how I climbed out and I remembered when we down to this area, the sun was like in my seven o'clock position so I turned and put it in my one o'clock position and I wound up on the 45 to the down wind of the, of Bartow Field.  I said you want to go in and shoot some landings?  He said yes.  I was just, I lucked out.  You know there I was where I should be for the landing pattern.  So I went in made my first landing, three points right in front of mobile.  I had never made a touch and go ever, even when I was in training there in Baltimore.  So he pours the coal to it.  Now in the mean time I've got to do the carburetor heat and trim the airplane 'cause I know he's going--I've got it you know.  So I just take the thing off and go back in a closed pattern.  Then on downwind he chops the power.  He said, let's land.  So I made an angle in final, landed, three points right in front of mobile.  Took off again cause I'm ready for it now, we're going to do a touch and go so I do all those kind of good things, come back and of course he made me take it out a long ways and I drug it in, drug the aircraft, in other words a power on approach, that's what we call dragging it in anyhow, landed three points right in front of mobile.  He said let's go on.  So he said to me as we were taxiing in, he says you know for somebody at your level of experience, that's the best ride I've ever had.  He said what happened Friday?  I said I don't know but I hope this demonstration today lets you know that I can fly the airplane.  So after we got out of the airplane, went into his office he says well lieutenant, I'm from New York and I knew what was coming.  You know you don't have to write it out for me.  He said if you have any other problems which I never had it was not my problem, it was that other instructor's problem.  If you have any problems come see me and let me know what they are.  I thanked him for his candor and for the ride, never had another problem.  I went all the way through primary pilot training and advanced pilot training and never got what they call a pink slip and never busted a ride whatsoever in my total Air Force Training Program.  Got my wings and from there I was set and that was the only problem I ever had was a civilian inspector that had nothing to do with me.
Speaker 2: This instructor--I mean the implication here too is that he's, he was from the South right (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh obviously.
Speaker 2: Yeah, southern--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: My red--my roommate called him a "redneck" which is you know that--and this is a Caucasian guy and he remembered after 50 some--53 years or so, this was back in 1955, 5, 13, 58 years I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 33450
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you were sabotaged but then saved you know and you finally got your wings in 1955, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I and not only--no, it was '56 [1956], March of '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: '56 [1956] okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the Class of '56 [1956] but it started in '55 [1955] and--
Speaker 1: Oh, so you're twenty-five years old right?
Speaker 2: Well that was '55 [1955].  Wait, came in at twenty-three I believe, '54 [1954], yeah twenty-three.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So after you got your wings, now is this where you go to Nellis Air Force Base [Nevada]?
Speaker 2: No, no that's before--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Bergstrom [Air Force Base, Austin, Texas] first.
Speaker 1: Bergstrom first, okay.
Speaker 2: Right out of pilot training and I flew out, I was in the 560 Strategic Fighter Squadron, belonged to SAC.  Back in those days anybody that flew nuclear weapons belonged to SAC, Strategic Air Command.  And of course fighters weren't really suited for strategic air command per se because fighters were basically tactical in nature.  But anyhow I was in that unit--
Speaker 1: Now Strategic Air Command were--
Speaker 2: Bombers.
Speaker 1: --mostly bombers yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, B52s, B47s back in those--
Speaker 1: It was huge B52s.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember as a kid seeing it fly over Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I was there until 1957.  I had applied to go to F100 training and when I got there because I was not happy with the 84F because it needed some modi--it needed to be modified which it was later, that is the horizontal stabilizer.  It was modified to a slab as they call it.  Most air foils on the rear have a static portion and then they have an elevator but that didn't have the aircraft enough authority to pull out in a high speed dive.  So what they did, they put a slab, the whole thing moved rather than just the elevator on the back but that's what they needed to have done.  But anyhow in 1957, I went to Nellis to check out an F100 and we had the F100A there and that was about a six-month program where I flew that.
Story_ID: 33451
Speaker 1: Now for the sake of chronology, you already told the story about being on your way to Nellis and meeting your wife at Tuskegee [Alabama] right, is that true?  Is that where that comes in?
Speaker 2: Well see, that's a different sequence.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I had an assignment to Nellis from North Africa to the weapons school but it was canceled and sent me to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was, that, I never got to Nellis--
Speaker 1: Never mind, I'm getting your Nellis visits mixed up.
Speaker 2: Now this is the next assignment which was a directed duty assignment out of my application to go to F100 school.  And I finished that school and three of us were assigned to the 45th Fighter Day Squadron in Sidi Slimane, Morocco.  No, Sidi Slimane, I think that's Morocco.  I can't remember.  It's in North Africa anyhow.
Speaker 1: In Libya right?  Is it Libya?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: This is Morocco?
Speaker 2: This, this--yeah that's where I was assigned.  And so the three of us get on this airplane at Charleston [South Carolina] and we fly over and we land at Casablanca [Morocco], a place called Nouasseur [Air Base] which is an air base there just north, well it's on the coast. And from there we were supposed to go to the 45th Fighter Day Squadron at Sidi Slemain, that's S-i-d-i, capital S-l-e-m-a-i-n [S-l-i-m-a-n-e].  We never got there because our orders were changed to go to Wheelus Air Base in Tripoli, Libya.  Well we finally wound up in Tripoli, Libya after an interesting evening at the officer's club there in, at Casablanca--at Nouasseur.  Not Nouasseur, what did I say?
Speaker 1: Gosh, I can't think of the name of it.  That's the one I didn't write down, something "Limane" or something.
Speaker 2: No, that was Sidi.  We didn't get to Sidi.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was Nouasseur in Casablanca, yeah that's right, the air base there.  Anyhow we went to the club for dinner and there was a guy playing jazz in the main club.  I said who in the world is that?  It turns out it was Idrees Sulieman [bop and hard bop trumpeter].  I don't know whether you know that name but Idrees Sulieman and his orchestra were well known in the jazz circles back in those days.  And he was doing a tour, he and his people were doing a tour of Europe and he wound up there in Casablanca at this club.
Speaker 1: Idrees Sulieman is an African American?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the [United] States.  In fact he was one of the mentors of Miles Davis [Miles Dewey Davis, III, American jazz musician, trumpeter, bandleader, and composer] back in the day.  Sure enough we had a great time together that evening.
Story_ID: 33452
Speaker 1: In the meantime I found out that they have a big bombing range there in, at Wheelus Air Base in Tripoli, Libya.  And one of the guys who we didn't know, Air Force guy who was there at the bar said yeah you guys are going to be range officers which was not the truth.  We had range officers in the group, gunnery group.  Well we finally get to Wheelus, I've got to tell you this story.  I'm on a directed duty assignment and the commander there was a World War II hero called Robin Olds and Robin Olds is world famous for he being a fighter ace during World War II and likewise in Vietnam.  But anyhow that's getting ahead of the story.  We check in, Chuck Ditkus and myself, we check in, we're both lieutenants.  I outranked him, it didn't matter.  But the idea was we go to personnel and this guy who was a warrant officer, Mr. Pierce said to me, well we're going to try to have to find you a job.  I said I don't understand.  I said I'm here on a directed duty assignment.  I just finished F100 school and I'm here to fly F100s.  Well we don't have any F100s here.  I said well you've got fighters here.  Yeah, we've got some F86s here and so forth and so on.  I was getting a song and a dance, okay.  So he tells Chuck to report down to the squadron, 7235th Aircraft Support Squadron.  So I go with him 'cause you know I don't know where to go.  So we report in down there and the squadron commander says have you seen the group commander yet?  I said no.  So he called, picks up the phone and calls Colonel Olds' office, see colonel at the time, called his office.  Is the Colonel available?  So we go to his office and report in a military manner, both Chuck and I did.  And he said well is everything okay and I said Colonel I've got a little problem.  He said what's that?  I said we were both briefed by Mr. Pierce and of course we were both on directed duty assignments and he wants to make a supply officer or something like that out of me.  I don't know what that portends but I need some help.  He called his secretary.  Get Pierce on the phone and he picked up that phone and chewed Pierce out up one side down and down the other.  And then as it turned out he checked me out in the F86 but what we didn't know, the F100s at Sidi Slimane, the 25th Fighter Day Squadron were coming to Wheelus.  So the three of us wound up as instructors for the rest of the gunnery group because we were the only ones currently qualified in the F100, which was you know a godsend.  And of course Robin Olds made everybody know that I was a fighter pilot, he did it by example.  In fact, he took me up one day and he left me shoot him down, got film on him you know and he came back so mad, he said threw his helmet in there and he just made a loud, said some lieutenant shooting me down.  That's terrible.  So he made that statement 'cause you know it went all over the group that I had some track and film on him.  So he's my hero really.  He set the stage for me.  I was there for thirteen months and I spent forty-four there and that's, from there I went to Tuskegee [Alabama].
Story_ID: 33453
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's where [Tuskegee, Alabama] you met your wife [Mattie Dwiggins]?
Speaker 2: That's where I met Mattie, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people started telling you about her and--
Speaker 2: Yep, all over the place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that takes us to about, where are we now around 19--?
Speaker 2: '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: '65 [1965]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed at Tuskegee for four years, '61 [1961] to '65 [1965].  We were married in '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 33454
Speaker 1: Okay. Now during this period of time, you said the Vietnam War is cooking up.  It's really, that started with the U.S. advisors in '61 [1961] that were reporting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And maybe have been there earlier, you know.  I think the state department was there, then the U.S. advisors to the South Vietnamese Regime.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And then there was a coup in the regime wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And then Deim and--Deim being D-E-I-M.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Deim, yeah.
Speaker 1: Deim, yeah.  So well tell us about like what was your awareness of Vietnam at this point and what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: Well when I got to Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base] in Tucson, Arizona that was my first exposure to the F4.  And shortly after my arrival, I became the instructor with the 4456 Squadron.  And this was in 1965.  Well all of us instructors were frozen, that is to say we could not go to Vietnam because we were busy training other air crews transitioning into the F4.  We had our European folks that were transitioning, we had our Iranians, we had the Israelis.  We just had so many different countries that were checking out in the F4 to include our own.  Well finally our wing commander got an assignment to go to Vietnam and fortunately he had fifteen people he could take with him and I was one of the volunteers.  General Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.] who was the director of operations at the time as a colonel had an operations meeting and he wanted to know how many people had volunteered through the system to go and I happened to be one of them.  And he called each one of us personally and the next morning to see if we were really serious about going.  I was and sure enough I was fortunate to go to Cam Rahn Bay [Vietnam] with then Colonel Bolt, Jones E. Bolt, that's B-O-L-T last name, first name is Jones, J-O-N-E-S, E as in echo, and Jones E. Bolt.  And he took us with him and I flew 201 combat missions there in the F4.  I was interviewed by 'Time Magazine' and I had my picture in the Time Magazine in March of 1966.  I flew Ralph Ellison on a mission who was killed eventually at Khe Sanh [Vietnam].
Speaker 1: This is--?
Speaker 2: Ralph Ellison the photographer, Time Magazine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That Ellison.
Speaker 1: No, we have a famous Ralph Ellison the writer and I didn't think he was there so I was just, that's why I paused.
Speaker 2: Caucasian guy?
Speaker 1: Huh?  No, a black--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh.
Speaker 1: There's a black Ralph [Waldo] Ellison that's a writer.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: Who wrote 'Invisible Man' and all that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah that's right, come to think of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's why I kind of hesitated there.  But this is a photographer with Time Magazine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ralph Ellison, okay.
Story_ID: 33455
Speaker 1: So Time's [Time Magazine], Ralph Ellison [photographer], what was the nature of the article in the, in Time?  What did they, what were they about?
Speaker 2: Well there were two articles.  There was one in the Washington Post and it says to the degree that Vietnamese fire is integrated.  And of course it talks about me and my back-seater who was a Caucasian, my pilot.  We had what we called the weapons systems officer who was a pilot and he was--well you saw a picture of him in there, Marty--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Marty.  Martin Savinsky and--
Speaker 1: So he flew in the back seat?
Speaker 2: He, yeah he flew in the back seat.  He was a pilot but he flew in the back seat and I don't know how many missions we had together but I had a total of 201 combat sorties over there.  And I got hit that one time.  I was hit five times, most of them small arms fire but you saw that big hole in my wing, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's fire from the ground right?
Speaker 2: Yes, anti-aircraft fire yeah.
Speaker 1: Did the North Vietnamese, the Viet Cong have any planes of any significance?
Speaker 2: Any planes?
Speaker 1: Yeah of any significance?
Speaker 2: The North Vietnamese did.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  Viet Cong were down south.  They didn't have any aircraft.
Speaker 1: Oh okay the--they were the southern insurgents against the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, right I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That's--
Speaker 1: Yeah it's been a long time (unclear) forget who's who in this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But the North Vietnamese army had what, Russian MiGs or Chinese planes or what?
Speaker 2: No, they were Russian, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those are the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had big 17s, 19s, 21s back in the day.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now these are the MiG fighters right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So were they well trained?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were.  I never had, personally had an encounter with them because I never--let's say it this way, I always kept my speed up.  I never would try to get in a tangle with those guys, particularly at low altitude because that was their fight at low altitude.  Ours was high altitude and fast.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what are the logistical dynamics of that?  I mean just as, you explained something but I don't know why that that would be the case.  But what is, why was that the case that the Americans flew high and fast and the North Vietnamese flew--?
Speaker 2: Well it depends on the aircraft.  For example when the 105s went in there, they were on strike mission so they would go in fairly low.  When I say fairly low they would be below 15,000 feet for the most part.  And of course they were susceptible to anything, SAMs [surface air missiles], you know everything.  And of course when they went down to strike they were in now the gun range, Triple A, ZPUs, that's the name of a weapon.  It's a quad weapon.  I think it's a quad 30 caliber and it's pretty effective at low altitude and basically most of the guys who were shot down were shot down at low altitude by Triple A and medium altitude by SAMs, the surface air missiles.  And of course if you're up high you can see them coming and take evasive action.  And particularly if you see that they're locked on to you.  If you look out and see a SAM and it doesn't move, you know he's locked on to you because what he's on is a collision course.  So you get to a point where you take him down and then you pull up away from him and he can't stay with you.  He'll wind up tumbling and doing all sorts of crazy things.
Speaker 1: Oh right, that's because the missile doesn't really have the flight capacity of a plane, right?  I mean this just--
Speaker 2: Well yeah if you see it you can avoid it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But if you don't see it, if it sneaks up your rear for example, you're good as dead.
Speaker 1: I was just thinking like a you know, this, the service air missile doesn't have wings and it--
Speaker 2: Oh it does.  It has canaries you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean but it can't maneuver like a plane.
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: No, it can't do that.
Speaker 2: It can't make hard turns like a plane can.  But you have to you know make him commit and then once he commits to you then you can avoid him by hard turns basically.
Story_ID: 33456
Speaker 1: Now you flew you said over 200 missions.
Speaker 2: 201, yeah.
Speaker 1: 201 missions and were you ever close to being shot down or--
Speaker 2: Only, only--
Speaker 1: --that hole in the, was that the closest?
Speaker 2: That's the closest.  All the rest were small arms you know.
Speaker 1: This is a bite out of the wing of your plane.
Speaker 2: A big bite.
Speaker 1: Big bite (unclear).
Speaker 2: You see how big it is compared to me standing beside it.
Speaker 1: Looked like a bite to a--yeah.  Looked like a bite out of a potato chip or something.
Speaker 2: That's a big bite, yeah.  Of course in the air when, I didn't even know these pictures were taken until I ran into this guy that--well he's passed away since he died from cancer, prostate cancer two years ago.  But anyhow he was talking about this mission.  I said man that was my mission.  I led that mission.  He said yeah I think you did because you know you fly so many over there.  And he was with another squadron and he was like a fill in on my flight and he took pictures, particularly when I pulled up on the tanker cause I didn't even know I was hit, pulled up on the tanker to refuel and the boom operator says, F4 that's in the pre-contact position, you have a hole in your right wing.  I said hole in my right wing.  My back seater, I can't see the wings' tips from the front seat but he could and he said I can see the left wing tip but I can't see the right.  And it, as you saw, it was gone and the hole was about this big.  Fortunately the 85 mm round was not fused correctly 'cause it just went right through, tore off (unclear).
Speaker 1: If it had been fused correctly it would have exploded right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, big time.  I was lucky.
Speaker 1: Now did any of your squad get actually shot down?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.  We had, in fact the first day I checked in as ops officer, I checked into the squadron, I was being escorted you know showing--I was being shown the ropes for where I was going to live and so forth and so on and I got to my quarters and this young lieutenant says, sir if you don't mind I've got a flight this afternoon.  I said, go ahead I'm a big boy.  I can take care of myself.  Like six years later he shows up, you know he's repatriated.  He got--we lost four airplanes on one flight.  And from what I gather they all went through one, the same hole.  There was a hole in like in the overcast and all the airplanes went through that same hole and every gun in North Vietnam was aimed at that hole obviously because all four of them you know for whatever reason got shot down, big, big loss on that day.
Speaker 1: So he had been a prisoner for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He, let's see, they were repatriated in I think '73 [1973] wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, in 1974, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he got shot down in '60 [1960], in '50 [1950], '60 [1960], '67 [1967].  No, I'm sorry, '65 [1965], '65 [1965], '66 [1966] '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: He had been--
Speaker 2: '67 [1967], it was '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he had been a prisoner for that's seven--
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 33457
Speaker 1: I've heard stories from the enlisted men down on the ground, but what were race relations like in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I really can't tell you.  I never had a racial problem in Vietnam.  Maybe it was because of my position because I basically, the only enlisted people I associated with were the clerks and my crew chief.  And of course those weren't even, those--I didn't have a black crew chief, they were all Caucasian and of course there was nothing to be discussed racially speaking so I never got involved with the core enlisted persons.  I would imagine just like any place else you're always going to find racism for the most part but I think you find it less in a combat environment than you would anywhere else.  There is no time for that sort of thing in combat, particularly in the infantry side of the house when you're depending on your buddy or that person next to you for survival, if that makes sense.
Speaker 1: Now I imagine, now you can correct me if I'm wrong that you probably didn't have as much contact with the civilians of Vietnam as enlisted men would have otherwise?
Speaker 2: No.  I had, I didn't have any contact except we did have maids that cleaned our barracks, our quarters and so forth but that was about it.  And we didn't have any relationship with them at all 'cause they were you know at that time old people.  You know we never had any other contact with the Vietnamese whatsoever, at least I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then--
Speaker 2: I would imagine in the places like Tan Son Nhut or near Saigon and places like that the GI would have contact with Vietnamese people of all sexes, you know male and female.  But I never went to a Vietnamese club.  I never was exposed to anything like that but I guess a lot of GIs were particularly in those areas.
Story_ID: 33458
Speaker 1: Now did you have a, was there a personal goal that you would fly so many missions [in the Vietnam War] and then go back home?
Speaker 2: Actually I got cut off.  The rule was every twenty north missions you flew, you get a month off your tour.  Well I got cut off basically at fifty-three so I had two months cut off my tour.  In three more missions I would have had three months cut off, north missions that is.  But even though I flew what they call counters, several counters, I never logged them as counters because my commander wanted me to stay and fight.  He wanted me to extend.  I told him I couldn't do that you know because of my family I left back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Were I still a bachelor I would have but--
Speaker 1: By this time you had children right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I had three stepsons and one of my own.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And two of my own, excuse me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so five children and a wife [Mattie Dwiggins].
Speaker 2: Five boys, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay five boys all together?
Speaker 2: Roger that, none fighter pilots.  Thought I'd get one out of the bunch but never happened.
Speaker 1: Now where were they living when you were in--?
Speaker 2: They were in Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: In Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Remember we met at Tuskegee and she had three little kids and then we had two of our own and then we moved to Tucson [Arizona] and they stayed in Tucson at Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base] while I was in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The powers to be allowed some of us who had families to just remain on base rather than try to relocate them while we were gone because the housing wasn't a problem there in Tucson.  That is they didn't have an excess need for housing, on-base housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you came back to the United States in sixty--I mean--
Speaker 2: '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 33459
Speaker 1: And well what did you--now you were--
Speaker 2: I was a major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh you're a major by this time.  And you were assigned to the 400 and--
Speaker 2: 4456.
Speaker 1: Okay, 4456.
Speaker 2: No, what do you have 57th down there?
Speaker 1: I've got 4453.
Speaker 2: That's the wing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And does this have a squadron down there?
Speaker 1: Now what does it mean when you say the wing?
Speaker 2: The wing's the overall headquarters for the, all the units on that particular base.  The 4453rd combat group training wing is the big, is the top echelon of that organization.  Then there are three squadrons or four squadrons under that.  Squadrons are smaller units.
Speaker 1: And here it says the 4457th --
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --technical training wing.
Speaker 2: That's where--squadron.
Speaker 1: Squad--yeah, tactical training squadron right.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's what I was assigned to.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And that was a weapons school.  And I commanded the weapons school until I left there to go to I guess it was Randolph Air Force Base was my next assignment.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Randolph Air Force Base in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Texas as a chief of the Flying Status Branch.
Speaker 2: Flying Status Branch, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Story_ID: 33460
Speaker 1: So during this period of time now Dr. [Martin Luther] King is killed in '68 [1968].  Do you remember where you were when you found out about Dr. King being assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there at Randolph [Air Force Base, Texas].  I was, '68 [1968] to '70 [1970]--no, '68 [1968].  No, I'm still at Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base, Tucson, Arizona].  I'd come back and I was at Davis-Monthan in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Well we kind of always ask people what they were doing then and if they remember what happened cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The last time I saw Dr. King was at a graduation at Tuskegee.  He was the principal speaker and this had to be I would think about '64 [164] or maybe '65 [1965].  And he saw me sitting in the audience and then after the ceremony was over he beckoned to me and said, you know we exchanged greetings and so forth.  And then he said I'm going to send my driver home because I, we, let's walk back to Dorothy Hall, and we did.  And we caught up on each other and so forth and ironically when I was the president--I'm getting ahead of the story.  The provost at Prairie View University [Texas] was a student at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and graduated that particular year and she told me when I was with her, she said you know the last time I saw you, you were walking across the campus with Dr. King.  I said you saw that?  He says, yeah.  I had to tell her the whole story of how we knew each other and that sort of thing.  But you know we were a close family, relationship with the Kings forever it seems.
Speaker 1: So what are your personal reflections of Dr. King?  Did you have any idea that he was going to make such an impact on the world?
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  I didn't know at the time but I knew what kind of character he was.  In fact, I think he rose to the occasion because ML as we called him was not an aggressive person.  He was very docile because there was never a test back during those days to put him in that kind of position.  But when he got to Montgomery [Alabama] and he was pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church and you know the relationship with Dexter Avenue Baptist Church and the capitol, it's right in the next block.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right in the, it's a half a block away.  Oops, half a block away.  And when this boycott deal came up, every step Dr. King took put him further into the limelight.  It's not something he asked for 'cause knowing him he wouldn't have asked for it.  It's interesting since you brought up Dr. King, I spent the summer of 1952 in Atlanta [Georgia] after I finished summer camp, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] summer camp down in Albany, Georgia.  I pronounced it correctly as they call it, not Albany [Al-bun-nee], Albany [Al-bane-nee].  And that summer after I finished I went to stay with my wife's [Mattie Dwiggins] cousin, my mother's [Emery Mae Moore] cousin, forgive me, in Atlanta on Hunter Street.  And she was married to Dr. Bethel and that is my wife's aunt, her father's sister.  And I immediately called ML and AD [Alfred Daniel Williams King], the two brothers and we sort of got along fabulously together.  You know we were both all bachelors and so forth and that Sunday I was at church and of course he introduced me.  I put my uniform on, introduced me and the introduction went sort of like my dad had held a revival there at Ebenezer [Baptist Church] earlier the previous year or later the previous year and of course that was my introduction.  And at that time Coretta was visiting, Coretta Scott was visiting.  They weren't married at the time.  And we had a huge, huge, a beautiful Sunday dinner there at the residence that afternoon.  And off and on we'd see each other during the month that I was there in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 33461
Speaker 1: Just flashback a minute to '65 [1965], the March from Selma to Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Selma, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was coming out of cadets at Tuskegee [Alabama] at the time and I knew that the march was pretty much on the minds of our students and I wanted to make certain that if any of our cadets were to get in trouble I'd be there on the spot to sort of alleviate a situation that were to occur.  Well I went over to visit a dear friend of mine, of ours and he owns a barber shop there called Malden Brothers.  He's a college graduate from Alabama State [University, Montgomery] and we spent the night with him and we went to the rally that they had at St. Jude's Church.  It had rained all day and I say that because the ground actually was soggy.  They had a trailer set up with a stage so to speak on it for all the dignitaries to come up and do whatever you know like Peter, Paul and Mary [Peter Yarrow, Paul Stookey and Mary Travers, United States folk-singing trio with a fifty-year history], Harry Belafonte [also a HistoryMaker; Harold George "Harry" Belafonte, Jr., American singer, songwriter, actor and social activist, named the "King of Calypso"], oh god, this is a shame.  What's the actor's name that became a rifle toting person?
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Charlton Heston [born John Charles Carter, American actor and political activist], he was there.  Back in those days he was a Democrat but you know that's neither here nor there.  But it was a well attended affair.
Speaker 1: It was Moses, that's--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's what I was trying to think of.  But what happened I don't know who it was on the stage at the time but all of a sudden the lights went out.  They had all these big Klieg lights shining on the platform there.  All of a sudden the place went pitch black and I think everybody hit the mud cause they didn't know what was going to happen, going on or what was happening.  Well what had happened, somebody had kicked the plug and unplugged, you know they had a generator out there and unplugged the generator and all the lights went out.  Every light out there went out.  Well it took about maybe three minutes to get the thing plugged back in and of course I don't know whether I went down on my knees or not but I was looking around cause we were right there close to the stage and it was a well attended and orderly affair.  The next morning we met at the clock actually and walked up Dexter Avenue.  That's where I got those, I took those pictures.  And I have some shaky shots because you know there was a lot--it was close, you know the crowd was pretty close and I was not near the stage whatsoever.  But George Wallace, I have a slide with him in the window cause he was there watching the activities from the window.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the governor of Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yes, governor of Alabama and it was all, it's all orderly you know and I have some, I guess some priceless shots.  I even show a picture of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Montgomery].  It was a little blurry but I named it so people would know that it was right there, yeah at that corner.  So we had an uneventful march from Selma to Montgomery and nobody got in trouble.  I don't think there were any arrests made for any reason, so it was a historical thing.
Story_ID: 33462
Speaker 1: Yeah and you were saying before we paused last time that Dr. [Martin Luther] King's personality really never had a chance to be tested until the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And then that--
Speaker 2: Well tested is not a good word.  You might want to say exposed to these kinds of things because you know before the bus boycott I would say "everything was normal in Montgomery," normal, not to change the antebellum aura of the area.  But once he got involved with the bus boycott it broke the back of actually Montgomery.  Then there were more things to do because the more he got involved the more he was tested.  The more he was tested--Birmingham [Alabama] in jail.  I think he was arrested about seven or eight times during his lifetime and all for naught.
Speaker 1: Albany, he said Albany [Al-bane-nee]--
Speaker 2: Albany, that's right.
Speaker 1: --which we call Albany [Al-bun-nee] but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --down there they call it Albany [Al-bane-nee].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Albany yeah.  Yeah, and--but he rose to the occasion and his personality didn't change at all.  I think what happened he grew and being a logical person he knew how to do--in fact when I stayed--did I tell you I stayed with him?  I was on my way to check out an 84F and I had to go to Grounds School which took place at Turner Air Force Base in Albany, Georgia, okay?  I was stationed at Bergstrom [Air Force Base, Austin, Texas] so I'm driving from here to Albany, Georgia.  Well my mother [Emery Mae Moore] told me said wait, you're going through--do you go through Montgomery?  I said yeah.  Said, you know ML's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Montgomery.  I didn't know it.  I said he is?  She said yeah he's at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church.  I said what's his address?  She gave me his address and I wrote it down.  So I get to Montgomery about seven o'clock in the evening and it's dark and I pulled into this Texaco station on the east side of Montgomery, just on the east side.  And of course back in those days they filled you up.  You didn't have to do your own gas.  So I asked this white attendant, I said do you know where Jackson Street is?  He said yeah it's right, you just passed it.  I said who--he said who are you looking for?  I said I'm looking for Reverend King.  Oh here's, right down, you go in here, take a U-turn and turn left and, and go to near the next corner and you'll see houses all lit up.  And I said, how does he know where Reverend King lives, you know that was my thought.  But anyhow i did what he said and sure enough I made that U-turn as I got toward the corner I see this house with all these spotlights you know lights on it.  So I turn around on that side of the street and park.  So I go up and ring the doorbell and this, there's a guy I didn't know that answered the doorbell.  I said my name is Timothy Boddie and I hear this voice.  Timothy, come on in here boy.  That's ML.  So I went in and I noticed the pistol on the table and what I didn't know, I said is everything okay?  He said, no the house was bombed last night.  I was there the night after the house was bombed.  You talking about one scared guy, I was, I mean I was uncomfortable seriously.  And Yolanda was a little baby.  That was the only one he had at the time.  And of course she's gone now as you know.  She passed away but anyhow we were--I stayed with him that night and the next day I got up and hit the road and went on into Albany, Georgia, Turner Air Force Base.  But that was not the last time.  I told you about the last time I was with him was at Tuskegee [Alabama] when he was the principal speaker for the graduation there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33463
Speaker 1: This is 1968 and you're--'68 [1968], '69 [1969] I guess.  And you're in Texas right, in Randolph [Air Force Base, Austin] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, no, no.  In sixty, in '68 [1968] let me think.
Speaker 1: This is Randolph--
Speaker 2: No, I was at Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base], I was in Tucson [Arizona].
Speaker 1: Okay, in Tucson, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I had been back maybe a year from Vietnam and we left there in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: I guess you're a major [in the U.S. Air Force] by then, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now when did you start going to the International College of the Armed Forces?
Speaker 2: ICAF, I did that by correspondence when I was down at Randolph, that was, that had to be in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know you finished in '72 [1972] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, started in '71 [1971] I'm sure.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: ICAF as they called it.
Speaker 1: And did you go directly then to Air War College [Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Air War College was Class of '75 [1975].  I went there in '74 [1974], graduated in '75 [1975], War College.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I'll just let you tell the progression of this.  I don't want to--
Speaker 2: No, that's good.
Speaker 1: --get in the way of the chronology cause I don't know what happened next.  So go--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But now we were, in '68 [1968] well I stayed in Tucson, ran the FORTU, Replacement Training Unit academic school.  And it was the ground school for--we had a group of navigators who taught the back seat because at that time we were putting navigators back in the back seat.  And then I ran the weapons school for the pilots, the guys who were in the front seat, aircraft commanders.  And we taught weapons and tactics and so forth and verbalized evasion tactics from Triple A, and that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did that until 1971.  That was when I was reassigned to Randolph Air Force Base in the flying status branch.  And I stayed there until 1975 or 4, sorry, 1974 when I went to War College.  But in the meantime I was appointed commander of the 40th Attack Fighter Squadron which was formed to receive the A7 aircraft.  In fact after establishing that organization I departed for Randolph shortly thereafter.
Story_ID: 33464
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in seventy--this is in the 70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to [Air] War College [Montgomery, Alabama] '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay, '74 [1974].  Okay now tell us what--for those of us who are not familiar with army education, what is actually the Air War College and--?
Speaker 2: Well let me just start it this way.  The Air War College is a senior college in Air University that trains you for all the things that you didn't know coming up.  That is to say it teaches you the Air Force, what it's all about, the various commands, the various organizations and it also explains to you personnel activities, personnel rules and regulations.  It also gives you tactics that you can use in your daily lives.  It also gives you an association with your contemporaries that will be lasting throughout the rest of your career and probably that's one of the major things that the War College does.  It gets you together with the former or future leaders of the Air Force as it turns out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it gets the leadership together so that people will actually know who they are, each other are--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as they--
Speaker 2: Progress from that point on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and are dispersed at all these different bases so--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know what's going on in Langley [Air Force Base, Hampton, Virginia], you know who's there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who's the right pad, who's at you know--
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's right.
Speaker 1: --bases around the country.  And you have a relationship with somebody you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --at those other places.  That makes sense.  So this is for the senior leadership in the Air Force--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and without this there would be a different, it wouldn't work as well, right?
Speaker 2: Well I'm sure it wouldn't because the friendships you meet there and the associations are indelible.  I mean they're life lasting.  Regardless of who progresses or who doesn't progress that is up to four stars or whatever you still know that War College student that was with you during that period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And can relate to him or her.
Speaker 1: Well on our outline we have one of the guys who was with you, that's Major General Thomas R. Olson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tom Olson.
Speaker 1: And who else was with you that you--?
Speaker 2: Oh my lord.
Speaker 1: Were there any other African Americans in the Air War College?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I can't remember their names I hate to say that.  I tell you what I can get my yearbook if you want to hold that point.
Speaker 1: No, we're not going to hold off--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we'll just keep going.  But about how many were involved?
Speaker 2: About four.
Speaker 1: About four of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did you--I mean so how did you find the Air War College?  Was it you know--?
Speaker 2: Oh I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not an academician per se, but from what was taught and what we learned and it gave me an opportunity to pick up a masters degree from Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama] at the same time.  So I was doing double duty there.
Speaker 1: So you got a masters from Harvard at the--
Speaker 2: No, Auburn.
Speaker 1: Auburn U, okay, Auburn University okay.  And the masters was--
Speaker 2: War Eagle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the Masters in?
Speaker 2: Public Administration.
Speaker 1: Public Administration, okay.  So now, so the program is for two years or--?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: One year, okay.
Story_ID: 33465
Speaker 1: All right, so in 1976 from what I have here you were assigned deputy commander of operations for the 347th Tactical Fighter Wing?
Speaker 2: Well you missed a spot.  I was also, back in 19--when I left [Air] War College [Montgomery, Alabama] I went to Langley Air Force Base [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: So this is in '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '75 [1975] to '76 [1976] I was the Director of the Maintenance Standardization and Evaluation team for Tactical Air Command.  I was commander of a 43-person team that did the maintenance management effectiveness of all units and tactical air command. And of course listening to my wife [Mattie Dwiggins] I was there for 53 weeks and I was TDY [Temporary Duty Yonder] for 49 of those weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't stay home much.  But it was you know it was one year of road trips needless to say and I left Tac [Tactical] and went down to Moody [Air Force Base, Valdosta, Georgia], that's the next one you saw.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Moody is when you were with the 347th Tactical--
Speaker 2: 347 Tac [Tactical] Fighting Wing, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Moody Air Force Base in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Valdosta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, Valdosta, okay.  So you were--any experiences there you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well it was a fast moving thing because we were in a training environment, a heavy training environment and of course the facility was an old facility.  It was a World War II facility.  And between constructing new buildings and tearing down old buildings it was a busy base, very busy base during that period.  And then we had an operational readiness inspection that we were preparing for because we had so many days to get prepared you know for combat and so we were working hard in operations, we were working hard in maintenance and then we were working hard on the facility to get the taxiways and runways and parking facilities capable of holding the weight of an F4 because they never had an airplane that heavy on that station.  So we had to completely redo all of our ramps and the runways, the whole bit.  So it was a, just a busy place and it was good to be there because you never had a moment's rest to say the least.  And we were there for about two years and I moved from the DO position, director of operations position up to vice wing commander and that's when I was reassigned to go to Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33466
Speaker 1: Now this is in '78 [1978] when you go to Korea, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you go to Osan Air Force Base [South Korea]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you're vice commander of the 51st Composite Wing?
Speaker 2: Yes and then moved up to the commander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now it says here that you carried out more than 153 missions as a phantom fighter bomber pilot and this isn't true is it or is it?
Speaker 2: 153 missions?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that what it says?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Good lord, I flew more than that.
Speaker 1: Did you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I flew an effort two years in F4s.  I also, maybe it was 153 missions in, does it say anything about the OV10?
Speaker 1: Over north and south Vietnam between '78 [1978] and '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Oh you're at the wrong, you're in the wrong area.
Speaker 1: Oh is it?  Okay, this is the wrong--
Speaker 2: Oh, she got that out of 'Time Magazine'.
Speaker 1: Ah, so we'll put a line through--
Speaker 2: That was 153--no, I got 201 missions in Vietnam.  See, when the Time Magazine article came out, did she quote Time in there?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  It's, yeah I think there's something in here but it's not--
Speaker 2: The reason that 153 showed up was because that's when the Time Magazine you know Ralph Ellison and company came over and I had 153 missions that, at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in terms of North Korea then--
Speaker 2: I had 53 north missions out of a total of 201 missions.
Speaker 1: So you actually flew over North Korea 53 times?
Speaker 2: 53 times.  Actually more than that, but that's all I could take credit for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were the dangers of doing that?  Now North Korea seems like a pretty feisty nation some times they seem, you know--so what is the, you know I know there's a demilitarized zone between the U.S. and North Korea.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, but in the air what's going on?  Are you likely to get into a fight with North Korean fighters or did you all just ignore each other or how--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  It depends on where you were.  Fighters wouldn't leave the Vietnam airport area.  You know they wouldn't go further south but they would come up and try to attack you if you went north and we're in their area.  You know they would come up and get you, try to get you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But you know you go smoking through there and keep you, as we call it, keep your smash up, they can't touch you.
Speaker 1: Do they just not--don't have the capacity to do it, is that it?  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Well sort of you know.  They have the capacity but their doctrine is different than ours.  They're totally reliant--they, at the time they totally relied on ground control and if the ground control gets jammed then you might as well go back and land.  We've had some people like General Richie who shot--he was an ace over there.  He shot down five aircraft.  And of course you have to not expose yourself needlessly.  You don't want to dog fight an F4 with a MiG, you just don't want to do that because your tactics are speed and closure rate.  And you don't want to do anything outside of your capabilities cause if you do it's going to be to their advantage you know.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you, for instance as you were saying before in Vietnam if you're flying at a lower altitude in a situation where you've got to outmaneuver the MiG, you're probably in trouble?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's best to be high, you can fly over there high and fast and you can do things up there that they can't do?
Speaker 2: Well the point is you have better maneuverability high and fast than they do high and fast.  But you get down low density in the lower altitudes, they can turn sharper, they can do all kinds of things unless you keep your speed up you see, that's the trade off.  You don't want to get in a dog fight with a mig at low altitude.  There are several people that would attest to that because they got into a mix mess, mash with some migs at low altitude and came out the loser.  But all in all as far as ratios are concerned, we did as we did in Korea, we did have a better relation--ratio of kills than they did.
Speaker 1: Now was there a regular conflict across from, I mean from north and--?
Speaker 2: You never knew what you were going to expect to see when you went up north.  You know you just didn't know.  One day it would be clear.  As a matter of fact, a buddy of mine we had the same target, the same mission.  Mine was in the morning, his was in the afternoon.  He got shot down and of course we passed each other in route.  I was going home and he was going up and just as a casual comment he said, how's the weather?  I said the weather is good.  The weather meant Triple A because I never saw anything or any flack or anything when I went up there.  But obviously he got shot down, same target.  I don't want to say I woke up the gunners but they were awake when he got up there in the afternoon.
Story_ID: 33467
Speaker 1: So you were in North Korea until--
Speaker 2: I was in Vietnam.  Oh Korea?
Speaker 1: Yeah, North Korea?
Speaker 2: No, I was not in North Korea, I was in South Korea.
Speaker 1: South Korea, right, right.
Speaker 2: Republic of Korea.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, South Korea flying over North Korea sometimes.
Speaker 2: No, no, no that's during the war.  See, I never flew over North Korea, I flew over North Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't mix them up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right North Vietnam, all right, all right, all right.  Yeah, cause I've got a part in here about Korea in '78 [1978] so I'm thinking that you're flying over North Korea and that's what I thought we were just talking about.
Speaker 2: I went to Korea in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Became the commander in '79 [1979] of the 51st Tac [Tactical] Fighter Wing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you didn't--did you do any flying?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's what I was--
Speaker 2: I flew F4s and OV10s there at, at Cam Rahn Bay, not Cam Rahn Bay, at--in Korea.
Speaker 1: Osan--
Speaker 2: Osan Air Base.  I've been so many places they run together.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So when you were at Osan you didn't fly over North Korea at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought that was kind of incredible but I didn't you know, I was listening.
Speaker 2: You know and that was a violation to do that 'cause they had their own air space and we had rules of engagement that we couldn't go there.  There were other people that did, you know recognizance folks that did as far as I know.  And, but we never would even attempt to go up north in Viet--in Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah okay.  So now you were in North Korea, I mean in South Korea until 1980?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1980.
Story_ID: 33468
Speaker 1: All right and you came back to serve as deputy director of operations for the J3--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --National Military Command Center?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's in--that's an organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: That's correct, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that same year you were promoted to brigadier general--
Speaker 2: I was promoted before I left Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what is, tell us what a brigadier general is in terms of rank and--?
Speaker 2: Well let's see it this way.  As far as rank is concerned there are four levels of general officer.  One star, two star, three star, four star.  And then on total conflict you have five star generals that are theater commanders.  We don't have any of those anymore.  But the first brig--to make brigadier is like predicting where lightening is going to strike because basically you have anywhere from 6,000 to 7,000 people eligible to make brigadier.  And we're talking about 50 people, 55 that make it on any given list in any year and that's it.  And then if you stay, usually do a good job you can progress up to the third star which is consistent with the types of jobs that you receive during that period of time.  Of course I retired as a brigadier, I was on my way to Europe as a director of operations which basically is a two star billing.  But I left because, I retired because of my wife's [Mattie Dwiggins] illness and so I retired in '83 [1983], first of July 1983 and missed it quite a bit needless to say.  And next July, July the 1st, 19--2013 rather, I would have been retired thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you--when a brigadier general retires and somebody's been in the service as long--now you would have been in the service for twenty-five--
Speaker 2: Over twenty-eight years, over--yeah.
Speaker 1: Over twenty-eight, yeah.  So you retired with full benefits and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I would think so I was just asking for clarification, but yeah which are pretty good.
Story_ID: 33469
Speaker 1: So in '83 [1983] though you took a job as Director of Air Force--
Speaker 2: Requirements.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Requirements--
Speaker 2: For Link Flight Simulation Division of the Singer Company.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what does that mean?  You basically advise them on what the Air Force requirements are?
Speaker 2: No, exactly.  What I would do, I would go to you know the Air Force requirements people and find out what they were looking for or what they needed as far as flight simulations was concerned and then I have my company to develop a model if you will of what they needed and required and whether it be an F16 simulator, a C130 simulator, a B52 simulator.  And of course Link was the first company that ever made simulators.  Of course based on the way the [U.S.] Air Force has gone in the last twenty years, simulators have taken a big bite out of the budget because it's cheaper to fly a simulator than it is to fly an airplane and it's safer too.  Plus, those simulators are, you think it's the real thing.  They're so realistic that you actually get sweaty palms when something goes wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33470
Speaker 1: So we were talking about advising the Link Flight Simulation Division of Singer you know, in terms of building flight simulators.
Speaker 2: Well what I would do, my mission probably--I couldn't sell anything 'cause I'm not a marketer per se.  But my contacts were with just about everybody at the senior level in requirements and I could find out, legally find out exactly what their requirements were.  In other words, what simulators they wanted online, you know to come online and so forth and what requirements, you know what model did they need, what phase did they need?  Did they need a flight simulator that was fully rotational or did they need a static one where you could just do emergency procedures, you know those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did that for a couple of years and in fact five years, in fact retired from Link.  They had a, I don't want to say a hostile takeover but the Singer company had a takeover by a guy by the name of Bilzerian [Paul A. Bilzerian].  I can't think of his first name.  And the company and parts of it were sold off and it finally wound up as a [Howard] Hughes company and I'm not sure whether it's back as a single entity now or not.  But Link was well known back in the day because Ed Link who founded the company was the first guy that ever built a simulator in the world, a flight simulator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33471
Speaker 1: So when you left them [Link Flight Simulation Division of Singer Company] in '88 [1988], you were Vice President--
Speaker 2: Of Genesys.
Speaker 1: --of Operations and Business Development for Operational Technologies--
Speaker 2: yeah.
Speaker 1: --Services [Inc., Vienna, Virginia] first, right?
Speaker 2: Well what I did, I had formed my own company, Genesys Industries, G-E-N-E-S-Y-S Industries to provide aviation expertise, logistics, management and operational management for any company that desired those kinds of areas.  Well it just so happened that Operational Technologies brought me on as an advisor to the company and then things went pretty well and the next thing I knew, I was hired you know full time for the company.  And I did that from '88 [1988] until--I went to Link, I mean went to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 33472
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did that until '91 [1991] and became the Director of Aviation for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] running the Aircraft Management Office there at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and I did that for about five years.  And of course at the time, I'll give you a little background on that job.  We had 165 aircraft principally spread throughout the various centers that we had aircraft.  The majority of those aircraft were at Edwards Air Force Base [California] or Dryden Flight Research Center which is a part of Edwards Air Force Base.  And the administrator indicated that he wanted to lighten that load because these aircraft were all in flyable condition and not being used for research and development as such.  So my job was to pair down that group of aircraft that were really not attuned to or assigned to any project and that's what I did and that's one part of my operation.  The other part, I had a big part in safety of aircraft operations.  We had ten centers that had aircraft and of course I was the guy at the headquarters that the administrator would ask or put his finger in my belly button and ask about aircraft and so forth and so on and naturally I was the guy that, the expert that would give him all the information that he needed.
Speaker 2: So NASA has its own aircraft is (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so you basically managed the fleet of aircraft (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Exactly, even though at--every individual center that had aircraft, you had aircraft operators you know, an operations section, a maintenance section and I would meet with these directors of operations every quarter and we would exchange good ideas that you know we had, that some of the centers were using for safety purposes and make sure that we were all stepping out on the same foot as far as safety and flight was concerned.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And also I was the senior aviator at the time in the federal government and I was chartered by [U.S.] Congress to direct all the activities of all federal aircraft, all the agencies that flew federal aircraft to include research and development, interdiction aircraft and that was done from a safety standpoint.  It was called the Interagency Committee for Aviation Policy and I was the director of that organization at the same time I was with NASA.
Speaker 2: Well what are some of the agencies, the federal agencies that use aircraft (unclear)?
Speaker 1: FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], [U.S.] Customs--
Speaker 2: I guess the post office do they use aircraft?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they have aircraft, the postal service does.  Did I say border patrol?
Speaker 2: No, border patrol.
Speaker 1: In fact, I've just touched the surface there.  Commerce has airplanes you know and--
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: --FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] has aircraft.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: I was just trying to think of all the people that belong to that organization.  There are a bunch, I mean I had a meeting and there were a couple hundred people there.  Well, I had a meeting--I'd have several meetings a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would guess Department of Agriculture (unclear) and--
Speaker 1: Oh everybody, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and U.S. Forestry Service and--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's starting to add up now to make sense.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I, you know we--I guess in my mind I would think that if the, say the Forestry Service needed some air support they'd call the [U.S.] Air Force or something, I mean I don't know.  But it doesn't happen that way.  They have their own.
Speaker 1: Well you see for example all those people, all those aircraft that put out forest fires they are contractors but they're contracted through the Forest Service.  And they have to be certified and so forth and so on, the whole deal.  And each one of those organizations have to make sure that these guys are safe.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you would make sure that they apply, that they conform to the safety standards that the government has established for this?
Speaker 1: Exactly, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay, that make--okay now it's starting to, you know so--
Speaker 1: See, I was a big-wig back in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm telling you.  You know when you think about it, there are a lot of, you know I can--they still keep popping up in my head, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: These agencies that could probably use aircraft.
Speaker 1: And some you wouldn't even think about had aircraft.  It may be onesies and twosies but you know they still had aircraft.
Story_ID: 33473
Speaker 1: Okay, that must have been quite a job, a lot to keep up with.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  That was an extra duty if you want to put it in that category but we had a going operation.
Speaker 1: How big a staff did you have to supervise?
Speaker 2: There were let's see, five, six, seven, eight, there were eight people in the, in that office at the OPM, Office of Personnel Management.  Is it Personnel Management?  Yeah it think that's what they were.  No, it's not the Personnel Management.  That was in--
Speaker 1: Is it Aircraft Management Office?
Speaker 2: That was my office.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's your office.
Speaker 2: But yeah, they were located in the Department of--OPM, that's where they were, but they were separate and aside.  You know they weren't in the personnel business.  And of course that organization was charted by Congress that that's who I reported to.  I had to give a report on an annual basis to Congress.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did that until 1997, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 33474
Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't know when you started Genesys but this is your company right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Genesys Industries and--
Speaker 2: Well it actually started back between, just before I went to work for OTS [Operational Technologies Services, Inc., Vienna, Virginia].
Speaker 1: So you started around '91 [1991] then, is that it?
Speaker 2: No, I went to work for OTS in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Oh, '88 [1988] okay.
Speaker 2: Remember?
Speaker 1: Oh okay, oh all right.  You're right, OTS, yeah right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was when I formed Genesys Group because I was doing some private consulting at that point and I had a couple of companies that I consulted with.  I didn't even include those in the grouping because those were just quick shots so to speak.  But when I went to OTS, I considered that a quick one too but as it turned out it was like a long time relationship because I went on board with them as a full time employee, Director of Operations.  We did all of the FAA [Federal Aviation Agency] computers, you know gutted them and put in new cards and so forth, motherboards, the whole bit.  And of course I had started building computers back when I was, when I came back from Viet--came back from Korea.  Our organization tested the first Burrows 3600 that was ever used for the military you know before there were punch cards.  Now we had a real computer.  I used to--right next door to my building.  And I used to go over there and be mesmerized by that computer which is now archaic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the days of the punch cards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, seems like a long time ago now, big--machine is as big as a couple of refrigerators.
Speaker 2: Right, but just think every year is a different generation, sometimes twice a year.
Speaker 1: That's true.  So Genesys, now you had a lot to do with Genesys from '97 [1997] through the new millennium right?
Speaker 2: Well yeah and I finally gave up when we moved here [Plano, Texas].  We moved here in 2000 and the reason I gave up you know I didn't have a base to work from if you will.  That is to say, in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] you have all kinds of avenues, consulting avenues and being I was aviation specific more or less, I didn't see a market here for anything like that.  Plus, I was involved in a few other things.  I was on the Board of Directors for the Military Officers Association.  In fact, I was the Vice Chairman of the board before I left the board.  And I was on the board from 2000 to 2006 and this is an organization that has 370,000 members, all officers from all of the seven uniformed services.  And that was a six-year tour for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you start in 2000?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with--on the board, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's until 2006.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33475
Speaker 1: Okay, now you didn't tell us why you moved to Texas in the first place from Maryland.  You had this thriving consultancy going and--
Speaker 2: How about grandkids?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll make it easy.  Yeah, we [Boddie and his wife, Mattie Dwiggins] had three grandchildren all born here in Texas and we were coming down here every three or four months just to see the grandkids, granddaughter first and then of course those are some baby pictures over there of her, and right here behind me. But anyhow, we would come here every three, four months continually and finally one day we came down here.  My wife got sick, took her down to Dallas Medical Center and they treated her and she had pneumonia and bronchitis at the same time.  But anyhow they treated her within an hour and a half and diagnosed her, treated her, prescribed her, for her and that was her major concern because she had every doctor in the palm of her hand back there in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] at Andrews Air Force Base, at Malcolm Grove Medical Center and at Walter Reed and also at Bethesda [Maryland].  And she just had some of the best medical care in the world.  And she felt attached to that because she didn't want to leave that Washington, D.C. area until she came here and was treated down in Plano Medical Center.  And on our way back to Baltimore [Maryland], I mean to Baltimore--back to Washington, she said to me, Dad, let's move.  This was just before we hit the Arkansas border.  So we moved in 2000 and 'cause that was just before we had that bad snow there in D.C., you know like four feet of snow cause you saw that picture, that's why I left Texas.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean Maryland to go to Texas, come to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33476
Speaker 1: So now tell us about this, in 2006 you served as interim president of Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Texas Southern University yes, in Houston.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what happened?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well the Board of Regents removed the president who was there and since it's a state school, Governor [Rick] Perry was looking for somebody that could fill that job to put the school back in some modicum of shape.  There were financial difficulties, there were leadership difficulties and it just so happened I was recommended by one of my sons.  I call him my sons because I've mentored quite a number of people in my lifetime.  And he basically threw my hat in the barrel.  And the next thing I knew, I was being interviewed by not only his chief counsel, that is Governor Perry's Chief Counsel but also the Deputy for Appointments.  And they came here to the house and interviewed me and the wife [Mattie Dwiggins] and the next thing I knew I was coming--I was at a board meeting in Washington [District of Columbia] and I got a call from the Chairman of the Board wanting me to come down for an interview with the Board of Regents, not a published meeting but individual board members.  And so I had to leave that meeting up in Washington, fly down to Houston for a whole day's worth of consultation and flew back.  And then about two weeks later I got a call for me to come down and be sworn in.  I couldn't come down that Monday but I went down the next Tuesday and was sworn in as the interim president.  And it was only supposed to be for four months but evidently things were working for the betterment of the school and I wound up staying almost a year and a half.  So I left there, I got there in 2006 and left in 2008.
Speaker 1: And now was--how was being a college president different from a command, being a commander in the military?
Speaker 2: Not a bit.  Not a bit different.  You have the same--as a matter of fact they're so similar you can see the same situations all over again.  You have personnel problems, you have financial problems, you have leadership problems.  You have all, the same problems you have in any military organization if you're a leader that you will find on a college campus.  In fact, many of the schools now you don't have to have a Ph.D. [doctorate degree] to be a college president.  You have to have management and leadership skills and that's what it basically amounts to.  I had a master's degree and that was about it.  I'd done some further studies there at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as you saw on my resume but no Ph.D.  And of course that was my first hurdle because they'd always had a Ph.D. type running Texas Southern University.  Well it really wasn't a hurdle because I ignored it.  My purpose was to do the job to get that school on its feet and to get them the resources that is the money that they needed and they never asked for.  And of course I meet with the Senate finance committee members and the House appropriations committee members, individually and in camera to get together.  And eventually they gave us, I didn't know it at the time but according to Reverend Lawson at Founders Day, I--we received more money than the school had ever received in the history of Texas Southern University from that particular congressional group.  And it was because of, it was hard work to convince them and show them where the monies would go if we got it.  We had buildings that were so far behind in maintenance that it was criminal.  We had to close our theater, our huge theater or I should say the indoor where, building where we graduate people indoor, we had to close it because all the heating and heat, HVAC systems went out and didn't have the money at the time to repair it.  No spare cash, no spare anything.  To me, that was a lack of leadership and foresight.  So I was able you know to get some of that money.  In fact, got all of it really.
Speaker 1: Now we were on the campus this summer.  I know there's two new science buildings going up and there's some more you know breaking ground.  And did you have anything to do with that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, those were approved under my watch, the science building, chemistry building.  There was, and there's a physics building and--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's under construction now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and in addition to the law building.
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause we interviewed--he had a physics department out in the trailer but they were building a new physics building, you know--
Speaker 2: Umm, good to know.
Speaker 1: --this summer so--
Speaker 2: You see, those take quite a lot of planning to do and appropriations to have it you know happen.  And many of the buildings, I don't say all of them but many of the buildings came under my watch, that is the approval process started under my watch.  So you know I'm glad to hear.  In fact, Dr. Rudley who is the president there now is doing a super job.  He's keeping things going in the right direction really.  I'm happy to have been there and made my contributions when I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33477
Speaker 1: Now politically does it help to be a Republican in Texas today in terms of raising money?
Speaker 2: I would say yes.  Right now the Republicans have the money right now.  But there's a big push I noticed in the paper last coupled of days for the democrats to re--for a resurgence of the Democrats.  And of course I think the last time they were basically in control was when oh, I can't think of the lady's name but she defeated [President] George Bush for the governorship that is--
Speaker 1: Oh, Richards, Ann Richards.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ann Richards, Richardson yeah.  And of course that was back in the days of Lyndon Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson, "LBJ", 36th President of the United States] when the Democrats really had a dynasty here.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Johnson and Connally and--
Speaker 2: Yep, you got it.  But since I've been here, Republicans have been in control.  That's eleven years, going on twelve.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not only just local but national leadership.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.  This is a real red state as far as you know the colors are concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm not in the political arena whatsoever.  I gave up on that when my wife [Mattie Dwiggins] said she'd divorce me.  This was back in Maryland, yeah.
Story_ID: 33478
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to, you and your wife [Mattie Dwiggins] had a chance to travel before she passed, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, we would, we don't, we--I don't want to say we traveled all the time but we did our share.  There was--we had no attachments particularly after I left Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] you know to hang around so we decided to go to one of my fighter pilot reunions.  We'd just pack up and go wherever they happened to be.  And I have a couple of units, the 12th Tac [Tactical] Fighter Wing Reunion that happens ever two years.  I have the, what they call the River Rat Reunion which happens every year.  I have the F86 Reunion and the F100 Reunion.  So I've got a bunch of reunions I--I haven't been to any since Mattie passed but I'm going to get out of that, do a slow roll and get out of that quagmire and start going to some of the reunions.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You really have a good time seeing the old folks, now that we're old folks, you know.  Once upon a time, ten years ago, we were still young, but we're losing so many of our compatriots because of age and Agent Orange and a few other things that we've picked up over there in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: So have you been fortunate enough not to have any of those--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I've had a battle with prostate cancer.  And right now I'm in remission thank goodness.  And in fact my wife and I had cancer at the same time, seeing the same doctor, same radiologist and, but hers was far advanced and had spread, metastasized and took her out last December, a year ago, December the 23rd.  But mine was discovered by the VA and I finally had it diagnosed and set up here at Baylor Regional Hospital.  Not to say the VA couldn't do the job right but I wanted to make certain I had the best experts around.  I didn't think I needed to go to a resident situation you know and as it turned out I did the proper thing because I was radiated and not given any chemotherapy or anything like that.  But so far everything is normal.  In fact I just had an exam last, about ten days ago and so far everything is good.  Hope it stays that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33479
Speaker 1: I noticed you had a lot of Tuskegee Airmen memorabilia around the house.  Are you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --part of the group that meets (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I'm a part of the group, but I'm not an original World War II Tuskegee.  I joined the Tuskegee Airmen Organization when I was down at Tuskegee [Alabama] as the Commandant of Cadets and I've been to several national conventions.  In fact, I've even--some--there was a group to put me in to run for president of the organization.  This was back in 19--, let me get it right now, around '71 [1971] or thereabouts.  But it didn't happen but that was all right too.  I didn't need anything else to do at that point in time of my life.  But it's a good organization.  And of course as you can imagine, those folks are going out fast.  I guess they're less than 500 remaining out of the group and they're all in their late eighties and early nineties.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Or middle nineties I should say.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Story_ID: 33480
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: We got, we have several problems and I don't know how they can be resolved any time soon.  We have a systemic cultural problem and that's--what I'm trying to say there is we have allowed our young men and women to dictate whether or not they finish school, that is high school.  I'm not talking about college I'm talking about the basic high school diploma.  And if you don't finish that, forget it.  You will work in a subservient job if you work for the rest of your life.  And of course it's common knowledge to some of us that the difference between a high school graduate and a college graduate is like a half a million dollars a lifetime in earnings.  And of course that makes the difference as to whether you live in the ghetto or whether you have a separate house somewhere in the burbs.  That's the difference it makes.  Now culturally speaking, I don't know how long it's going to take for the young black people that are coming along today to make it, to make it out of the ghetto.  That's the biggest problem we have today is there's no--there is an environment, an environment of non-achievement.  And of course if you don't have a job, you're not going to achieve a thing in this day and age.  And if you don't have an education that even compounds it.  And people have lost--in fact when I was growing up you had to go to school.  People and parents and so forth didn't force you to go to school, you knew you had to go to school.  At least get that high school degree.  And some of us like me I knew I had to go to college because mom and dad both were college graduates.  And it was no question about whether I was going to school it was just where and when, where and when.  But see, those kind of attitudes don't exist in the black communities now-a-days.  Hell, I'm afraid to walk in the black community now because of crime and so forth and so on.  And I grew up in a black community.  But now-a-days like I said earlier when I started this particular conversation, I don't know how it's going to turn around or we'll have to wait for two generations to die, and I'm talking about kids in their twenties, thirties and forties.  I mean that's three generations right there almost and that's going to take a long time because now let me say it on the other hand, what is not really recognized is the contributions black people have made and the strives they have made since the Civil Rights Act has been passed.  You look at the number of company presidents.  You look at the number of government agents, agencies that have senior executive service people in them, it's astounding but that's not publicized.  Nobody talks about that, not even the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  They don't talk about the achievements that black people have made.  You do.  You have it, you have a database but see you have the database.  And NPR [National Public Radio], nobody else would even publish stuff like that and that's, that is the other problem.  You asked the question, I could talk about this all day.  But that's about all I need to say on that subject because it's really beyond me to say how it can be fixed.  But I know I had to do a little fixing down at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], had to straighten the attitudes out down there.  I had to get rid of a few people too.  But those things are necessary.  Just like when I was a wing commander I had to get rid of a few people I mean cause you know when you lie, cheat and steal, to me you don't belong in an academic environment like Texas Southern University.
Story_ID: 33481
Speaker 1: Okay, well what are some of your thoughts today about the prospects of African Americans in the military?  You think we made progress or are we still making progress or are we losing ground or gaining ground?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you what I think we're doing quite well from the standpoint of your enlisted services, servicemen and women are concerned and--because they seem to be motivated, they're well educated and they're fit to the task at hand.  And of course they're coming into the service in a different generation where the prejudices don't exist per se like they did in the 40s [1940s] and 50s [1950s] or earlier than even that.  But this, you know think about it was 1946 I guess, '47 [1947] when President [Harry S.] Truman integrated the service.  That was many, many years ago.  And of course with our educational backgrounds now I do think that a young airman or a soldier or a marine or a seaman they have an excellent opportunity to make a career in the military.  I also think that the officer corps is--has strained a little bit because we don't have as many African American officers as we used to have, ratio speaking.  And we need to take a look at what's causing that.  I think it may be an attitude that's being brought in by the parents and relatives and so forth and so on that don't want their sons to go into the military even as officers.  And of course I take exception to that myself personally and I think that we need to be in every walk of life, not only medicine but teaching and so forth and so on and the military as well.  And with a degree and a commission, the sky's the limit now-a-days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33482
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you wish you could go back and change if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I mean I'm so happy with what I did in life.  I did for one point in time I said I need to get out of here and go to med [medical] school and that was when I got my Korean assignment.  And let me tell you I'm glad I didn't because that was the best assignment I ever had.  There's nothing like being your own boss and commander of 6,000 troops, everyone of whom was trying to get you fired everyday.  So yeah we had a big group over there in Korea.  I had like twenty-some odd tenant units along with the wing so a total about 6,000 people and I say that jokingly 6,000 people were trying to get me fired.  But that's not true but it was just a joke more or less.  But we had our times and I took care of them properly and so far so good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33483
Speaker 1: Now once again if you look back at everything you've done till this point, what today would you consider to be your major accomplishments or your legacy?
Speaker 2: Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  Of course I'd have to say the [U.S.] Air Force being No. 14.  I was the 14th general made, African American general made in the Air Force, promoted in the Air Force but even on top of that I think I did a great job as the wing commander.  I did a great job down at Texas Southern and that's the most recent and the most area in my mind that I think I did a good job and most memorable to me because I mean, thrust into a new environment and--but it wasn't new.  I'd been there before you know in a different capacity.  The wing commander, the same things happen and it's just a matter of history repeating itself but groomed in another cloak if you will, cloak of academia versus the cloak of the military.  But the same things are prevalent, the same management and leadership skills are required, the same should I say way of doing business is required.  Your personality doesn't change so keep it like it is because you know you can accomplish this obstacle and you have enough vision to say okay this is what I need to do to fix this problem.  It basically boiled down to, it boiled down to money.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your allies at Texas Southern in terms of you know I guess implementing the plan that you laid out for the school?
Speaker 2: Well I had Dr.--Jesus, it's terrible.  Oh my lord, I'll think about it in a minute but my executive assistant or my vice president was probably my strongest supporter.  She was my executive vice president and this is terrible.  I'm trying to think of her name but anyhow she was very supportive.  As a matter of fact as I, the longer I stayed there I received more support from people, they finally realized what I was doing.  It took a while and finally when they had a search team looking for the president I actually had people come to say why didn't you apply?  I said no, I didn't want to apply because I just didn't want to stay here that long.  Well I regret not having applied because I'm sure I would have had a group of people who would have wanted me to stay.  But I was getting up in age and trying to keep this house together and driving back and forth--every time we came home something was broke, sewer line or you know name it, crack in the pool, just stuff you know just by not being here I suppose.  They said you have to come back in a hurry.  I say that facetiously but we did enjoy our tour down there at Texas Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33484
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family.  We haven't talked about the children you know the--
Speaker 2: Okay, five sons, Horace, Roy, Bill, Tim and Benji.  I'll talk about Benji first.  He was born in 1964, he was a--Down Syndrome, severe.  And he's been in a group home since he was six years old in Arizona as a matter of fact.  He's in Phoenix [Arizona].  Now the oldest son is retired, he is sixty-three [years old], the next son is sixty-two, that's Roy, and Roy is working for a--he spent twenty-three years with AT&T and retired from AT&T and then went to work for a trucking company there in Atlanta [Georgia].  Bill, he'll turn sixty this year as a matter of fact in March, March the 1st.  He spent thirty-two years in the Marine Corps and retired as a full colonel.  He enlisted, we call him a mustang.  He enlisted, I thought he was out of his mind.  He finished Wichita State [University, Wichita, Kansas] and his Military ID card expired.  If you're out of college that's it, you're no longer a military dependent.  Well the next thing I knew, he called me and said he enlisted in the Marine Corps.  I thought he, I just chewed him out.  I said are you crazy?  Then his recruiter called me, I chewed him out too.  Anyhow, after being enlisted for two years his commander sent him to Quantico to officer candidate school so he finished that and spent thirty years on active duty as an officer.  And as I said December a year ago he retired as a full colonel and he's living here now.  He's in Dallas [Texas] and beautiful home over here in North Dallas right off of Campbell Road and Frankfort.  That's three.  Tim, our--my namesake, he passed away.  He had a prescription conflict.  He was bipolar and he had diabetes and they changed his medicine down here at Parkland to Abilify, some medicine.  I don't know whether it was Abilify or not.  But he went down there, spent the night Thursday and Friday and as I said they changed his medicine.  He came home Saturday and died.  And it took the medical examiner forever to figure out you know what caused his death and they finally found that he had that conflict but nobody knew it.  But now if you see advertisements for those mood changing drugs, they'll tell you that they can cause brain damage or death if not taken in the right quantity or whatever.  So we lost him in 2005 and that's the whole family of guys right now.  Mattie's [Boddie's wife, Mattie Dwiggins] sister passed away like three years ago and she, almost identical.  She had cancer also and Mattie, my wife, by the time they discovered her condition it was just too late 'cause it had metastasized into her bone system and it was just, she was in such excruciating pain that it was--God took her at the right time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well--
Story_ID: 33485
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I would like to be remembered for the conscientious work I have done over my lifetime for the good of everybody.  I have, as a matter of fact I was just talking to one of my sons, not blood sons but one of my sons in the military, former military.  And he said Pops, you don't know how many--he calls me Pops.  You don't know how many people you've helped in your lifetime.  And I said well I guess that's a part of me.  That's a part of my legacy, helping people and I've done it ever since I've been in the service.  When I left college I was doing it you know in the service.  And of course from then on I was doing the same thing.  Everything I did it was helping people.  In many instances I was helping myself when I was you know helping the company like Link get the right requirements accomplished, when I was helping OTS [Operational Technologies Services Inc. Vienna, Virginia] get the right avenue to approach their sales and so forth and you know everybody profited.  And I can't tell you how many millions of dollars this guy, this friend of mine--he called me on the--that's who was on the phone a while ago, called me, sold his company for like a bunch of million dollars.  I don't even want to get into that bit 'cause I don't know the exact figure but he did quite well.  And he was a leader himself.  He built the company up to over 400 people within a matter of ten years.  And I guess he sold his company two years ago.  He started in about '88 [1988] and you know it blossomed.  He had an idea and of course I helped him with that, his ideas and we went from there.  I have to say this, we ran into a snare working at the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], we had a block contract for a small business.  All of a sudden we found our business going to a majority company.  Come to find out the contracting officer was doing it, in other words giving our contracts away.  Her husband happened to be working for that other company.  Well, I went to see the deputy director of the FAA who at the time was a retired admiral, [U.S.] Navy admiral.  And of course when I first met him he told me, come by the office sometimes.  You know I said well you know I'm not going to bother anybody.  But I had to go see him on this issue.  It turned out, I explained it to him what was going on.  He said send me a document.  Document it for me.  Send it to me.  Well we called that document Big Bertha, it was about yea thick, with attachments and so forth and the next thing I knew the place blew up.  The person lost her warrant and of course when you lose your warrant as a contracting officer you don't have a job.  Well that settled a lot of things.  People thought we were the guys with the white hats on so they didn't take care of us, they made sure we got paid on time that sort of thing.  And it's nothing like a small business that has to wait for pay for work accomplished.  And because that will put you out of business faster than anything if you don't have a line of credit with a big bank or a lot of you know credit on the side.  But you don't want that because that costs you too.  So fortunately we were able to get all of our contracts taken care of on time and of course it progressed from there and we did a good job.  It's that simple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I still want to be remembered for the good works that I've done in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: All right, okay well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Oh you're quite welcome.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'll start working on those pictures tomorrow.
