Story_ID: 654858
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm Kathleen Jackson Bertrand [HistoryMaker Kathleen Bertrand], K-A-T-H-L-E-E-N, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, B-E-R-T-R-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, October 17, 1951.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired, from my day job and I'm a jazz singer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your day job?
Speaker 2: I was senior vice president of community and governmental affairs for the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today, wow, I don't know.  It's October 3rd (laughter), October 3rd, nine--what is it, 2016.  Wow, such a simple question, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, and--yes.  And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address but, you know.
Speaker 2: We're in my home in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 654859
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer.  They're kind of like a warm up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Pizza (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pizza.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, purple.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes!  Autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think what I live is: do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  I think that's what I live.
Speaker 1: That's a good one.
Story_ID: 654860
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Jackson] side but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, Nan Jeannette Jackson [Nan Gibson Jackson].  She was Gibson, she was actually born Nanny Gibson.  She was born in Rabun Gap, Georgia, 1907, December 26, 1907.  She died December 16, 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Don't know a lot.  My mother had two brothers, one was Carl [Carl Gibson] who lived in Meadville, Pennsylvania.  And at some point in time, my mother went up to Meadville to leave, to live, my mother and her mother and my oldest sister [Willa Jackson Mays].  Then I had an unc- my mother's other brother was Sloan Gibson, and he was a Pullman porter on the trains that would travel.  And to be a Pullman porter was quite the deal, you know.  They had a uniform, they dressed a certain way, they were still porters but it was a prestigious job in the community.  And he lived in Canton, Ohio, the home of the--I think Football Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame] or something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One of the--
Speaker 2: One--
Speaker 1: --I think it's the pro football capital of the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's where he lived Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, being a po- a porter is a, was a big deal then.  It--free travel, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --being able to travel and see other places and come back and talk about them--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --was a big deal, too.
Speaker 2: And then my mother's mother was Lula Gibson and my grandmother was born in South Carolina but I don't know where.  I don't have any information on her father at all.  She never knew who her father was.  Her, that was her like lifelong quest and she would ask her mother and her mother would give her one answer but then not really an answer.  And I think that pained her until her dying day that she just--
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: That her mother never gave her information--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about my mother's father.  So she never knew who her father was, so when we even talk about trying to trace history we just come to a dead end in that regard because it's a dead end.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not, it's not unusual--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, so--
Story_ID: 654861
Speaker 1: Where was she [Bertrand's mother, Nan Gibson Jackson] raised at?
Speaker 2: She was raised in Rabun Gap, Georgia up in the mountains of Georgia.  And I remember as a kid growing up you'd hear that name Rabun Gap and it'd be like, oh, my god, what kind of place is that, right?  But finally, traveling one day, driving, I was driving to New York the first time and I drove up through North Georgia, and there on the exit was Rabun Gap.  What about that?  So it's up in the mountains of Georgia.  She never talked very much about her childhood.  I know there was a creek nearby because that's where they would put the buttermilk to cool.  I know that my grandmother [Lula Gibson] had two sisters and three brothers.  And she would talk about stories of them.  But never a lot of detail, more of her detail was about how she was treated as a child growing up in early Georgia and having to go by--my grandmother was a washerwoman at some point during her life before she became a maid.  And, so kind of having to tail behind (clears throat), trail behind her mother as a--in her role as a washer woman.  And she would talk about just kind of the abuse and the way people would talk to her and things like that.
Speaker 1: These are people she worked for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she never--people that my grandmother worked for, white people--
Speaker 1: White people, okay.
Speaker 2: --that my grandmother worked for.  But she never went into deep detail about it other than a statement or two.  We--she didn't tell stories.
Speaker 1: But I take it once they left Ra- Rabun Gap they didn't go back.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't go back.  From Rabun Gap they went to--she met my dad [William Jackson] in Athens so they spent some time in Athens, Georgia, and that's where she met my dad.  And then in some point in time after that they went up to Meadville, Pennsylvania which is where my uncle [Carl Gibson] had settled.  And by this time I--you're in 19--the late '20s [1920s] right at the Depression [Great Depression].  They were in Meadville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now, that's near Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], not too far from Pittsburgh and not too far from Canton [Ohio] either.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  And I can't remember when they migrated back this way to settle in Atlanta [Georgia] but they were certainly here by the time of World War II [WWII] breaking out.  They were in Atlanta, they lived over on Morris Street in Atlanta, which is near Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital], center of the city.  And eventually, the first public housing or the second public housing project was built, Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia], which is near Grady Hospital and that's where they lived Grady Homes.  They had a--there were, there were two story apartments and that's where I grew up in my early years was in Grady Homes.
Story_ID: 654862
Speaker 1: Did your mother have, did she have a chance to get much schooling?
Speaker 2: No, my mother had an eighth grade education and she was the educated one in the family, for the family, you see, because my grandmother [Lula Gibson] I think had a fourth grade education.  My dad [William Jackson] might've had a first or second grade education.  So my, like I said, my mother was the smart one.  And through that though, she was the person, was the person that inspired her children to go to school, get a good education, you know.  Be open to learning because she always wanted us to know more than she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the funny thing is at her obituary [sic.], I remember the pastor saying, you know, reading things that we had written and he said, "You would--." He called her Miss Nan [Nan Gibson Jackson].  He said, "You would never know Miss Nan was not a college educated woman because she read constantly or she'd ask about a word that she saw in the newspaper."  I mean, that's what kids are for, right, to tell mom things that you don't understand, they shouldn't understand.  And, so she was always open to learning.  And I think that was what was admirable, admirable about her, the way she carried herself, the way she spoke.  And, so to have the pastor say, "You would never know that Miss Nan was not a college educated woman" was quite flattering even though she didn't get a chance to hear it.  Because that was how she was, very refined doing the, always the right and proper things and those are things I remember and probably picked up a great deal from her in that regard.
Story_ID: 654863
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William Henry Gibson--I'm sorry, William Henry Jackson, William Henry Jackson [William Jackson].  And my dad was born August 29, 1908, and he died July 3, 1957, right before I turned six.  So I don't have a lot of information about him and don't know a lot about his family.  However, when I was putting together my second CD ['No Regrets'], my oldest sister [Willa Jackson Mays] told me for the first time that his mother's name was Hattie [Hattie Finley Jackson], and Hattie was a singer.  And she used to go from church to church in the Athens, Georgia area singing and that truly fascinated me.  And I know that his father's name was Arthur [Arthur Jackson].  He had a brother named Thomas Jackson, and I think he had one other brother [sic.] that died and I didn't know him.  This was before I grew up.  So that's all I--oh, and he had two sisters [sic.].  He had a sister, Lilly Mae [Lilly Jackson] who was here in Atlanta [Georgia], and he had a sister Gertrude [Gertrude Jackson Dolve] who wound up living in New York and married William Dolve, D-O-L-V-E.
Story_ID: 654864
Speaker 1: So he [Bertrand's father, William Jackson] grew up in Athens--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Geo- Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the home of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: It is, it is.
Speaker 1: And did, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a barbershop porter out in Little Five Points [Atlanta, Georgia].  He was a porter for a barbershop and the shop, whatever the shop was, it was next door to Miss Georgia's Ice Cream [ph.].  So on Wednesday evenings he would bring home Miss Georgia's ice cream.  Where did that come from, I don't even know how I remember that but, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 654865
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never talked about it.  Because you see, my dad [William Jackson] died when I was five and my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] really just stopped talking about her life with him.  More through grief than anything, but she really never shared their story too much.  She would always relate stories of how he interacted with the children, but she never really gave very many stories at all about their relationship.  I know she left at one point to go to Meadville, Pennsylvania because he needed to get his act together, I know that part.  And then only came back to Atlanta [Georgia] because there were certain things that he was to do that he must have done, gotten his act together.  And I used to have a table, it must be in the basement.  I had a table for the longest time that was his gift to her when she came back to Atlanta.  That was his proof that he'd gotten his act together.
Story_ID: 654866
Speaker 1: Now do you have older brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do.  I have two brothers and a sister.  My closest brother in age is Harold Jackson.  Harold is now seventy-two, lives in Atlanta [Georgia], a father of two, grandfather of three, retired from Delta Air Lines [Delta Air Lines, Inc.] as a gate agent, went to Howard High School [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and Clark Atlanta University [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And didn't finish Clark with his class but went back and finished right after I finished Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  He went back and finished his education at Clark.  Then I have a brother David, David (cough), David Allen Jackson [David Jackson].  David is seventy-five now and he also lives in Atlanta, retired Eastern Air Lines worker and then he went on to become janitor for De- DeKalb public schools [DeKalb County School District], and he lives out in Stone Mountain [Georgia] area.  David graduated from David T. High School like my brother Harold and then he went to the [U.S.] Army, was stationed in Korea and came back and took several jobs before he settled into Eastern Air Lines.  And he was with Eastern until they went out of business.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  My oldest sister is Willa Mays [Willa Jackson Mays].  She was born Willie Lou Jackson and she changed it to Willa.  And she moved back to Atlanta about twelve years ago or so, twelve, fifteen years ago, after living most of her adult life in New York and New Jersey.  She went to Spelman, did not graduate.  If she had graduated, she would have been I think class of '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  She went to Booker T. Washington High School here in Atlanta and lived in New York, just different jobs nothing as a career, more as a housewife really over the years.  But always very good at, and very organized, and she's ninety-one now.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Now you're by far the baby of the family, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your par- your mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] and--well, your mother and father [William Jackson] were fairly well along when you were born?  They were in their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mom was forty-four.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And my dad had probably just turned forty-three, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, that's past the age most people have children.
Story_ID: 654867
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember enough of my father [William Jackson] to know that I would take things after him.  Although, my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] used to say things.  My love of certain foods like watermelon, you know, she would say, "Well, your dad used to love watermelon."  He ate the seeds, okay.  He was a man's man.  And--
Speaker 1: So you don't do that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Please.  I try to find the seedless watermelon.  But, no, he would just chomp right in and chew the seed and the whole thing and just be done, yeah.  That I remember, but I don't know so much what I take after him.  My mom, I am mom, I'm neat.  She was always neat about her personal appearance and she was very conscious of just your demeanor, public perception I guess, you know.  But she just always carried herself well and whatever that term meant, you know.  But she was just never sloppy about anything she did.  And I think I take that after her a great deal.
Story_ID: 654868
Speaker 1: What are your first childhood memories?
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory is living in Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] and on Sunday afternoons my dad [William Jackson] would take us for a ride.  That was the big thrill of the week is to go for a ride on Sunday afternoon.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that people--you don't hear that as much anymore but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just to go for a ride.
Speaker 1: We used to do that when I grew up in Dayton, Ohio, same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: On Sunday, dad'll say, "Y'all want to go for a ride?"
Speaker 2: That's it, that's it, best thing ever.  And, you know, those cars had those big back seats back then.  And, so there was what beca- became the habit is that, if I didn't go to church [Liberty Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], my mom [Nan Gibson Jackson] would--I'd have this whole afternoon bath thing, you know, get my hair fixed and all just to go for a ride in dad's car.  And he had probably been out with my brothers [David Jackson and Harold Jackson] or something like that.  And the treat was to go to a place in Atlanta [Georgia] called the Rainbow Inn.  The Rainbow Inn was a drive-in that they came out to the car and they clamped that thing on your car.
Speaker 1: The tray, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the tray.  They clamped the tray on your car and my daddy--here's something I remember.  My daddy used to say, I could smell a hotdog a mile away because I just knew we were getting close.  I had no sense of direction but I knew we were getting close 'cause I could smell the hotdog and that's what I had.  I had a hotdog and grape sodas on Sunday afternoon.  That's my first memory and Grady High School--I mean, at Grady, Grady Homes.  I also remember the way the apartments were.  We had a big porch, we had a big porch and I remember pushing somebody off the porch one day, my next door neighbor.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did they, were they all right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She wouldn't get out of my chair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So all I knew was to dump you out (laughter).  I don't know where that came from, but I did, I pushed her out of the chair.
Story_ID: 654869
Speaker 1: So the Grady Homes are in what neighborhood in Atlanta [Georgia]?  What would you call it?
Speaker 2: It's near Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: So between--let's see, it's--let me see, near Auburn Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Auburn Avenue.  Yeah, between the area that is Auburn [Sweet Auburn Historic District, Atlanta, Georgia] and Grady Hospital and then I would say, let's say Edgewood [Atlanta, Georgia], Hilliard Street, there.
Speaker 1: And this is historic black Atlanta, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very much so.  Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] is--was down the street from my church which was Liberty Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] was also on Auburn Avenue, pastor there was Reverend William Holmes Borders and between Reverend Borders and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--my pastor was not so much an activist but he was very much involved in the movement, you know, in those years that came.  But, yes, that was the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What was your pastor's name?
Speaker 2: Well, I had two.  At the time my dad [William Jackson] died, the pastor was George Dudley [George W. Dudley], but the pastor that I grew up under was Melvin Watson, Melvin H. Watson.  Dr. Watson taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and really became like a dad, father figure to me because he was just kind and concerned and kind of took me under his wing to just make sure I was doing the right things.  And I was just very close to the family.  And, so that was Dr. Watson, that's the pastor that I knew most at the time of going through Liberty Baptist Church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, Friendship Baptist [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] is over there too, right, (unclear)?  No?
Speaker 2: No, Friendship was over to the west side of Atlanta.  Friendship is--Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] was founded in the basement of Friendship Baptist Church, so Friendship was within a mile and a half of where Spelman currently is right now.  So that was on the west side--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --of Atlanta.  But those churches on Auburn Avenue were really strong in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the churches that were adjacent to Auburn Avenue as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, where your pastor is not just a pastor but he's a doctor or he's a professor and, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, Dr. Melvin H. Watson and taught at ITC, the Interdenominational Theological Center [Atlanta, Georgia] as well as Morehouse.  And he wasn't a fire and brimstone kind of pastor and, so there was a quietness about him that I grew to love.  And when I would go to other churches and pastors are whooping and jumping all up and down, I was just like, what on earth is going on here, you know, 'cause Reverend Watson was a teacher and he brought his teacher's style to his sermons on Sunday, yeah, from what I recall.  So he was very different for his time I think but very effective, very effective.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like church had a, had a big impact on your life and how you approached life.
Speaker 2: Well, probably.  Good people--I, remember I didn't have a dad.  My mom [Nan Gibson Jackson] was still going to Liberty and we had a church station wagon.  Well, before the station wagon there was a woman that didn't live very far from us.  Her name was Maria August Boughten [ph.].  Miss Boughten went to Spelman, and she took an interest in me and, so she committed to picking me up on Sunday mornings so that I could get to Sunday school because we didn't have a car.  And I would ride with Miss Boughten and we would have all kinds of discussions, but I really appreciated what she did for me because then we got, the church got a station wagon and, so then the station wagon's job was to go around and pick up kids that were in that neighborhood there.  And Mr. Willie McCoy [ph.]--I'm still friends with his children and he had like six or seven children.  But Mr. Willie McCoy would come and pick us up on Sunday mornings and then after church.  And, so that was kind of my outlet.  Vacation Bible School, if Mr. McCoy was off, he worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] but after he'd get off at the post office or, if he had a off day, he'd come and get the kids to take them to church.
Story_ID: 654870
Speaker 1: So I was very involved at Liberty.  And there was another--there're two other women that were both Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] women that were key in my development.  One was Dr. Lynette Saine Gaines and she was Dr. Saine for many years.  And she was just this poised, beautifully spoken woman and I loved everything about her.  I wanted to be like her.  She was like, there was a lady that used to be on television, Loretta Young, and I don't know, that's probably before your time.  Loretta Young (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I remember Loretta Young.
Speaker 1: She used to come through those doors.
Speaker 2: She used to spin.
Speaker 1: Right!
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Loretta Young Show.'
Speaker 1: Well, Dr. Saine for me, reminded me of Loretta Young.  Just, you know, the way she carried herself and, you know her hair in a bun and all of this.  And when I look at my years and see what my mom [Nan Gibson Jackson] did, she nudged me to be under Dr. Saine.  She would always say, "Well, there's Dr. Saine, go say hello to her."  Or, "Dr. Saine's over there, you need to go and make sure she knows that you got all A's this week," or, you know, whatever those things were, and it worked because Dr. Saine took a great interest in me, so here's another Spelman woman that is looking at me in a different way and telling me what they expect of me and, you know, what I can do with myself and that shaped me.  Plus I was a Catholic school girl, you know.  So I went to Catholic school.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In--even though I was going to Liberty Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], I was going to Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Now that's quite an investment I guess unless that--you go for free.  That's an investment.
Speaker 1: You couldn't go free--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --unless you were Catholic but, you know, it was a lot for my mama but it wasn't that much.  And she had actually sent my brothers [David Jackson and Harold Jackson] to Catholic school, so while we were growing up in Grady, Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia], my brothers were going to Catholic school because she heard that's where you got the best education.  So that's where they went.
Speaker 2: Yeah that, I was going to say, that means some commitment, you know, higher education.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So that's where I went to school.  I went to Our Lady of Lourdes, and just happened to be Our Lady of Lourdes was around the corner from Liberty Baptist Church, so (makes sound) my world was all right there in that same neighborhood.  But Dr. Saine really was an influence on me, I know that without second guessing it.  The other person that was a great influence was a lady named Betty Wilson [Betty Wilson Durden], she's now Durden.  And Betty was one of the youth at Spelman--I mean, youth at Liberty who wound up going to, guess where, Spelman.  And she also took an interest in me.  And when I was able to, I used to do the announcements.  The way a lot of people knew me was because on Sundays I used to do the announcements for the church.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this is something that I could picture as you're describing--I was thinking that you must have had a lot of responsibilities as a youth in the church and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Well--
Speaker 2: --so, you did the announcements every--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did, I did the Sunday morning announcements.
Speaker 2: At what age did you start doing those?
Speaker 1: Fif- fifteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in tenth grade, yeah.  And also that's how people that--the few that didn't know me became--you know, everybody knew me by then.  And Betty was the kind that would come up to you after church and say, you know, "You did a really nice job" and, you know, "Keep doing that" and, "You could do this different," you know, just gentle encouragement.
Story_ID: 654871
Speaker 1: So I won this singing contest when I was sixteen, it was called the national Superteen contest.  And it would be the equivalent of--well, not 'The Voice' but 'Star Search,' I guess it would be the equivalent of that.
Speaker 2: A national--
Speaker 1: A national contest, it was run through ninety radio stations around the country.  And, so the radio station here was WQXI [WQXI Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] and they asked people to submit tapes of them singing.  And I submitted a tape of me singing [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick's 'I Say a Little Prayer for You' ['I Say a Little Prayer'] (laughter).  And, so I won, Atlanta [Georgia], I got a call from them and I won Atlanta.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were, you were how old when this happened?
Speaker 1: By then, I was sixteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is '68 [1968] then I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, that's when I won.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: The name of the show was 'The Sounds of '68.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so WQXI sent my tape on to the national, there were ten thousand entries nationwide.  And of the national, they picked nine finalists and I was one of the nine.  And, so I got a chance to go to Hollywood and I asked Betty Wilson Durden to be my chaperone because my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] wasn't, wasn't going.  My grandmother [Lula Gibson] was elderly--you know, just didn't know so we asked Betty to go with me to be my chaperone.  And, so those are the two women that, in addition to my mother, had the most influence on me growing up and how I am I'm just being myself but when I hear people's perception of what they think or when they've met me, they say the same things about me that I said about these women throughout my life.  So--
Speaker 2: And that's a good thing.
Speaker 1: That's h- so that's how I know it really rubbed off, right?
Story_ID: 654872
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your grade school?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you discover that you had a great singing voice then?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--we used to--back then they had music lessons in school and we were always singing all kinds of songs from, you know the proverbial 'Row, Row Your Boat' ['Row, Row, Row Your Boat'], but we sang just about every day or every two or three days or something.  And I was in--from time to time they would have a choir sound for the services and--remember I'm not Catholic so I don't go to church on Sunday, but every now and then they would have some kind of extra special event, and I loved that.  I loved when they had the events and we had a chance to sing.  I starred in our play at third grade, and it was mostly a speaking role.  I think I had just a little bit of song in there.  And I hated because we didn't have a play again after that year.  It was so marvelous, you know, I don't know what happened but that was--I, 'cause then I would've been an actress (laughter).  That's how much I loved it, you know, that's how much I loved it.  But that was our third--
Speaker 1: Now were the nuns who taught you, were they, were they mostly white nuns?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they also had lay teachers as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the nuns were white, they were from the order of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  And Our Lady of Lourdes as a parish was founded specifically to help the Negro and American Indian [Native American] population here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was--
Speaker 2: I think they were--
Speaker 1: Was the school located in the Au- Auburn Avenue area or--
Speaker 2: Yes, the school is at Boulevard at the corner of Auburn Avenue, and right out the backyard of Our Lady of Lourdes is the home where Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] grew up.
Speaker 1: Right, now that's an area a lot of people are familiar with.  I'm familiar--I--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I guess I've walked by that church and--
Speaker 2: You have.  There's a Catholic church right there on--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Between Au--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Auburn and Edgewood [Avenue], there's a Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And to the left of the church there's this big building that used to be the school.  They closed it down as a school and, now it's a parish building.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were over there yesterday.  We ate, we ate at Thumbs Up [Thumbs Up Diner, Atlanta, Georgia] on Edgewood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, yes, you were right around the corner, you were right around the corner.  But, yes, so I went to Our Lady of Lourdes.  I lived in the Fourth Ward of Atlanta which is now, let's see, not Virginia-Highland, what is the area, Bedford, Bedford Pines [Bedford Pine, Atlanta, Georgia] is another area they call it.  But, now it's the Old Fourth Ward, it's so fancy now and everything costs five hundred thousand dollars and up.
Story_ID: 654873
Speaker 1: That's where I grew up, and there was no bus service that went straight--I mean my school [Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia] was litter- my street was right off of Boulevard and the school was straight down Boulevard about maybe two or three miles, maybe two miles.  But there was no bus service that went straight down Boulevard at that time.  So in the morning I would take a taxi.  Taxi cost fifty-two cents and my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] did not want me on the bus early in the morning or anything like that, so she struggled to make sure that I could get to school in a taxi every morning until my brothers [David Jackson and Harold Jackson] were a little older and then at some point one of my brothers would drop me off on occasion.  And then in the afternoon I rode the bus home.  And there was school buses, they were, they were--the transit system buses and they would take us into downtown and dump us off and then kids would get on the individual buses that took them home.  So I would leave Boulevard, go downtown, get my bus to come back home to Boulevard Place [Atlanta, Georgia] which was only two miles away but that was how it worked.  And it, and it was great.  I was usually--we got out at three [o'clock], I was usually home by 3:45 so it wasn't bad at all.  But it taught me a lot, it taught me a lot about Atlanta [Georgia].  Because every day I'm in downtown, you know, and, so I'm learning the streets and I, and I remember teaching my children that.  I said, "You know, you got suburban kids that have no idea what their downtown of their city looks like but you will not be that person."  So we used to spend time, as my kids were growing up, downtown.  You should know the street names and the buildings and just--you should know.  So I have great memories of downtown.  I recall when the, when I got a chance to sit in the back of, sit in the front of the bus.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as you were growing up all the, all of the barriers of the past--a lot of the--
Speaker 1: Were in place.
Speaker 2: So the segregation (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when I would--yes.
Speaker 2: They was like falling as you, as you--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --got older, yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So as I was riding the bus, there came a period in time when I didn't have to sit in the back anymore.  I could sit in the front.  And, you know, of course you're tentative at first and people did look at you like you didn't belong there but eventually it just smoothed on out.
Story_ID: 654874
Speaker 1: So you'd have been about eight or nine then when, when that started to change (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine or ten, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nine or ten, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they--the Atlanta movement starts up around '61 [1961] or so.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Where all this segregation starts to be challenged and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the buses--my, I remember my old- my second oldest brother, Harold [Harold Jackson], rode the bus with me when I was in the eighth grade.  (Clears throat) Well, I'm sorry, when he was in eighth grade, I was in first grade [at Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia], we're seven years apart so I only had that one year of navigating with Harold.  Then the next year we found--there were a couple of other girls that lived in the neighborhood [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia] that my brother knew and, so he would ask them to look after me, to get me into town and to make sure that I got on the right bus.  And I think about my fourth grade or so there was a girl that actually rode the bus all the way almost to my stop.  She got off about two stops before me.  But I learned how to just navigate that.  I left my purse downtown once, I had a little change purse and I recall myself going to the five and ten cents store, McCrory's [McCrory Stores, Atlanta, Georgia] I think it was, and I left my little change purse.  And when it came time to get on the bus I didn't have my transfer or anything, and I had called my mama [Nan Gibson Jackson] from (laughter) the store.  I went to the people and told them and they called my mother, and somebody in the store gave me money to go home and that was it.  But I remember there was nothing--when I think back it could've been an opportunity for people to be mean 'cause here's, you know, a little black kid and just, you know, and not care, but God was with me and in their hearts that day because they were very kind and made sure that I--I knew where to catch my bus, I just left my money (laughter), you know.  But they were very kind and made sure that I got on the bus and, you know, I probably had ten cents or so to spend extra and somebody brought me something--brought some candy or something for me.  So that's something that just popped in my head that I recall from that period.  But for the most part, not a lot of, not a lot of overt racism of the time.  I think the biggest thing that would happen is that the bus drivers would see people coming to the bus stop and they'd keep going, you know.  That was, that was hard.  It's hard to watch, and you're on the bus sometimes.  You're on the bus and you see somebody coming and you know they, you know they saw 'em.  And they would just keep going.  That was always hard to digest.
Speaker 1: You think they did it just out of hate?
Speaker 2: Nope, you don't know, but you assume because he had to see them.  There's no way you couldn't see them.  And stopping to pick this person up is not going to throw you off your schedule by, you know, by that much.  So as in a child's mind even then, you had to assume that that's what was happening that--it was because the drivers were white and they didn't care, yeah.
Story_ID: 654875
Speaker 1: Now you went to high school.  Did you go to a Catholic high school too?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Grady High School [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's right, Grady.
Speaker 2: --which was the neighborhood school for--where I lived in the Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].  And Grady was newly integrated when I went.  Grady had only been integrated three years previously.  And, so when I went it was a still relatively new space for black kids.  And, but I had a fantastic experience at Grady.  I can't think of anything in particular, I mean, there were always, there was always somebody would say--I had this one teacher, let me go back.  I had this one teacher in ninth grade, Miss Kemp, Masel Kemp [ph.].  And in ninth grade--that was my first year because most of these kids had gone to school since eighth grade but I was still in Catholic school [Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia], so I came at ninth grade and funny thing is I remember that being in public school was such a change for me because they talked in the halls, you know.  'Cause at Catholic school you can't talk in the hall, you know, that was just--this is wild (laughter).  These people are all over the place, you're out of control.  But, anyway (laughter), I had this teacher in ninth grade--I had become friends with a couple of women that we are Facebook friends today actually.  One is Barbara Lipsius Bullard [ph.], she's in Northern California.  And one is Reva Katz and Reva is in Alaska.  But they were in my ninth grade home economics class.  We had just taken pictures, and we were exchanging pictures, this is what people do.  And Miss Kemp saw us exchanging pictures and she didn't think that Negroes should be exchanging people pictures with white people, okay.  Now I don't know where this person came from but me, ninth grade, went to the principal's office to tell the principal that this is what happened in my class, and I don't think it's right.  I think my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] paid for my pictures and I should be able to give my pictures to anybody I want to.  And the principal agreed with me.  And made an announcement on the PA [public address] system, not the next day but maybe a couple of days later.  And when I look back on that, I was like who was that child (laughter)?  Who told you to go--but it was just the right thing to do.  I wasn't intimidated by white people so much because I had had nuns that were white so I, and I knew that there were good people that happened to be white, that interacted with me throughout my life, but Miss Kemp was an anomaly, you know, she was not in that space.  And, so once, you know, she was called out on it she treated me with respect.  I got an A in her class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she treated me with respect.
Story_ID: 654876
Speaker 1: What were you focused on academically in high school?  I know everybody takes the same kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, there's not, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's not really a focus.  Ninth grade I needed to just see what the landscape was so I had average classes and by tenth grade when they saw my grades I started being put in honors classes, so I had honors English, I had honors math from tenth grade all the way out (laughter).  And I didn't have any particular focus other than doing those things necessary to get into college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to go to college.
Speaker 1: And you probably had a good idea that you were going to go since your older siblings had gone (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, my brother Harold [Harold Jackson] had gone and my sister [Willa Jackson Mays] had gone.  I mean, it was, it was just like never a question, you know.  And then there was this program called the Spelman Morehouse Intensified Pre-College Program [Morehouse Spelman Intensified Pre-College Program] that they used to have in the summers for high school students from all over the country would come.  And we would stay for six weeks on campus.
Speaker 1: It's like an Upward Bound (unclear).
Speaker 2: Kind of, yes, yes, yes.  But it was just Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And, so they had all kinds of activities for us, but you had classes that were taught by college professors.  And that was one of those life changing moments, I think, being there because it affirmed for me who I was as an African American.  That was important when you're in a sea of white people that don't encourage the you that you are so being around kids that came from all over the country, being in--you know, and then hearing the history, hearing the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'] for the first time, you understand?  So that was a life changing--I came back to Grady High School [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in eleventh grade 'cause I went the summer between tenth and eleventh grade.  So I came back eleventh grade, this is '67 [1967] going into '68 [1968] and I bring--I'm bringing Langston Hughes to my English classes, you see, because we're getting these books of poetry and, so then you have to ask the question, well, why don't you have information or why aren't we, you know, reading--these are great American poets, you know.  And, so that's what that experience did for me. It infused me with a sense of pride as to all that we've accomplished as black people, as African Americans whatever our name was at the time (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: What was the--well, we were Negroes then in sixty-se- seven [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, or Afro Americans also was somewhere in there.
Story_ID: 654877
Speaker 1: What was the ratio of Grady [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia] black students to white students?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe 10, 20 percent if that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Black students to white, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  But you've got to understand within the so called white population you've got a large Jewish population as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your friends you mentioned had Jewish names (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, exactly, a large Jewish population.  You've got Hispanics, you've got Asians, you've got Native Americans, you've got Vietnamese, all of that was at Gra- Grady, Greek.  One of our great reporters here, Maria Saporta, her sister Elena Saporta was a year behind me so Maria was the baby, but they're Greek, you know, that's their culture.  So Grady was always known as that melting pot school, always at the top, always at any kind of ranking of high schools, et cetera.  Grady was always at the top.  And I really, really enjoyed my experience.  I had a great counselor, Mrs. Overton [ph.] because Mrs. Overton is the one that told me about the National Scholarship Fund.  You know, it's not the UNCF fund [United Negro College Fund], they used to be NSSFNS, National Scholarship Fund for Negro Students [sic. National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students] or something like that.  And then she told me about the National Merit scholarship [National Merit Scholarship Corporation] and they had one for African Americans that was called the National Achievement Scholarship which I won.  So she was to be kind of digging into supporting a black student in the very early years, she was excellent.  And because of her I got a scholarship to Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], I got scholarship to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], I got partial funding to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  Nixed all of it and decided to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was there, you know, it was there.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I got accepted to Pembroke [Pembroke College in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] which was the female part of Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], I mean, I was just, I applied to everything.  She helped me with my applications and in many cases, we didn't have money for application fees, you know.  And I don't know what Miss Overton did but she managed to make sure that I could apply to anything I needed to.  And everybody needs a counselor like that I think (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654878
Speaker 1: Now 1968--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is like a national turning point.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god!
Speaker 1: The assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]--
Speaker 2: That's right, three--two months later (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) right afterwards.  But Atlanta [Georgia] was in the national spotlight after the assassination of Dr. King.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And you're in high school here living in that neighborhood [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And Yolan- and Yolanda [Yolanda King]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Marty [Martin Luther King III] went to Grady High School [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you knew his children?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I knew Yolanda, I didn't know Marty then, but I knew Yolanda, yes.  And the whole school was sad, you know, it wasn't--there was no--it was just sad, you know, that's what I remember, that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Even the white students there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the white students?
Speaker 2: Yes, just the whole sense of sadness because, you know, when I've gone to my class reunions, class of '69 [1969] Grady, when I go to my class reunions we all recognize that we came through in a very special time in this country's history.  And we could've turned right or left, you know what I'm saying, we could have wound up hating each other or--but we really were more towards the side of, all we're saying is give peace a chance ['Give Peace a Chance'] and, you know, what the world needs now is love ['What the World Needs Now Is Love'], flower children.  We're of that age, you know, the hippies and all of that.  We were very peaceful people, my class, very loving people.  My doctor now and my dentist are both my white classmates from Grady High School, and I can think of no people closer that I would trust my life with, you know what I'm saying, it's that kind of bond.  So that's why I say Grady was a great experience for me and we've recognized that being in the mix of that kind of turmoil from Dr. King's assassination, Robert Kennedy's assassination, the Democratic Convention in Chicago [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], the whole world's watching, SDS, Students for a Democratic Society, all of that turmoil that was going on at that time black and white and just white could have shaped us in a different kind of way.  But for some reason maybe in hindsight it made us closer, you know.  But I love my class reunions.  I haven't missed one.  I love my classmates.  I was voted most likely to succeed of my classmates, first time for an African American to have gotten that superlative, first time for a lot of things when I was at Grady.
Story_ID: 654879
Speaker 1: So this [Superteen] is I take it in the spring of that year?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The same, same time when all the turmoil was going on.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You're going to Hollywood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, Holly- I didn't go to Hollywood until August.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember when Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was killed in June and it's like I got some kind of letter from Hollywood like that week, you know.  And I was just really a little despondent, just kind of couldn't get with it, you know.  And there was something they must have wanted me to send in or something, I don't remember, but I know I missed a deadline and they were calling me.  But it was just during that period you just didn't know--and it wasn't so much a questioning of what my future is going to be.  It was more a question of why.  I didn't know enough to think about--too far ahead about the future, you know, but it was more like why, why is this happening, why would you kill this man that's got seven children and now they don't have a daddy.  I know what's that's like.  Yoki [Yolanda King] doesn't have a daddy, I know what that's like.  But my daddy [William Jackson] didn't get his head blown off, you know.  And it was more of that kind of despondency that I had during that summer, but I perked up.  I came out of it.  And by the end of the summer that was when the--we taped the show ['The Sounds of '68'], and it was shown in August of that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  You have any stories from your trip to California?  Had you ever been there before?
Speaker 2: I hadn't, that was my first time.  And the funniest thing is most recently I went to Hollywood for a premier, and I was trying to look and see where my bearings were, but I didn't know anything.  I was on Hollywood Boulevard, but when I was there years ago, I was on Sunset Boulevard, and it took me a minute to realize that.  But, no, nothing special.  Well, when you're--this is my first experience in front of television cameras and all of that, and when you're taping it takes a long time.  Everything looks instant, as you know on--when you're--
Speaker 1: As you're watching it at home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as you're watching it but things--so we taped until, oh, like one or two in the morning.  And there's something else as well.  The original dress that they created for me was designed by a guy named Boyd Clopton, B-O-Y-D Clopton, and he was a very hot designer then.  And, but the song that I was singing was 'The Look of Love' and, so they decided that the dress that he had for me originally was too baby looking for me to be singing 'The Look of Love,' so they had him create another dress, just like that.  And, you know, that's how Holly- I understand now being working with film that's how things can happen, you just, if you don't like it go create something new.  And they literally created a different dress for me overnight, a one shouldered kind of something with feathers around it.  But, you know, that was pretty awesome because I came home with two dresses and the prize.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was pretty awesome.
Speaker 1: So you chose--for this contest, you chose two Burt Bacharach songs?
Speaker 2: Loved Burt Bacharach.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Loved Burt Bacharach, loved Burt Bacharach, and Hal David.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dionne (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god!
Speaker 1: Dionne War- Warwick [HistoryMaker Dionne Warwick] and Dusty Springfield--
Speaker 2: Every song.
Speaker 1: --was singing them on the radio.
Speaker 2: Ev- every song.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: Every song.
Story_ID: 654880
Speaker 1: So my sister [Willa Jackson Mays] told me maybe about four of five years ago, that I had gotten a call from the--Burt Bacharach's office when I was singing, I must, I guess I'd gone back to school or gone--I mean was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or something.  But she says my mom [Nan Gibson Jackson] didn't--told them that I wasn't interested in doing that.  And that broke my heart.  I said, you know, "Some things better not known," that was one of those little tidbits that, eh, you could've kept that one.
Speaker 2: So back during that period, Burt Bacharach's office called your home to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, called my home, yes, yes, yes.  And that would've been the be- see, because when I won this Superteen contest, I won a contract with Capitol Records, I won a car, I won a color television.  So the contract they wanted, they put me with an Atlanta producer, a guy named Bill Lowery who was really big in music for Atlanta [Georgia].  There was the Atlanta Tams [The Tams] was a group that he had produced and then at that time he was producing a guy named Billy Joe Royal, Billy Joe Royal, 'Down in the Boondocks.'  So Bill, you know, was--had buzz, but Bill wanted me to sing songs that weren't me.  He wanted me to sing kind of like the Atlanta Tams' sound.  It was a distinct--it wasn't as hip as Motown [Motown Records], it was just a little less hip to me, and it wasn't Burt Bacharach and Hal David more importantly, you know.  The kinds of songs he wanted me to sing and, so I never, I never picked up the contract.  I never did it, I went to, I went to school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I--again, I don't know where this resolve came from.  This person here that was speaking, but I knew what was me at sixteen, seventeen.  I knew what felt good on me, what fed my soul, fed my spirit.  And the kind of music, it wasn't bad, it just wasn't me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I didn't want to sing it, so I didn't.
Speaker 2: I know I've read that you were influenced by your brothers' [David Jackson and Harold Jackson] love of jazz.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  Yes, yes.  And I grew up listening to, oh, Miles Davis and John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman and Sonny Stitt (laughter) and Pharoah Sanders and [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner and, you know, that was me.  And I had not moved into jazz vocally but I had a great appreciation of it, which is why a Hal David, Burt Bacharach arrangements, you know, that--it kind of just worked for me.  Blood, Sweat and Tears had just come out in 1969 and their whole band and horn sounds, that appealed to me.  Chicago, CTA [The Chicago Transit Authority; Chicago], oh, my god!  The arrangements, the arrangements, there were all those jazz riffs behind before you got into the rhythm of the, of the vocals.  And all of the appealed to me.  But the songs that they wanted me to sing, unh-uh.  So like I said, so I passed on that and went to school.
Story_ID: 654881
Speaker 1: Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] founded by the Rockefeller sisters I think, I mean--well, Rockefeller's wife [Laura Spelman Rockefeller] way back when (laughter).
Speaker 2: Way back when.
Speaker 1: In the 1860s I think, but, so you start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen eighty-one [1881].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: Was founded by Florence Matilda Read [Florence M. Read].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was later that they got Rockefeller investment at Spelman.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you start in 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay.  And what was your major?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, actually it's--it started off as math, and calculus changed my mind, so it became English (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, were your aspirations to go into science?
Speaker 2: Computer, computer science which was new at the time.  When they interviewed me back when I had won the contest [Superteen], I was in Jet magazine and in the local paper, the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution].  And they asked me what did I want to do, and I said, "Well, we're learning about stocks and investments, and I'm interested in computers."  So there was an African American gentleman that was with an investment firm called Counts and Company [sic. Courts and Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and his name was T.M. Alexander, Jr.  A very prominent member of the community, and he was an investment banker type person.  And he invited me down to his office, he took me to lunch, to just let me know, well, when you're ready to make this kind of step, I hope you'll, you know, come back by and see me.  And, so I went to school with the thinking that I'm going to get this computer piece down because it looks like something that's very interesting.  And I loved math, or so I thought.  And as I said, I got to calculus and it changed my mind.
Speaker 1: Now I have to ask this question.
Speaker 2: Yes?
Speaker 1: So many people when they evince the kind of talent that you show at the national level, you win a car and a color TV and a trip to Hollywood on TV.  You come back and you go to Spelman, and I mean, how did you stay focused on Spelman?  Was a part of you like lear- yearning to be a star?
Speaker 2: No.  Not really.  See because I wanted to break the stereotypical expectation of all black people can do is sing and dance, you know.  That's all.  That was important to me.
Speaker 1: But you actually could dance (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, I actually could.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I just wanted to break that mold.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I wanted to say that I, say and prove to myself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of people wish they could and they can't really do it that good, but you actually could do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I needed to do something different.  I needed to use my smarts.  I was very smart, you know, honor society, Beta Club [National Beta Club], all that stuff in high school [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I needed to use that, and I didn't see how that would be utilized in a music career at that time.  So I wanted to go to school.  I wanted to get a college education that was important to me, so that's why.  And even when I got to Spelman, I didn't do glee club, and I didn't like their sound.  It didn't have enough bass in it for me.
Story_ID: 654882
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you didn't take a lot of music courses at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.  I took a public speaking class, and they asked me why was I in the class (laughter).  I said, "'Cause you said I had to take the class" (laughter).  What can I tell you?  But, no, I really was, I was writing poetry, and I went to Jamaica twice to the University of the West Indies [Kingston, Jamaica] for a creative writing retreat [Merrill Foreign Travel-Study Program] that Dr. Manley [Albert E. Manley] had put together for us.  I won that for two successive years.  Won a national poetry contest, I mean, you know, I was being expressive.  It just wasn't through music because I didn't hear what I liked, you know, I didn't hear what I wanted to be a part of.  So what I didn't realize until years later was that what was happening to me was my tastes were shifting really to just jazz, away from R and B sound, away from Burt [Burt Bacharach] and Hal [Hal David] but really moving to jazz.  So in that expression I was a radio disc jockey for the first station in the AUC [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], which was not WCLK [WCLK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] which we have now but was actually WAUC [WAUC Radio, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was a coaxial cable station, so you could only hear it if you were in the AUC Center or if you were nearby the AUC Center.  But I was a disc jockey.  I had a show called--one of them was called 'Silk and Soul' [ph.] and I brought forth women in jazz.  And everyone from Shirley Coltrane--Alice Coltrane, I'm sorry, to Shirley Horn, mixed in a little Minnie Riperton when I could, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Sarah Vaughan.  That was my show that I did--did I--was it every day?  I think it was every day I did a radio show.  And then I moved from that show to another show called 'Astral Traveling' named after Pharoah Sanders' album ['Astral Traveling'].  And I loved that show because now I got to play the full realm of jazz, and I wasn't limited to females only.  So I was still being expressive in the art, although it wasn't coming from, from my voice, but I was still being expressive.  And that was important to me at that time.
Story_ID: 654883
Speaker 1: I started doing commercial work and I think that's what got me really back into thinking about music.  There was a young man named Charles Mann, who went to my church [Liberty Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], student at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Charles wrote this song that Roberta Flack and Donny Hathaway recorded called 'Be Real Black for Me' and was a good friend of mine.  Well, another good friend of Charles' was a lady named LaTanya Richardson, she's now LaTanya Richardson Jackson, married to Samuel L. Jackson.  And Charles brought me and LaTanya together.  She was an actress as well.  And we did a couple of commercials together.  There was a studio in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] at that time called Doppler Studios, they then moved further out, but Doppler was right on Peach Street.  And my commercial, I did one for the National Bank of Washington and I did one for Nadinola skin cream [Nadinola skin discoloration fade cream].  And I loved it!  Can I tell you I loved being in the studio because having gone from the Hollywood experience, where I never did record, but I saw the orchestra recording, to being in the studio now when the tapes playing and all of that.  I fell in love with that, with that process.  And, so that's what I wanted to do if there was anything musical I wanted to do, it was to record.  And it didn't have to be my own.  It was do commercial work.  And, so I wound up doing several things over the years.  Little past Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] where Doppler would still have me on their list and call me.  And, huh!  I just a call just last week, I got a text from a guy that used to be an engineer at Doppler.  Wow, who called me?  So, you know, that was the entry that I saw into music, was doing commercial work.  But at least it got me singing again 'cause I hadn't been singing.
Story_ID: 654884
Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then while I was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] had a jazz band that was led by Dr. Ted McDaniel [William T. McDaniel] and I told him one day--I was taking his class and I said, "Well, you know, I can sing."  And, so, you know, kind of people are like, oh, yeah, yeah, everybody can sing.  I said, "But, no, really.  (Makes sound) I can do this" (laughter).  So he let me sing with the Morehouse jazz band [Morehouse College Jazz Ensemble].  And then I ran for Miss Maroon and White, Miss Morehouse.  And you had to do a talent, and most people knew me as a--the disc jockey, but they didn't--or English major or photographer, all those other things.  But they didn't know that I sang.
Speaker 1: So you were a photographer too during this period?
Speaker 2: I was, yes, yes.  I was a photographer for the Spelman Spotlight, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you get into that, I mean, how (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My brother [David Jackson] who was in Korea brought a camera back that was just sitting there, and he didn't use it, and I started using it.  I just started driving around taking pictures and you get better and better.  And then my doctor and I were talking one day.  At the time, my doctor at that time, Dr. William Stewart [ph.] and he--we talked about my love of photography.  So then he started letting me use his Nikon, and the Nikon had great lenses and oh, my god!  That click, I still love that click for that single lens reflex camera.  Oh, my god!  There's nothing like it (laughter).  So, you know, just encouragement along the way but really trying to always have an eye, you know, always look at things differently.  And, so, yeah, that's how I kind of branched into that.  In fact, that's how I met my husband, Andre Bertrand, because Andre was a photographer and he was in the photography club at Morehouse.  And, so I went to the first meeting of the photography club at Morehouse 'cause I wanted to see what they were all about.  And we didn't hook up then it was years later but that's when I first met him because he was in the photography club at Morehouse.  I took a class at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that was an independent study class and for my project I did a photographic study of the Hyatt Regency [Hyatt Regency House; Hyatt Regency Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] hotel.  Hyatt Regency was a brand new hotel, brand new hotel concept, you know.  John Portman [John C. Portman, Jr.] created this open atrium concept that you've seen repeated in several of his properties and other properties, but the very first concept was--
Speaker 1: With the open lobby and the, and the--
Speaker 2: Right, right and--
Speaker 1: --balconies kind of like--
Speaker 2: --and the elevators that had the lights outside.  There were elevators were outside of the shafts so that you saw them going up and down.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah the first time I saw that was from Atlanta [Georgia] on television.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then I--in '75 [1975] I actually came down--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and actually saw it in person.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well that was a John Portman creation that he did in 1967 I believe is when the Hyatt first went up.  But, anyway, that was my--I was so fascinated with this building here in Atlanta that I convinced my teacher to let me do a photographic study of the Hyatt because when you're standing on those different--I used to go in all the time.  Remember, I'm a downtown child, so I had no qualms about going inside and, you know, walking around places.  And when you stand on the different floors and you look down or you look across and see all of his balconies lined up, it just--every picture was different.  Every single picture was different.  I did it in black and white and used shading and contrast, and I got an A.  'Cause that was--I just liked seeing things, you know, in a different way.
Speaker 1: So this is--one of our Atlanta (unclear) is with [HistoryMaker] Asa Hilliard, III and he said, at the end of the interview he said, "People really don't know who you are.  They see just one aspect of yourself" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I'm just thinking of all these different aspects (laughter) of (unclear) so--
Speaker 2: Yes, I know.  It's a problem (laughter).
Speaker 1: People, people who thought they knew you--well, I mean, you know, like when you describe singing, say, "Well, I can sing," people would say, "Yeah, right."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But then you can really sing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers had the same kind of response.
Story_ID: 654885
Speaker 1: Anyway, so we were--where were we?  We were at college--oh, how did I get over to the photography?  Oh, my goodness.  I was at college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I asked you about it 'cause that's another, that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I guess you did, yes.  Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We got off topic though.  Oh!  So I was telling you about Miss Maroon and White.  So people knew I could sing, so the talent that you had to have, you had to have--do some talent so mine was singing.  Well, here was a whole room of people at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the gym [Samuel H. Archer Hall Recreation and Fitness Center] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that had no idea that I could sing.  And, so from that point on, people did see me differently because I started being asked to sing for different things in college.  And, you know, which was good.  I enjoyed that and it also help me win as Miss Maroon and White because I did win and the next year was the coronation and homecoming and the parade and all of that stuff which was a lot of fun.  You know, I grew up looking at the local black paper which was the Atlanta Daily World that was what we knew most often.  It was delivered in our neighborhood [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I remember in the weekend papers they would always have the pictures of the college queens and I never, ever conceived, thought crossed my mind about me being that person.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Never, never crossed my mind.
Speaker 2: So this is, this is 1972?
Speaker 1: Yes, '72 [1972] exactly, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Now did you think about entering or--Miss Black America at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, not my interest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not my interest.  Just, just--you know, I'm not--no, not showy like that, just--no, yeah, I--unh-uh.  Just it was enough running for Miss Morehouse and that was fine.  That all worked well.  People knew that I sang but to run for Miss Black America, oh, no.  You know, and I wasn't built like that.  Those girls had, you know, (makes sound), and, you know, (makes sound) and (makes sound), and, no, unh-uh.  I was just a little skinny little something that could sing good (laughter).  You know, really.  That's it, and I had a lot of friends because I had this groundswell of support from all of the freshmen 'cause they would pass my window every day at the dis- at the radio station [WAUC Radio, Atlanta, Georgia].  And they'd come to the window and try to make requests or give me a phone number or whatever the case might be, you know.  And my thing was go vote, just make sure you vote for me.  So that's what I had, I didn't have the whole curvy thing.  And I didn't have, you know--this was also an interesting time in the schools because if you looked back historically at what Miss Maroon and White looked like over the years, she was generally with straight hair, long hair, lighter complexion than me, you see.  But I came along in the late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], and all the queens were pretty much brown girls, you know, from a young lady named Danice Thomas [ph.] who was Miss Maroon and White my freshman year to Janet Lane [Janet Lane Martin] who was Miss Maroon and White my sophomore year to Toy Caldwell [A. Toy Caldwell-Colbert] who was Miss Maroon and White my junior year, to me in my senior year.  This--that whole period there were brown women which was very, very interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah it became like a cultural controversy as I remember.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Miss Black America pageant started, and darker black women were winning Miss Black America.  And someone actually started a rival contest call the Miss Americolor to--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to--
Speaker 1: Never heard that.
Speaker 2: --make sure that some light skinned women could win in the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you know, in the old way.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I mean, in the old way of viewing the lighter you are the closer you are to white.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So therefore you must look better because of the, you know, the black self-hate we've been taught, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that stigma.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So again, so again, like I said, growing up in Boulevard Place [Atlanta, Georgia], being Miss Maroon and White, that's not even in my frame of reference, do you know.  So it was, it was all a surprising, and it was great.  I thoroughly enjoyed it.  I got to know the alumnae and even as I worked for Spelman in years after, after that to run into the alumnae while I'm out traveling was always great.  And they remembered me, so it was, it was, it was a great period.  I've tried to in my life just build relationships, haven't burned too many bridges that I can think of.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I just always tried to build relationships with each different expression or each different activity.
Story_ID: 654886
Speaker 1: So this time between 1968 and '73 [1973] is a special time in the history of Atlanta [Georgia].  The black community is kind of flexing its muscles and--now you graduated in '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I missed the Maynard [Maynard Jackson] election, I missed that.
Speaker 1: Were you not here or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I, when I graduated from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I went to Milwaukee.  That was my first job out of college was at--in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you left in the spring.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was elected in the fall.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So 'cause I was gonna ask you if you, if you worked for him.
Speaker 2: Yes, I missed it.  I remember I had a bumper sticker but that's as much as I could do because I left in June.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were, you were excited about it and--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely!  I mean, look now I'm in Milwaukee.  Okay, let me say that again, I'm in Milwaukee (laughter) and I felt culturally deprived because you come from a place like Atlanta [Georgia] where there is the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium], and there's a sense of pride of people of color and, you know, we were moving up in the city.  And whether we were moving up in accepted ways from a business perspective, but there was always great pride in Atlanta.  This is the home of Citizens Trust Bank and Mutual Federal Bank [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association Atlanta] and the (clears throat) Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], and we had libraries in our neighborhoods.  And, so Atlanta was always special like that even before the great things that came post-Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  But Atlanta was always special.  So to go to a place now like Milwaukee and--where I didn't feel any sense black empowerment at all, I just didn't feel it.  (Laughter) I don't think it existed.  I really don't think it existed, was very difficult.  I went for the job, I was an English major in the recruiting offices, you know, when the--placement offices, when the corporations come there weren't very many people that were offering things for English majors other than being a teacher.  And I didn't want to do that, but I did like advertising, I liked advertising, ad agencies.  And, so the--I went to Milwaukee.  There was another job that came up for Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] because Clairol was at that time thinking about investing in a line or some kind of marketing campaign that focused on African Americans.  But I stayed at Koehring Company [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], was the name of the company.
Speaker 1: Koehr--
Speaker 2: K-O-E-H-R-I-N-G.  Koehring Company is a multinational machinery manufacturing company.  They make or did make pile drivers and back hoes and things like that.  But I'm in communications.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so it's about press releases and such and such got promoted and, you know, creating a template for that.  And I enjoyed that.  But I only stayed a year, a year, eight days, and I used to know the months and the, I mean, the hours and the minutes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you couldn't wait to get back?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god!  No.  It was just, it was Milwaukee.  It didn't stimulate me culturally, and it was cold.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was cold.
Story_ID: 654887
Speaker 1: So I have a Milwaukee [Wisconsin] story I can share with you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you know, in Atlanta [Georgia] when you have an inch or two of snow here back then, of course, you know, we're much more sophisticated now.  But back then, inch or two, three, city shuts down.  I mean, just forget about it.  So the first real snowfall that they had in Milwaukee while I was there, and I'm going to say this might have been December of '73 [1973], and I hear on the radio be careful out there, snow.  And I look out the window and snow is like, it's got to be like above your ankles.  So I'm like, bet there's no work today.  And I just went back to sleep.  Wasn't even thinking about it, and the phone rang maybe thirty minutes later, and it was my boss [at the Koehring Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And he wanted to know--first, his first question was, "Are you okay?"  And I said, "Yeah, I'm great."  And I'm like, "Why are you asking that question?"  He's like, "Well, you know, we're just wondering because everybody's here and we hadn't seen you.  We didn't know if you'd got lost in the snow or, you know."  I said, "You folks are at work?"  And he says, "Yes, everybody's here."  I said, "Oh, okay.  I'll be there."  So I went and dug my car out and made my way into work where all day they called me Southern Belle.  All day long they called me Southern Belle.  So second snowfall--the first one hadn't gone away but still snow on top of it, and I said I'm taking no chances, I'm going to get out of here early.  And I got out and again I had to dig my car out 'cause the snowbanks.  And I got to work and Southern Belle was on time watching people come in 'cause I didn't want to hear that anymore.  The third snowfall, he called me to say, the office is not open today.  And of course, at home I want to go, "What?  What, you're not open?  What?  What happened, Milwaukee?"  But the snow was so high that, when the snowplows came and moved the snow away, people couldn't get out of their driveways.  That's how high it was, it had to be in the twenty something inches by then.  Unheard of.  I went out to look for my car, and I had a Karmann Ghia [Volkswagen Karmann Ghia], so it's a little something.  And I saw this bank of snow and then it kind of dipped, and I said, "That must," (laughter)--, "that's my car."  This little bitty indentation, and you dig up under, and my car was under that.  So for those three reasons and others, a year and eight days was quite enough in Milwaukee.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Didn't want to do that winter again.
Story_ID: 654888
Speaker 1: Did you have a job lined up in Atlanta [Georgia] when--?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] had invited me to come back to Atlanta to talk for one of their alumnae career days and, so I did that.  And spent some time talking to Dr. Manley, Albert Manley [Albert E. Manley], who was the president at the time.  And he said, "Well, you know, there might be a space here at Spelman.  If there was, would you be interested?"  "Absolutely.  I would love that."  And he started just calling.  We talked in the afternoons, and then I got an offer letter to come to Spelman to work in their public relations department.  Now once I got here, they determined that the need for me was greater in the alumnae office than in the public relations office.  So that's where I started off working, I started working at Spelman in the alumnae office.  That was in the summer of '74 [1974].  And I stayed at Spelman four years.  I went on to become--by my third year, I became director of that office, director of alumnae affairs and the youngest person that had held that office.  But I loved it, I loved doing things for my Spelman sisters, I loved creating new programs for them.  I loved creating a newsletter for them to keep them all, you know, in touch and communicating.  And this is the old fashioned way, nothing digital, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --mimeograph machine, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have a sense that Spelman more than maybe any other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] keeps in touch with its alumnae.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes.  And that alumnae office is key.  Mrs. Ernestine Brazeal, B-R-A-Z-E-A-L, was the head of the alumnae office for many, many years.  And when I came in, I was under her.  And as I said, two years later she retired, and I became director of the alumnae office.
Story_ID: 654889
Speaker 1: What did you notice about the city when you, when you came back?  How did it change, you know, as May- with Maynard Jackson as mayor?
Speaker 2: What do I recall?  Well, Atlanta [Georgia] has always had a vibrancy to it.  And I would say, I felt about Atlanta then perhaps the way millennials feel about Atlanta now.  That it's the place to be.  That whatever is happening for black people, it's happening in Atlanta.  You know, Maynard had put in place the 30 percent of all contracts had to go to minority contractors, you see.  And that was a come up for many businesses that were here in Atlanta.  So you started seeing the result of that and seeing that people like [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell were, you know, taking a more prominent role in the development of the city.  And, so for me, it was just a great sense of this is the place to be.  Atlanta's always been the place to be from my perspective.
Story_ID: 654890
Speaker 1: So dur- during this period of time in '75 [1975] construction begins on MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], you know, moving Africans ra- rapidly through Atlanta [Georgia].  That's--somebody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very good (laughter)!  Very, good, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is--
Speaker 2: You heard that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I heard it, I've heard it.  There's a lore here and everybody has to learn it.  And shortly after that, I mean the planning for the, for Hartsfield is a, is going on.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I knew Hartsfield Airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] like the back of my hand because in my role at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as director of alumnae affairs and then when I traveled with [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers subsequent to that.  So I'm in and out of the airport.  When I tell you I knew how long it took me to go from the front door to what--whichever gate, I knew it just that well.  That--I left Atlanta from one airport and came back a few months later to a totally different airport was such a great sense of pride, such a great sense of pride (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you've come back to the (unclear), the largest airport in the world.
Speaker 2: Largest airport in the, in Atlanta, y'all, you know.  So I have a great deal of pride with what this city has accomplished, and in particular how its African American community has flourished and been great contributors to the fabric of what this city is.  I love that.
Speaker 1: And also Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] the president.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Ted Turner starts CNN.  This is all, you know, national (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Atlanta!
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Ted Turner went from Turner, Turner [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] the only cable station it felt like (laughter) that you could ever get to creating CNN in Atlanta.  And nobody could believe it, well, why is it in Atlanta?  And what's going to come--what'd they used to call it the chicken noodle network or something like that?  All kind of craziness outside, but I think we know who we are.  This is a city of people that dream big.  And Ted Turner was one of those people.  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was one of those people.  [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron who broke Babe Ruth's homerun record here--
Speaker 1: He broke that one, you got it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was one of those people, you know.  This is a city where people have been allowed to dream big, and when I say allowed I mean, if you can make it, then do that.  I don't think there's been a lot of resistance to people growing their dreams here.  We've got a--so many wonderful stories here of people that you've seen that started off as a student and then they got an internship and then they were a manager and then they blow up, and there's something really huge and making great contributions to the city.  So that was that period.  And that's why I said a little earlier Atlanta has always had a lot going on particularly for African Americans.
Story_ID: 654891
Speaker 1: Now I don't want to leave Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] out of the picture here, but what was your, what would you consider to be your greatest accomplishment at Spelman when you were there the four years as alumnae director?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, as alumnae director.  Well, we had our first alumnae travel experience while I was director of alumnae affairs.  Freddye Henderson [Freddye Scarborough Henderson] was head of Henderson Travel [Henderson Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia].  At the time, one of the oldest, most well known travel companies by an African American in the country.  She'd been profiled in Ebony magazine.  And Freddye and I were talking at some function, and I told her of my great love for Paris [France], and she says, "Well, why don't we put a trip together?"  Hm, really?  And, so we did.  The summer of 1978 we put together our first alumnae travel experience [Alumnae Global Travel Program] to Paris and parts of France.  Something else that I created that Spelman still does, but I'm not sure what they call it, but I created the Spelman alumna student exchange program [Sister 2 Sister Professional Mentoring Program] so that during the spring breaks the Spelman students had some opportunities to go and visit alumnae, see what they were doing, stay in their homes and have the experience of here's what a (laughter) grown working woman does, you understand.  Because we were all--and the inspiration for that was actually Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] because Morehouse was always talking about what a Morehouse man does or such and such'll happen and, well, you know, he's a Morehouse man.  And at this period of time, while we had many graduates, I don't think we were tooting our horn as much as we could have about people that were doing extraordinary things.  And as alumnae director, that was my job, was to make sure that people knew the great work of our alumnae and that they were involved in the college.  But I also felt equally that it was important that our students knew because you got to know what you can aspire to do or aspire to be.  And I felt Morehouse did a much better job of that than we did.  So that was my goal.  And as recently as maybe three or four years ago, I think they still have that program where the students go and they spend time with an alumna during the spring break or sometime during the year.  And of course, our alumnae now are in such high powered jobs all over the country, so the students are getting such an amazing experience if they're still doing that.  But those are the two things that I'm, I'm most proud of, and the fact that one has had longevity.
Story_ID: 654892
Speaker 1: Now you got married in the late '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], okay, all right.  And you told us how you met your husband.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then you didn't, you didn't get together then, but you got together lat- later.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I met Andre [Andre Bertrand] probably maybe '76 [1976], something like that.  I had--no, I met him when I was--no, '72 [1972], '73 [1973].  He was a freshman [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], that's it.  And I met him at the photography club meeting and, you know, he tried to talk to me then and invited me to come visit him in his dorm.  And I'm just like, you're a freshman, (laughter) come on.  You know, I'm Miss Maroon and White, what would I be doing going to a freshman dorm, you know.  So he used to love to tell that story because it was true.  But I saw him years later, I had just come off the road with [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers in 1979.  And he was here for the second half of the Atlanta Jazz Festival.  Atlanta Jazz Festival used to do something in June and then they would do something like in Labor Day weekend or something like that.  And, so I saw Andre and we talked, hung out, just had a great time.  I found out he was only a year younger than me not, you know, three or four as I had imagined.  But I still wasn't going to visit his dorm (laughter) so, you know, that still was out.  And we got married the next year.  It was really good chemistry just, you know, everything clicked and he said that he was looking for a wife at the time so, yeah.
Story_ID: 654893
Speaker 1: You had kind of threw away that you'd just come off the road with [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers. I mean this is a, this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't throw it away, I just hadn't, hadn't got back to it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Roy Ayers was big--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: --in the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: He was at his biggest.
Speaker 2: And I toured his biggest song, which was "You Send Me."  I toured that song for him.  So that was, that was fun.  I met Roy, I was living in Midtown, I had a friend that was a flight attendant that was overnighting in Atlanta [Georgia], so she was staying with me.  And it just so happened that he was performing at a club, Alex Cooley's Electric Ballroom [Atlanta, Georgia], which was like around the corner from my house.  And, so somehow my girlfriend--I don't know if she got us tickets or if we bought them, I don't remember.  But we went to this concert and we were sitting right up front, and it was--oh, my god!  So much energy, which never changes over the years.  It's amazing, his showmanship and energy.  But it was just like one of the best shows I'd ever been to, so after the show is over we go backstage and I tell him, "Well, you know, I can sing."  And what's that standard answer?  Oh, yeah, sure, right.  You know.  So, "But no, really, I really can sing."  And, so I sang a song called "Take All the Time You Need," which was one of his early hits with a female vocal.  And he was very impressed, he gave me his phone number and told me to let him know if I was ever in New York [New York], and he'd love to, you know, just kind of see what I was doing.  And, "Are you taking voice lessons or doing anything like that?"  I said, well, no, I really wasn't but--well, he says, "Well, you know, you might want to do that, just, you know, kind of work on a little bit on pitch and breathing."  And, so I did.  I took voice lessons just to be ready.  So when it came to '78 [1978] and I'm getting ready to go to Paris [France], well, I have a whole day in New York.  So I flew into New York first thing that morning, the flight doesn't leave until like six [o'clock] or something that night out of JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York].  And I came in early that morning so I could go and see Roy Ayers and let him know that I took voice lessons all year, and I'm ready and I want you to hear me.  So I literally got off the plane, went to his house, sang for Roy, went back to JFK so I could fly to Paris.  And by the time I came back, he had called me and they--he would--starting to record some album ['Fever'] he wanted me to come up.  So I went to New York, but I didn't join them until February of 1979.
Speaker 1: What's the song?  "Running Away"?  I remember that was one of the big--
Speaker 2: Doobie doo, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that was before me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: But we covered that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah,
Speaker 2: But like I said, at that time, he was, he was crossing over into a lot of pop and R and B charts with his version of "You Send Me."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And remember, it has his voice and a female vocal voice, and that really was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think really when he--the Mizell Brothers were producing some of his work in those days I think.  I don't, I mean I'm, you know--
Speaker 2: That doesn't ring a bell to me.
Speaker 1: That doesn't, okay.  Yeah, maybe not, maybe not.
Speaker 2: That doesn't ring a bell to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654894
Speaker 1: So you get married in 1980, and you're performing with [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers sometimes, right?  'Cause your--
Speaker 2: So I performed with Roy before I got married.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So when I--
Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's why I said, when I came off the road I was no longer with Roy, when I came off the road.  So that's why I was kind of opened to this new experience here of this guy from the islands and he's from, Andre's [Andre Bertrand] from St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands.  Although, he was born in Savannah [Georgia] but grew up in St. Thomas.  So I was off the road by then.  But the road taught me a lot.  I felt that I could handle it because I had done all of my traveling with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] so that part I had down, I had down better--it was one woman and thirteen guys between the crew and the band and every- and roadies and everything else.  There were thirteen of them, of us that would travel.  What I didn't have down was being able to take care of myself for long periods of time, so I was sick like the first month and a half, two months.  I was literally performing with an inflamed throat or tonsillitis or whatever the case might be.  And we had a break in April of that year and I went to Puerto Rico.  Didn't know a soul, I just needed to be where there was sun, just needed to be where there was sun.  And I went to Puerto Rico and came back, and I was well.  Do you know, brand new me.  And I felt good, it was like the first time I really felt like I was hearing myself at that time.  And then Roy taught me something that I carried into my corporate life for many years, still do, that people pay to come and see a show and that's what they want to see.  They don't want to know that you broke your heel, they don't want to know that your luggage didn't arrive on time, they don't want to know that your dress ripped.  None of that's important because they came to see the show that they paid their money for, that you're supposed to give them.  So what that meant was attitude, everything has to be on top for the show.  And we got to that because one of the roadies hadn't taped down the cords from the mic back to the amplifiers, speakers.  And, so I came on stage, you know, here is my big entrance and I tripped 'cause I tripped on the cord that wasn't taped down.  And, so I was really ticked for the first, you know song or two.  And he looked over and saw me and I wasn't smiling and, so we went into this one song, you know, he likes to hit on this cowbell (gesture), and he, you know, leaned over to me and said, "Can I talk to you for a minute?"  And we turned our backs to the audience, but he's hitting on the cowbell and we're dancing.  And he says, "What's wrong with you?"  And I explained what was wrong with me.  And he says, "Well, you know, nobody cares.  I really don't, and you need to get it together so when you turn around, you need to be smiling," (singing), "because when you're smiling the whole world smiles with you."  I promise you, this is the drum playing something totally different, but this is what he's singing.  And, so by the time I turn around and life is grand and glorious again, you know.  But I kept that lesson for a lifetime, you know.  I used to tell my staffers, I said, "Nobody cares if the kid pooped on you before you got to work or you spilled milk in the car, whatever, somebody cut you off.  Not my issue because when we have a meeting at nine [o'clock], however, and there's a client here, or a member company has come to visit us then we've got to be in the moment right that minute."  And it was good training because many times when I was in my corporate job, I would have at that point dropped four kids off at one--for a year and a half at two different schools.  And I've still got to be at an eight o'clock meeting where there's a room full of people waiting to see me because I'm the first speaker for my program.  So I would literally walk in the front door, drop my briefcase behind the desk with the receptionist, deep breathe and then you go in and, what'd Bob Fosse say (snaps fingers), "Show time?"  And that was it.  And that was that--Roy's lesson that was still resonating.  It's show time.  People paid, or they're here for a (gesture) specific thing, you need to give it to 'em.  They don't want stories about how your kid, you know, threw Fruit Loops all over the car and stuff like that.  That's not part of the moment.  So just that was my Roy Ayers lesson that I learned on the road, and it was a good one, it was a good one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I--
Story_ID: 654895
Speaker 1: About your voice, I heard it last night for the first time to my--I mean, that I knew it was specifically you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because I hadn't focused on you as an enter- entertainer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I hadn't.  And I'm listening last night and I was struck by the breathing.  It's almost like listening to Roland Kirk [Rahsaan Roland Kirk] play the horn.  I mean, you don't, you just flow from one thing to the next--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in an effortless kind of way.  I mean, it's really interesting.  I mean, you know, you don't, you don't hear people sing that way.  Is this something that you are conscious of that you're doing or a vo- vocal--I mean--
Speaker 2: I mean it's just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your breathing has to be really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've had people that will say to me something about my breathing and I'm just like, oh, really?  Just, years.  Really, just, just the experience of the years.  Remembering things from English like, you know connecting a sentence together--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and not breathing in between a syllable, you know, so some basic thing.  You know, you are at any moment the sum total of your life's experiences and, so I just have tried to bring everything that I've learned, whether it's in English class or whether it's something that [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers taught me.  I've just tried to bring all things to being in the moment when I perform.  And that's the same for when I record, it's the--just kind of going in with that same thought (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there must be a word for it but it's a sustained--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't know it.
Speaker 1: --trajectory of voice.  It's just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's so different.  It's not like with the--you know, the ty- typical church singer, you know, these days, they're trying to be fancy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ooh, ah, and they do all that.
Speaker 2: All the runs (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you--all the runs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you can just kind of flow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's--
Speaker 2: But I can't do runs like that.  That's just not my style.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the easiest way to approach that--
Speaker 1: So 'cause you mentioned you had a voice coach a certain point and I didn't ask you about who it was but--
Speaker 2: My voice coach was Dr. Cecily Beasley, she was a music instructor, music professor at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  And that's who I studied under for about a year, year and a half.  And my point with Cecily was to learn how to breath, learn how to use the total instrument and not just be in a head tone or a chest tone but really to use everything.  And it was very good for me, it expanded me.  I--a few years later somewhere maybe in the '90s [1990s], I went to a lady named Dee Knapp, K-N-A-P-P.  Dee has transitioned since that time, but Dee was just wonderful.  And it, again it was about breath and breath control.  Breath control is everything, it's really everything because it's your lows and your highs.  And it's that space in between, and it's expression because you may want to put more emphasis on one note than another and, so that's what I learned from those ladies.
Story_ID: 654896
Speaker 1: So here you are, you're married now and you had your first son in 1980, Rodney [Rodney Bertrand Morine], right?
Speaker 2: No, Rodney is Andre's son.
Speaker 1: Andr- okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, my first son (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  So--oh.
Speaker 2: --was Ikechi [Ikechi Bertrand].
Speaker 1: Ikechi, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, well, I notice the next what, three, they have African names.
Speaker 2: All of them have African names.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, so Andre [Andre Bertrand] had met a gentleman from Nigeria named Osuago [ph.], Osuago, and he had convinced Andre that he should, that his name, Andre's name should be Ikechi, which means that all that I have comes from God.  All that I have comes from God.  And, so our first son was named Ikechi, although Andre is still Andre.  But named our first son Ikechi.  Then the second son is Amichi [Amichi Bertrand], Amichi is--oh, no, Amichi is all that I have comes from God.  Ikechi is God's will, that's what Ikechi means, God's will.  Then the twins came along and they are Chioma [Chioma Bertrand] and Chinela [Chinela Bertrand].  Chioma is God's love, Chinela is God's thoughts.  And, so what is consistent is the -chi which refers to deity, God, Creator, something greater than yourself.  And when we started looking at the meanings of these Igbo names, I liked that thread throughout every child's name, giv- always giving them that source of a higher power for their lives.  And then all of their middle names is Jackson 'cause I needed to give homage to my mom [Nan Gibson Jackson] and dad [William Jackson].  So it's Ikechi Jackson Bertrand, Amichi Jackson Bertrand, Chioma Jeannette Jackson Bertrand named after my mom, and Chinela Earnestine Jackson Bertrand named after Andre's mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So a lot of family stuff in there.  But that's how you carry it on, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a good connection.
Story_ID: 654897
Speaker 1: When did you leave Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  You--
Speaker 2: I left Spelman in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: And--um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because that was the year I started interfacing with Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers].  I had gone to New York [New York] that summer.  I was about to go to the Manhattan School of Music [New York, New York], that was really what I was leaving Spelman for, was to go to the Manhattan School of Music.  And I was using some of my Spelman slash Rockefeller relationships to, you know, kind of manipulate my way through where I would stay, going to school and things like that.  But then when the opportunity came to sing with Roy I wanted to pursue that instead of actually moving to New York because I didn't have to.  I could do that and still live in Atlanta [Georgia] and be on the road and come back to Atlanta, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you're actually performing full time then for the first time in your life--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm performing from, let's say, June through December in and around Atlanta and I leave Atlanta to, to perform with Roy.  He called me on New Year's Eve '78 [1978], so I went out on the road early February of '79 [1979] with him.
Story_ID: 654898
Speaker 1: Was it getting married that stopped you from traveling so much or did you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Because we moved to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and I still sung.  I was with a band there called Onyx [ph.], and I sang while I was pregnant, I sang after the baby [Ikechi Bertrand] came (laughter).  I just never stopped.  But I wasn't in a position to try to get out on the road again or anything like that.  And that wasn't appealing to me at that point.  I really wanted to concentrate and be there for my family and my son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you like the Virgin Islands?
Speaker 2: It was okay.
Speaker 1: Not that much I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, it's an island, you know.  And, so there's only so far in any direction that you can go.  And everybody knows everybody, and everybody knows everybody's business.  And if I went to the bank and the end of the day somebody would've told Andre [Andre Bertrand] and he'd say, "Oh, you were at the bank and such and such a saw you."  And, it's just like, yeah.  There was a portion of time we lived in St. Croix, and I had shipped my car to the Virgin Islands, my little Karmann Ghia [Volkswagen Karmann Ghia].  And they had this freeway [Melvin H. Evans Highway], it was about four miles long, maybe five miles long [sic.].  That's it.  So the joy for me was to go get on that expressway and just press pedal to the metal and just (makes sound) all the way to the end, get off, turn around (laughter) and come back 'cause by the time you got up to speed it was time to get off.  That's all I had, you couldn't do that on the regular roads of course, you know, because you got, you know, little small roads and curvy roads and things like that.  But I loved getting on that little four mile highway and just letting it rip for a minute.
Story_ID: 654899
Speaker 1: So you came back to the United States--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when?  In '83 [1983], you think?
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983], came back to the states.  There was some information in the newspaper about the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau [Atlanta, Georgia].  My mother [Nan Gibson Jackson] used to send me the newspaper all the time.  And the city council, the convention bureau was going after additional funding for some initiative, and they were going before the Atlanta City Council.  And, so there was an agreement or a caveat of sorts attached to them being able to get the funding, which was that they needed to expand the number of African Americans that worked for the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau.  So I saw that article and was like (makes sound), you know, who do I know?  (Laughter) And, so I came to Atlanta [Georgia] for a Christmas holiday and started making some calls.  And Don Stewart [Donald M. Stewart] was president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time, I told him what I was trying to do.  And then Don called Sonjia Young [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young] and Sonjia Young was a member of the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau.  And, so she called the president of the bureau and told him that there was a young woman that she thought that he should talk to.  And, so that's how I got my interview with Ted Sprague of the ACVB.  I interviewed with him.  I interviewed with him in January and got the job, and I started working with them in March of that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1983?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654900
Speaker 1: So this is 1983 at the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau [Atlanta, Georgia].  What were your initial duties?
Speaker 2: I started off as an account executive for membership.  Actually, our title was account representative for membership, and I got it lobbied to get it changed to account executive.  There I go again but (laughter).  So our duties were to sell advertising in the various publications that the convention and visitors bureau had that were given to visitors and to sell memberships.  The Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau is a membership based organization.  I would say, however, at the time the emphasis in our sales duties was more towards the advertising revenue side--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --than to the membership.
Speaker 1: But the members would be hotels and restaurants and other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  Any business that would stand to gain from being affiliated with the hospitality industry--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So caterers, florists--okay.
Speaker 2: --in Atlanta [Georgia] that had a service or a product that was aimed towards the hospitality industry.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, now how did that work at first.  Did you, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, that first year was a little rough.  We were on commission, and it was a hundred percent commission, there was no draw or anything.  And, so that first year was a little rough.  But, you know, I hung with it.  I was staying with my mother [Nan Gibson Jackson], so I was back at home.  And the bonus was that she watched my son [Ikechi Bertrand] at least the first half of that first year.
Speaker 1: So were you divorced at this point or were you split up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were separated.
Speaker 2: No, we hadn't, hadn't divorced yet.  No, well--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's just that I came up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --before Andre [Andre Bertrand] came up.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I came up before Andre came up.  To just kind of get settled and see, you know, how are we going to do this, and he was involved in a farm that we had.  Well, we were partners in, in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], and felt that, you know, that's where he needed to be.  And like I said, we didn't have a place to stay here other than my mom's, so it kind of worked out.  So as I said, the first year was rough but I got in and kind of learned the lay of the land and, so by the second year I had doubled my salary.  And then I was starting to get a sense of the space.  And by that, I mean you know, you can't just go into a place and start, you know, rattling off changes and things like that.  You really have to learn the politics of an office and the flow and the co- corporate culture.  And, but by the second year I started making suggestions about how things could run better because remember I'd been in management--although I wasn't at that time, but I at least felt that I had some things to share.  And, so it was kind of, you know, every other week or so I was creating a memo that talked to how to make the situation better.  There was myself and two other women that were the account executives.
Speaker 1: Who was the director then?
Speaker 2: The director of my area?
Speaker 1: Well, no, the whole Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Of the convention business bureau?  The president was Ted Sprague, the gentleman with whom I interviewed was the president of the bureau.  So let me see, myself, two other women and one man.  That was our initial group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So four people?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Then the man dropped off I think by the second year or so he dropped off.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And it was three ladies left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a new convention center or--here in Atlanta then?
Speaker 2: Well, the Georgia World Congress Center [Atlanta, Georgia] was up, but they made two additions to it during the time--two or maybe three during the time that I was working for ACVB.  But the Georgia World Congress Center was that main meetings space that was here.  And it, and it's funny when I look back over my thirty-two year career, we've had at least three, maybe four dips in the economy during that period.  But each time Atlanta came back bigger, better, stronger than before, which I think is a testament to the strength of that particular industry here, and it's well run.
Story_ID: 654901
Speaker 1: In 1986, I was pregnant with my second son, Amichi [Amichi Bertrand], and I worked up until maybe two weeks before he was born and that was March of '86 [1986].  In January, February of '87 [1987], I went to work, and I had found out I was pregnant again, and that same day my boss at the time had come in to announce that he was about to take a job someplace else, so he was leaving.  And that afternoon I'd planned to come in and announce that I'm pregnant, so I just kept my news (laughter).  After he said he was leaving, I was like, oh, man, here we go.  But by that afternoon or perhaps the--yeah, by that afternoon, his boss called me in to tell me that he wanted me to apply for the job as manager of the area of membership.  And, so I did with his coaching and tutelage.  And I--that's when I told him that I was pregnant again.  And he said, "Well, it didn't seem to stop you the last time so, you know, I don't see where that's a problem."  And it wasn't.  So I became advertising and membership manager for the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1987, which is the same year that--my twins [Chioma Bertrand and Chinela Bertrand] were born that September.
Speaker 2: So these are the two girls, right?
Speaker 1: The twin girls, yes.  I maintained that position until 2001--no, '91 [1991], nine--'91 [1991].  Yeah, I jumped ten years, until '91 [1991] at which time I became vice president of membership and community affairs.
Story_ID: 654902
Speaker 1: Now let me just stop here a second and ask you about the--At- Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] Olympic bid.  I think we--it was made around--between '87 [1987] and '90 [1990] I guess, and I think a lot of people when they heard about it felt--around the coun- country didn't take it very seriously.
Speaker 2: I didn't either.  It was like, are you serious (laughter)?  But we're in hospitality, so we have a little bit of a different view in that the ACVB [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia] was involved.  While not at my level, we knew that our team was involved in the bid package, putting it together, expounding on the great attributes of the city.  And of course, we love anything that brings attention to the city.  We had just had the Democratic National Convention, I think that was in '88 [1988 Democratic National Convention, Atlanta, Georgia].  I believe that was in '88 [1988] we had the Democratic National Convention and, so there's a different kind of energy in the city when there's something really, really major going on.  It's kind of an electricity.  And not only that but during those early '90 [1990] years, those were the years that the Atlanta Braves were into the--they made it in the--I don't know if they call it the finals but--
Speaker 1: The playoffs.
Speaker 2: Yes, playoffs and subsequently the World Series, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The World Series, yes.  And this is a team that had been--
Speaker 2: Had last, forever.
Speaker 1: --languished at the bottom for a long time and--
Speaker 2: Right, right, forever.
Speaker 1: --Ted Turner started broadcasting them on cable.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were always still at the bottom.
Speaker 2: Still at the bottom but that's--
Speaker 1: But, now all of a sudden (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-one [1991] was when they turned--'90 [1990] or '91 [1991] was when they turned it around.  Worst to first was the phrasing that they used, which was true, which was true.  But that was new energy for this city because the other name that we had in addition to Hotlanta was Losersville.  Because none of our sports teams were winners at anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah the Atlanta Falcons, they--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: --they lost for a long time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And the Hawks--
Speaker 1: --the Atlanta Hawks--
Speaker 2: --had a little spirit there back when Lou Hudson--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was involved but after that, no.  And, so to have the Braves go to the World Series, what?  Was just awesome.  And, as I said, there is an electricity, a feeling that's palpable.  You--any part of the city you could feel that.  And I really enjoyed being in that industry during these key times in the city.  Braves winning, Falcons going to the Super Bowl, so Olympic games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah, that was great but we--hadn't we already had a Super Bowl by then?  I can't remember, but, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ted Turner is married to Jane Fonda I think at this point, I mean, it's a lot of, it's a lot of attention--
Speaker 2: Just a lot of stuff going on--
Speaker 1: --poured (unclear).
Speaker 2: --in the city but--
Speaker 1: CNN is big so--
Speaker 2: And by then CNN was, you know, had that credibility that, you know, not so much in the early years but certainly by then.  And Atlanta has always had a--as I've said, things to be proud of.  So to be with the company that's responsible for selling this great city to others for their short term visits or conventions or whatever, it felt good.  It felt like a really good fit for me.  And I came to the convention bureau on a dare because my friends in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands would always say things to me like, "Well, yeah, you need to go work for the tourist board there because all you ever do is talk about Atlanta."  They always said that.  So when this--that opportunity, you know, presented itself I was like, well, you know, everybody says I need to go work for the tourist board.  So this is the equivalent of the tourist board here, and it was a really good fit for me.
Story_ID: 654903
Speaker 1: The Olympic bid is, is going on.  I think they were finally chosen in 1990 I guess but they were get- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm and there's a tape somewhere, I'm on it.  I was at Underground for the announcement, and this is how, this is how I was, when it was, when there were big things relating to the city, I would bring my children, so I had my son Ikechi [Ikechi Bertrand] and my baby son Amichi [Amichi Bertrand], and Amichi was up in my arms.  So he had to only--maybe it was '89 [1989] or '90 [1990], yeah, because Amichi was still a little something and, but I wanted them to sense what it was when your city is a finalist for the Olympics.  So you remember they had the announcement at Underground Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia], that's where they made the official announcement.  And I took them out of school that morning because the announcement was first thing in the morning.  And I took them out of school so they could go down with me, and when the announcement was made I'm jumping up and down, I'm screaming, I'm crying.  And there is actually footage on I think one of the television stations, they have me bawling (laughter) with my son up in my arms.  But it was that kind of moment that you want your children to remember that, you know, you were a part of this because this is your town.  This is the same place I told you, you need to learn what your downtown is.  Well, you also need to learn how to embrace great things that are going on in your city.
Speaker 1: Now correct me if I'm wrong here, but I read that the ace that Mayor Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and the city had for bringing the Olympics to Atlanta [Georgia] was the African bloc.
Speaker 2: I had heard that as well.  And Andrew, you have to--we call him Andy, but Ambassador Young had been ambassador to the United Nations for heaven sakes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, so he had relationships around the world unlike any of us.  And he was particularly strong in the African bloc as you referred to it, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he got married in Africa, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, so, yes.  And just had a remarriage about, a rededication about six or seven months ago, so, yes, he had very, very strong ties to Africa.  And, so if that was what worked in our behalf then so be it.  It worked.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had a swing vote in the, I mean the African bloc could swing it is what I heard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's what brought it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe I've read that as well, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So anyway, so this is a--people start talking about this.  I mean they were talking about it in Chicago [Illinois].  Now they're going to get to Atlanta for the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, people, people were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --excited.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was a great time in this city.  Absolutely--when they--they just closed Turner Field [Atlanta, Georgia] yesterday, and I was trying my best to--I'll come back to that.  But my thought was that we watched the old stadium come down, me and my kids, and we went to the opening of the Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], me and my children.  So when you think about again this child from the Fourth Ward in Atlanta [Old Fourth Ward] and what's on your list of things that, you know, you want to do.  Going to the Olympic Games would never have been that because, what?  Coming to Atlanta?  Of course, not (laughter), you know.  So again I got a chance to expose my children to that because I took them to the opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games.
Story_ID: 654904
Speaker 1: Some of the things that you did as your--as vice president of membership and community affairs?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There was a--you created a Diversity in the Hospitality Industry Summit?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Summit, yeah.  Hospitality student summit.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Diversity in marketing advisement council.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you developed an--Atlanta Heritage, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The visitors guide?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The visitors guide.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell us about some of these things and how you came up with them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when you're in a position to have a voice in the room, you need to make sure that you use it strategically, you know.  And feel the power behind doing that.  So when I became vice president of membership and community affairs, I asked for the community affairs addition because the--I was getting calls from people all over Atlanta [Georgia] all the time that wanted information about the convention bureau [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia].  What are we doing, what can we do to help them?  You know, what's our mission, what's our focus, how are we touching whatever the case might be?  And, so I asked for that addition to my title to expand how people viewed us and how we viewed Atlanta, number one.  Number two, when you get called on to speak publicly as much as I did, you start to get a different sense of a community that's outside of hospitality and that is the perception of what we were as a company, the perception of the industry.  And I spent a lot of time talking to students that has been consistent in what I've done, spent a lot of time talking to students and their perceptions of hospitality industry were just all so off.  They couldn't think beyond a bellman or a waitress or something like that.  And when I tell--told them that, you know, there's a gentleman that's the chief engineer at this hotel, and there's a woman that's the general manager at this hotel, and there's a gentleman that owns his own transportation company and all of these wonderful stories, it just said to me we need to do something in Atlanta.  We go to conferences other places, but we need to do something that's here, that we start, that we embrace to tell the story of diversity and hospitality and to learn from it.  What are the lessons that we can learn?  How can we increase our customer base?  I mean, that's really what it's all about for everybody is how do you get more customers in?  And if we want to appeal to the African American, if we want to appeal to Hispanics--seg- segments of this population, what are the things that we should be doing?  So that was why the Diversity in the Hospitality Industry Summit was started.  We covered everything from hiring practices to advertising, to recruitment.  You know, people talk to people that they know, but sometimes you have to extend beyond who you know to get to people that look like me, and you can't be afraid to have those real conversations.  And, so we did that for nine years.
Story_ID: 654905
Speaker 1: Out of that came the student summit because there were several high schools in Atlanta [Georgia] in the Atlanta public school system [Atlanta Public Schools] that had hospitality programs.  And I found this out kind of by accident and invited one school one year, but when I discovered that there were more schools then I started going to schools and talking to the directors of the programs to prime the pump so to speak, to make sure that they knew of the program that I had so that we could bring students in so they could experience it.  Some of our students had never been inside of a hotel.  Some of our students--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --didn't know how to use the correct silverware and everything at lunch.  And I had them sitting at lunch every time they came, and I would go to the school and say, "Well, you might be sitting next to the general manager of this hotel, so you need to know how to talk to them--."
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: And, you know, all of those little things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's interesting in that regard because I know that I've heard that today's youth, many of them never sit down at the table and eat.
Speaker 1: I've heard that too.
Speaker 2: They eat out of McDonald's bags, pizza boxes and in their room.  I mean, the family doesn't sit down formally to eat--
Speaker 1: Yes, I've heard that, as well.
Speaker 2: --but maybe one time a year then they might do it.
Speaker 1: I've heard that.
Speaker 2: And then it's like--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the tables there are spread around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard that as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I try to massage a lot into their experience everything from interviewing, talking to, you know, someone.  My thing was always the written and spoken word, what you can write, what you can read, what you can say.  It's still important, you know.  And getting them into a space where I would have African Americans that were in all these different positions.  One guy owned a sound and lighting company.  As I said, one guy owned his own bus company, general manager of a hotel, hotel sales manager, restaurant owner.  And, so that they could see this is what hospitality looks like because unfortunately the programs that they were in were way too focused on the culinary side of things.  And everybody's not going to be a cook, you know.  And they were learning all kind of different knives and all that, which is wonderful, but everybody's not going to use all those knives for
Speaker 2: It was too narrowly focused--
Speaker 1: Right, it was too narrowly focused, I wanted to just broaden their horizons, you see.  And, so that's what I was able to do through the diversity summit [Diversity in the Hospitality Industry Summit], we did that for nine years, did that for nine years.
Story_ID: 654906
Speaker 1: The Atlanta Heritage guide that you mentioned came out of a need to have a publication that talked about Atlanta [Georgia] as a destination for African Americans.  There was so much history here, so much rich culture here, but it was not being covered in the general publications that promoted Atlanta.  And, so it literally started as a typewritten sheet in my desk because the National Dental Association, the president of which was a friend of mine was in Atlanta one summer--I wanna say maybe '88 [1988], '89 [1989], and he came to me--or '90 [1990], and said, "Well, you know, do you have a, a--something that gives people an idea of what's in the African American community and restaurants and things like that?"  And I said, "Well, I have this typewritten list that I've compiled myself."  Because I kept a list of all of the black restaurants and shops and--just because people would ask that information and I wanted to have it.  And I gave that to him, and he copied that for the National Dental Association that summer.  And, so then I went to the CEO and I said, "This is embarrassing.  Atlanta, Atlanta, home of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Maynard Jackson, Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], should never be a place that has a typewritten sheet that promotes its African American community."
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this is the point you got the--this major airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], largest in the U.S.  Dr. King, the Dr. King museum.
Speaker 1: The Center for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The King Center [Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Center, King Center, um-hm.
Speaker 2: These are international attractions, people coming from all over the world.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: When you go over there, you'll see all kinds of people there.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: And they come here so I mean--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --so it makes sense.
Speaker 1: You would've agreed, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and, so, and he agreed.  He understood, he got it.  And, so the--remember I used to be advertising manager.  (Cough) Excuse me.  So we formed this partnership with the Atlanta Business Chronicle and out of that came a publishing company called Atcomm, A-T-C-O-M-M.  And the Atlanta Heritage guide was published through Atcomm Publishing [Atlanta, Georgia], and we published for twenty-five years.
Story_ID: 654907
Speaker 1: I want to throw in a couple of other things here.  In 1992, it says here that you performed at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona [1992 Summer Olympics, Barcelona, Spain].
Speaker 2: My voice went to Barcelona (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your voice went, but you didn't go?
Speaker 2: My voice went to Bar--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So at the end of the Barcelona games--this was going to be the--because remember back then the Olympics were every--let me see--
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: --every four years and it would be winter (clears throat), it would--winter would alternate with summer.  Remember that?  So let's see--I got a call to come and record 'Amazing Grace.'  I think it was at Doppler [Doppler Studios, Atlanta, Georgia].  Remember Doppler from way back?  And I wasn't sure what it was for at the time and when I got there they told me.  So I had a chance to sing through the song, and they wanted it to have that rich, southern, gospel kind of feel to it.  And then I hummed it.  And they actually used the hummed version, so at the end of the '92 [1992] Olympics you start to hear my voice.  There's a commercial that comes up talking about Atlanta [Georgia] and that's my voice that's in the background of that commercial promoting coming to Atlanta in '96 [1996].  By the same token, in '94 [1994] ACOG had formed by then, that's the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.  Jeff Babcock [Jeffrey Babcock] was the head of the cultural arts portion of it, and I was asked to accompany Joe Jennings and the Atlanta All Stars band to Lillehammer, Norway.  So we went to the '94 Olympics [1994 Winter Olympics] where we served as cultural ambassadors.  And we kind of did a little mini tour, we performed in Lillehammer, we performed in about four cities in and around the Olympic venues.
Story_ID: 654908
Speaker 1: That was wonderful. That was just an extraordinary experience.  Snow, I should have been used to that from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] but outside of my--the place where I was staying, the snow was literally this high (indicates height).  It was waist deep.  And I had bought some juice at the store that day and, so my brilliance in the moment was, well, there's no place to put the juice so go outside and just stick it in the ice.  And, so that's what I did each night.  I'd open my door, I'd stick my juice in my little ice refrigerator (laughter) outside the door and in the morning, I'd go take it out and, you know, take it back into my room.  Ah, man!  But it was wonderful.  Joe Jennings is someone that I'd known many years and Joe was the first director of the Spelman jazz band [Spelman College Jazz Ensemble].  He put that jazz band together that Spelman's [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] well known for.  But prior to that he had a great group in Atlanta [Georgia], and they still perform on occasion, called Life Force.  And Life Force was the--to me, they were the premier jazz performance group in Atlanta.  Avant-garde, straight ahead sound, he wasn't doing so much, you know, the Basie-kind of music [Count Basie].  He was more towards the Lonnie Liston Smith, that side and more.  And I used to perform with Joe before I went on the road with Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], so it was one of those full circle moments to be able to go to Norway with him and a band that he'd put together and to perform all over Norway was just really wonderful.  So that was in '94 [1994] before we get to the Olympics in '96 [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].  During '96 [1996], I had performances all during the Olympic Games, so many places.  I was performing the day that they had the bombing.  I had been performing earlier that day in the park [Centennial Olympic Park, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: So your responsibilities with the convention center, I mean, the visitors bureau [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia] didn't conflict with performing at the Olympics?
Speaker 1: No.  Well--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, there's a thing called vacation time, so you strategically place vacation time so that you can do those things.  I mean, I've (clears throat)--I think I've always had a good balance of being able to continue my music and maintain my day job as we say because that was necessary.  I was still raising children and, you know, needed dental benefits, medical benefits, and I loved my work.  I loved it all.  So as much of it as I could do, I just tried to do it all.  But definitely, when I went to Norway that was vacation time in '94 [1994].  And when I did my performances for the Olympic Games, if it was in the daytime that was vacation time.  If it was at night, it was on me.  Sometimes I would take my kids with me, it just kind of depended on the venue.
Story_ID: 654909
Speaker 1: You mentioned the bombing [at the Centennial Olympic Park, Atlanta, Georgia].  You, so you performed the day of the bomb--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Fortunately, you were not--
Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) around.
Speaker 2: I think we were, we left maybe like four o'clock or something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: It's interesting now you think about it, so many bombings by Muslims and, or people that are claiming to be Muslims anyway and in those days, it would be like some disaffected--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --American.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in this case it was.  It was Eric Rudolph, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But another man was accused, Richard Jewell.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was in there--for a couple of weeks he was a suspect.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember.
Story_ID: 654910
Speaker 1: What were some of the highlights?  I know, I know a lot of people talk about Ali's torch lighting as being one of the highlights of the Olympic Games but tell us about that and some of the other highlights of the games here in Atlanta [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Certainly, Muhammad Ali lighting the Olympic torch and then you know, there was a great mystery around that because they hadn't announced who the person was, and everybody's guessing, and you just really had no idea.  And, so when he appeared it was like a bolt of electricity went through the stadium.  It was already a magic moment be- just being there and the way that they portrayed the activities on the field.  You know, when you watch it on television all the colors and so many people's children were involved in all--so many people, cast of thousands.  You used to hear that term, but that's what that was at the opening ceremony.  So to get, to have seen all of that and to get the point of who's going to light the torch that was really just very special.  And then we were afraid he wasn't going to be able to light it, you know, because I think it was like on the third try that it finally actually caught which was wonderful.  And then the stadium just erupted, that was just awesome.  Another great part of the Olympics Games was, that was at Tur- what is now Turner Field [Centennial Olympic Stadium; Turner Field, Atlanta, Georgia], but a lot of the activity took place at the Georgia World Congress Center [Atlanta, Georgia] and the Georgia Dome [Atlanta, Georgia].  And I went to see--I took my kids to the Olympics, I mean, to the gymnastics and that was just wonderful to be able to see the young women that were doing the flips and, you know, eventually went on to win.  But to see them in competition was great and also to be at the stadium for track and field.  Oh, my god!  It's like (clears throat)--watching it on television is one thing, and that was the year that NBC I think had this great camera--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that literally rolled right along with the, with the runner.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That was the year they introduced that.  Never saw anything like that in my life, that was so fabulous.  But when you're sitting right there and the runner--they run faster than you can almost conceive 'cause you literally wanna sit there and press the rewind or what did I just see and could they be that fast.  So we saw Michael Johnson.  Michael Johnson?  I think that was his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the gold shoes, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Michael Johnson, we saw Michael Johnson run.  So those are my highlights, it was just amazing.  Again, kid from the Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], never thought I'd be at Olympic games, you know, really special moment.
Speaker 1: And they're right here.
Speaker 2: And to be able to share with my family was even more special.
Speaker 1: Right here in Atlanta [Georgia], yeah.
Speaker 2: In Atlanta, that's right.
Speaker 1: So did--I mean, well, did you get a chance to go to a lot of the ceremonial events as a member of the--
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I had tickets to a few of the activities and then we had--on my working side, we had guests in town, clients, meeting planners that the bureau [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia] had invited into the city, so there was, you know, some of that care and concern that had to be taken care of.  And then, of course, you have to live life and you have family, and children, and then can I sing, can I sing a minute or two.  So it was just a lot going on.  It was jammed packed but I loved it, I absolutely loved it.  Before the Olympics officially started, I took my daughters [Chioma Bertrand and Chinela Bertrand] out one day on a tour of the city because someone had created these sculptures out of wire and greenery, they were like tree people.  I mean, people, I mean, yeah, like trees made of, people made of trees or something like that.  And they had perched them all around the city, all around downtown and near the Olympic venues.  And, so I took my girls on a tour one afternoon of all of those little places where these little green people were.  And in the process you get a chance to see the city and see what venue, what activity is going to be taking place here, and at the end of the evening someone had used there buggy, you know, the buggy rides, and they needed to get off earlier than where the horse needed to go back to.  And, so they offered, they saw me and my girls and they offered it to us.  And, so we got a, a buggy ride out of the whole day, so that was one of those special days.
Story_ID: 654911
Speaker 1: There's a lot of discussion this year about the next Olympic Games and where are they going to be and if cities really profit from having Olympics in town.  I mean, how did Atlanta [Georgia] make out?  Did--
Speaker 2: I think Atlanta had a remarkable success because we used all our venues, you see.  The problem is in some of these places--I think they showed one in China--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the bird nest sta- [Beijing National Stadium, Beijing, China]--the--it's abandoned now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, just, just sitting there.  But we used (laughter) all of our venues.  So as you know, the Olympic Stadium [Centennial Olympic Stadium] became Turner Field [Atlanta, Georgia], they cut out a portion of it because it was a complete cir- circle and they cut out a portion of it, and opened that up to the skyline of the city and that became Turner Field.
Speaker 1: The home of the--
Speaker 2: Home of the--
Speaker 1: --Braves.
Speaker 2: The former home of the Atlanta Braves.
Speaker 1: Former home, yeah.  As of yesterday.
Speaker 2: As of yesterday, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The natatorium for the swimming activities became part of--was built at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and, so that is still used.  And it's still used for our national swim activities.  Centennial Olympic Park [Atlanta, Georgia] is used by everybody all the time, a great gathering spot in the center of downtown whether it's concerts; there have been conventions and shows that'll come in and buy the use of the park and block it off just, you know, for their show.  They have a Wednesday Wind Down activity every week with R and B and jazz during the warm months, festivals throughout the year, and of course that fountain, the Olympic fountain [Fountain of Rings, Atlanta, Georgia], that kids love to get wet in, including mine.  You can't beat those things, so I think Atlanta for the most part has really made use of all of the facilities that were built on behalf of the Olympics.
Story_ID: 654912
Speaker 1: Now in ni- in 1999, you released your first album.
Speaker 2: Yes!
Speaker 1: So you'd been singing all this time but never--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --put an album out.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: How did it take place then?  What happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, because I come from my bureau [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia] hat I would say, you know, marketing and packaging and how things look.  So at the time, what I was noticing is when musicians and singers wanted to leave something with you, they left you a tape.  And they would say, "Well, you know, you need to scroll over to, you need to scroll over to, you know, this part right here to get to the third song, you know."  And I had done a demo tape back in 1992, and I needed to have something to promote myself with and, so that's what I did in '92 [1992].  But it only had four songs and, so to do the CD [compact disc] was really to commit to a full project and to make it look, you know, you would--there were record stores back then, remember those?  So you would go in Tower Records [Atlanta, Georgia] and they had a local section, you know, and a lot of the CD products looked local, you know.  I don't know if your kid drew the cover, or it was a picture you took with your Polaroid or whatever the case might be but it--when I'm looking at it with my marketing eye, a lot of those things just did not look professionally done while the product inside may have been fantastic, but it didn't look like it.  And, so I knew that I wanted a product that looked like [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson's product or looked like [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves or looked like anybody else that's out there on that level, so I started there.  And then I wanted the product itself to speak of me in a way that people had not heard.  If you've heard me sing the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] at some event, of if you've only heard me sing a solo at church for a particular song, then you didn't know what I did.  And, so I wanted a product that kind of showed that side as well.  And the name of the project was 'All of Me' because I wanted to just kind of say, "Hey, this is all of what I do.  It's a little Latin, it's a little something else," (laughter), "little straight ahead, contemporary."  I just wanted to put it out there, but I wanted to have something that was representative of who I thought I was.  And a tape and reeling over to the third track with my name written on it was not where I wanted to be.  As it turned out, I did my CD release at Sambuca [Sambuca Jazz Cafe], which was a wonderful club.  They had pretty much just opened in Atlanta [Georgia] at that time, Sambuca.  And it was packed and then I got my music into Tower Records and my CD--somewhere I have a picture of my CD on the shelf because we were number one for two and a half weeks at Tower Records here.  WCLK [WCLK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] picked it up and started to play it and that was amazing.  Whatever you've seen in movies about that first time someone hears their music on the radio, it's all of that (laughter).  It's all of that exactly.  And I remember, and this has happened several times.  I'll get in my car, turn on the radio or turn on the music, and something will be playing that's--and it takes you a minute to go, oh, that's me!  But then you say, "Wait a minute, I didn't have that CD in, I had something else, so I must be on the radio!"  It's still brand new every time.  I think, you know, once I'm being played every hour or something like that, then I'll get used to it but until then, it's still a great experience.  And so, all of that happened with that first CD, had articles written in the newspaper or in--
Story_ID: 654913
Speaker 1: And it was a great door opener because it led to relationships that allowed me to have my second CD which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this one came out in 2002, right?
Speaker 1: Right, 'No Regrets.'  And that was the CD that was on--I actually had a record deal.  See, my whole thing was, okay, well, I don't have to wait for a record deal, record deal.  Let me just do this myself because I needed to validate myself in that way, that I could do it.  You know?  But (clears throat) I had an attorney in New York [New York] that sent it to some people in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and they liked it in L.A., and the next thing I know I'm in discussion about signing a record deal.  And it was with Gold Circle Records and through that we had the 'No Regrets' CD.  But here's the interesting story about the 'No Regrets' CD.  So I had a budget to work with.  Oh, my god, never had a budget other than my own money and investors.  I've had investors and I've always paid them back.  So here was this CD [compact disc].  Our all in date was September 12th, okay.  So we finished on September 10, 2001, nine p.m.  And we were all excited and I was going to FedEx the next day to send everything off to L.A. for our all in date.  And then the world stopped on September 11, 2001.  The day was--and here in Atlanta [Georgia] it was just like New York, clear as a bell, not a cloud in the sky, you know.  And I still kind of think about that on very, very beautiful clear days it still resonates with me.  But that was September 11th and then of course the planes stopped flying by that evening.  So California wasn't, wasn't worried, I mean, I'm sure I wasn't at the top of their list of things if Kathleen's [HistoryMaker Kathleen Bertrand] project is not in.  And I think I got it to them by that next week, but we were due initially to come out in November and, so that delayed our release until February of 2002.  But what it also did was the owner of the label, Gold Circle Records, was one of the brothers that created Gateway computers, Gateway [Gateway, Inc.].  And his money that was tied up into Gold Circle Records after the market crashed, after 2011, he decided to close the label, just like that.  So when he made his decision was probably--my CD came out in February--April. And by June it was gone.
Story_ID: 654914
Speaker 1: Now a third album came out.  Is that a--that was also 2002, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I--
Speaker 1: Two [2002].
Speaker 2: --did that myself.  That's my Christmas CD, and it's called 'Reasons for the Season.'  And people still play that CD [compact disc] 'cause of course you can play Christmas music forever.  And I had, I--you'd mentioned earlier about, you know, the church seems to be a, seemed to be a influence over a part of my life and musically speaking because I sing a choir, I hear more in that regard than I had previously because I'm in a choir.  But the other way that I'm wired is I'm always hearing a different interpretation or a different rewiring, you know, tearing it down, building it back up.  And I happen to be around outstanding and fantastic musicians who can do just that very thing, or (clears throat) we'll be on something together and I'll hear them play and it's like, oh, my god, this--I don't have to reinvent it, you've already, you've already done that.  So the CD called 'Reasons for the Seasons' [sic.] was a great collaboration of working with Phil Davis, who's been my producer for all of my projects, and Kenny Banks.  And between the two of them, they had the most amazing arrangements of anything I'd ever heard of.  And, so that became our collaborative project, 'Reasons for the Season.'  We keep talking about coming back to do another--see, this one has no Santa Claus, it's all hymns, spirituals, spiritual songs of Christmas as opposed to the Christmas carols, but they're all done in a jazzy way.  So a unique story about that is there's a couple at my church, Cascade United Methodist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], they traveled to Florida, and they saw me at church, this was like last summer.  And they saw me at church maybe September--and, "We hadn't seen you," and, "We played your CD all the way to Florida and back."  And I was like, "Oh, great, great, I'm so glad you enjoyed!"  And the husband says, "Oh, yeah, that Take 6 tune, we just really loved that."  And, so I had to stop and think about it.  I said, "Well, that's my Christmas CD."  He says, "Yeah, we played that all the way to Florida and back!"  It was like, oh, my god, in the summertime.  But there is an arrangement we have of 'Away in a Manger' and with the keyboard there is a sound you can create that's like a vocal sound.  And, so the kinds of chords that Phil Davis created sound just like the chord structure that Take 6 would use.  You know Take 6, the a cappe- a cappella group?  So it really sounds like I'm singing with them in my background.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's all--that's computer and I'm on top of that.  But as soon as he said the Take 6 song, I was like, that's Christmas (laughter) but he played it in August.  And I've had so many people that tell me that they play that CD not only every year, but they play it all the time, just kind of part of their things that they play.  So that meant a great deal to me that we could do it and that it resonated with so many people.  And that here some, what is it, fourteen years later, people are still playing that.  That means a great deal to me.
Story_ID: 654915
Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson passed away in 2003.  And, but, now you release another album called 'New Standards' in 2006, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes, right.
Speaker 1: And was that--did you do that yourself or did--was that picked up by a--
Speaker 2: Yes.  No, so everything--the only thing that went through the label was 'No Regrets.'  Everything else that I've done, so 'Reasons for the Season,' 'New Standards' and then 'Catharsis,' all of those have been financed by me as is my upcoming CD [compact disc] with no title that we are currently working on.  So I went from investor financed to self-financing everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 654916
Speaker 1: In 2007, you became senior vice president of community and governmental affairs?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that, is that--well, it's a different wording but it is a pro- this is a--
Speaker 2: Step up, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) move up, okay.
Speaker 2: Highest ranking African American ever on staff at that time and highest ranking woman ever for that company [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And all right.  And you founded something called Hospitality Industry Professionals?
Speaker 2: HIP.
Speaker 1: HIP, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  HIP really grew out of my experience in traveling to other conventions.  I found that I would go to Miami [Florida] or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or something for a conference and I would see forty people from Atlanta [Georgia] but, I'm like, but why can't we get together in Atlanta?  Why do we have to go and be on somebody's expenses account when we can be in Atlanta and be encouraging each other and really kind of do that same model but do it for ourselves?  And, so that was the impetus behind the creation of HIP, Hospitality Industry Professionals Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And there's a scholarship in my name, the--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --Kathleen Bertrand HIP Atlanta scholarship [Kathleen Bertrand Student Scholarship] for hospitality students.
Story_ID: 654917
Speaker 1: Now you formed a, co- co-founded a film festival in 2009, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The BronzeLens Film Festival of Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what inspired you to do this and how did you do it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, BronzeLens came out of a conversation that I had with my CEO at that time, William Pate.  William came in new to the bureau [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, Atlanta, Georgia] and was really just kind of looking at everyone's strengths.  And we had a discussion in December of 2008 to really, it was really our first time talking because he was serving as acting president, and he officially became president like in January.  And it was our first time in a one on one conversation.  And he said, well, you know, he says, "Why doesn't Atlanta have a, you know, a film festival that everybody knows about and is coming to because, you know, after all, we've got Tyler Perry here."  And that was his frame of reference, we've got Tyler Perry here.  And he was specifically speaking of something for African Americans.  And, I said, "Well, there's several smaller festivals that do go on."  And, he says, "Well, I've never heard of any of them, and we need things in Atlanta that everybody's heard of."
Speaker 1: Now the black arts festival was going on already, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's still going on now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that happens--is it every other year?
Speaker 2: No, it's every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And their most recent strategy is that there's a different discipline of focus each year.  So one year it was the performing arts, one year it was art, one year it's dance, and they have two others that have yet to come forward.  But, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: So I shared with him that the National Black Arts Festival did a portion but they, you know, it wasn't their whole reason for being.  They had many things at that time that they were doing, so film was just a portion of it.  So he wanted me to just--his words were, "Well, why don't you see what you can do with that."  And it was really just an idea.  But he gave me the example of when he was in Sundance [Sundance Film Festival] and, you know, the limousines were lined up, and people are in different locations doing things all related to film.  And he thought Atlanta was right at that point where it needed that kind of activity, and he was right.  Because at the time that BronzeLens started--our first festival was in 2010, but at the time that BronzeLens started this rise of Atlanta and Georgia as a film and production destination was on its way, but it wasn't even, it wasn't nearly where it is now.  At that time, Georgia was fifth in the nation in film and television production.  Now it's number three, two to three, and that's pretty amazing.  That's just really pretty amazing.  So many (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Young people saw it coming.  I know my son lived here for about a year, and he called it, he called it the Negro Hollywood or the black Hollywood--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at that, at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He said because of the different rap groups that--was it--OutKast who was big then and Tyler Perry's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --emergence.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just--
Speaker 2: Well, there's several studios that are here now and not on--you know, Tyler Perry just built his second, no, third studio or is building his third studio [Tyler Perry Studios, Atlanta, Georgia].  You know, Marvel Studios [Marvel Studios, LLC] is--well, what is it, Pinewood [Pinewood Atlanta Studios, Fayetteville, Georgia] is here where they shoot--
Speaker 1: From England.
Speaker 2: They shot 'Ant-Man' and something else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Screen Gems [EUE/Screen Gems Ltd.] is here.  BET [Black Entertainment Television] does a lot of their production and filming here, there is so much going on this city.
Speaker 1: Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], too, right?
Speaker 2: Oprah has done some things here, she doesn't have a studio here though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she has done some production here.  So everybody is kind of coming through here at some point in time.
Story_ID: 654918
Speaker 1: What we recognized back in 2010, however, was that in addition to being this place where people come to bring their films, as a film festival would be, we need to also be concerned with growing the community and its knowledge of the film industry.  So, you know, it's kind of what I did in hospitality, making people aware of the options and the opportunities that are in film.  Everybody is not going to be a producer, and everybody is not going to be a director or an actress, but there are so many jobs that are behind the lens that you never hear about or think about.  But for every one or two people you might see on the screen, there are hundreds behind that, behind that lens.  And, so we wanted to have those discussions, so one of the key attributes of BronzeLens [BronzeLens Film Festival] is that we have these outstanding workshops where we talk about different aspects of the industry.  We bring in industry experts, some that are here in Atlanta [Georgia] as well as some that we fly in so that those persons that attend the film festival get a really full view of what it is to be a content creator.  And I changed the terminology only because we're not just limited to film, you know, there's so much digital content now.  And it's not just on the film screen, it can be on the television, it could be on--it doesn't have to be on mainstream television.  It could be on cable.  You can go straight to the web.  This young lady, Issa Rae that has a new show that's coming up on HBO 'Insecure,' Issa Rae started as a webisode star.  She had a program called 'Adventures of Awkward Black Girl' [sic. 'The Misadventures of Awkward Black Girl'] that was her third webisode [sic. web series].  But through her development as a producer, director, writer, actor, she got thousands of people following her around the world.  And, so, now she has parlayed that into a series on HBO [Home Box Office], but she started as a webisode person.  So when you talk about creating content, which is the way that we try to focus it now, there's so many platforms.  The goal just needs to be to tell our stories and to make sure that our stories are exposed for the world to hear about and to learn about.  And whatever that platform is, we try to be receptive to that at BronzeLens.  And we're especially interested in any, any content that's created from this community.  As we continue to grow it, we want the content to come forth from this community.
Story_ID: 654919
Speaker 1: Now in 2011, you released your fifth album, 'Katharsis'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with a K.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, branding (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like Kathleen [HistoryMaker Kathleen Bertrand], I see.  Well, tell us about this album?
Speaker 2: Well, a catharsis is a cleansing and emoting of just kind of what's going on, what's inner becomes outer in a catharsis or things flip upside down.  And I was at a, just a time in my life where looking at retirement coming up somewhere down there, my kids are coming out of school and a lot going on.  And just in my head.  And, so again, my CDs [compact disc] have been not so much themed about me but more a collection of music and music styles.  So one thing may be a straight ahead groove and something else may be a Latin groove and something else may be an original piece or this one may be a Sade piece but it just kind of all comes together into a nice piece.  And, so that's what 'Katharsis' is about.  The great thing about that CD is that over the years I've built relationships with Internet radio, which is becoming bigger and bigger now which is a great thing.  Another platform on which the artists can go straight to the people as opposed to through a company just like webisodes and, so I've gotten great radio play around the country and around the world.  There's a chart, radio chart in England where I went to number one on the chart, I was like eight or ten weeks in their top ten or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the UK Soul Chart.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they've played my music before.  And, so it was great to have something that was recognized that returned to the UK Soul Chart, and I anticipate the same for my next CD as well that will do that.
Story_ID: 654920
Speaker 1: Now one song called 'Date Night'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was inspired by Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and Michelle Obama.
Speaker 2: Yeah!  Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I loved this song because it talks about the antici- you know, as you get older you forget about the specialness of a date night.  I really had not heard that term before them.  I had talked to married couples, and they were going out, but I really hadn't heard people, you know, my age or even slightly younger refer to going out with your partner as a, as a date night.  Made all the sense in the world, so what I tried to capture in that song was that giddiness of how it was when you were sixteen or eighteen getting ready for a date.  And with a little bit of, you know, grown woman sensibility to it now, but just really trying to recapture what that's like to spend time with your partner and to have that same anticipation of how great it's going to be.  And, so when I saw the Obamas and some film clip, and he talked about, you know, "We--Michelle and I have a date night," I was just like, yeah.  I love that, I love that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's recently been a movie made about their first date--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And I thought about that when I saw this--
Speaker 2: Yes 'Southside with You,' yes.
Story_ID: 654921
Speaker 1: Now you write music too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You write your own songs and--
Speaker 2: Some.
Speaker 1: --what are some of the songs?  I know, I know you've written a theme song for 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  A song called "What They See Is What They'll Be" that has been their theme throughout the time of their activity.  Basically, saying what our kids can--they can't strive to be something if they can't see it, goes all the way back to what I created for the Spelman alumnae student exchange [Sister 2 Sister Professional Mentoring Program].  That those students needed to see what they could come into, you know.  And, so it's the same thing, the theme for the 100 Black Men is what they see is what they'll be.  And Tommy Dortch [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Dortch, Jr.] was the chairman, president at that time and I had sung for--he was being inaugurated into his third or fourth term I believe.  And I had sung for each one.  And, so here I was coming up on this last one, it was like, oh, my god, I've sung every song already.  What can I possibly sing for this, you know, that's what was going through my head.  And driving along as most times I am and, so I started hearing the hook already (singing), "They can be what they can see," and, so I needed to come back and create some verse around that.  And, so I called myself.  That's what I would do back then as--I'd just call myself and leave a voicemail, except that this idea hit me on Monday and the conference was on Friday.  So I called my key collaborator, Phil Davis, and I said, "Phil, I'm going to the 100s conference and I need to do this song."  And he's thinking, okay, well, you know, when you want to do it.  And he's thinking I'm gonna say next week, I said, "Tonight," (laughter).  But he loved it.  I don't play piano, but I know chord structure, so I can voice each chord to him and, you know, how it goes tempo wise.  And he really just put that thing together.  By Tuesday night, I had a track, I went and sang to the track just to make sure that everything worked.  By Wednesday, he had cleaned up the track, made me a CD [compact disc] because I left Wednesday afternoon going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. I sang it for the first time that Friday and I had to literally have my words in front of me because it was all, it was all just that new to me, so I didn't know what I had said, that I had said I said (laughter).  So, but it came out beautifully, they loved it.  I get invited even still now just about every year to the conference to sing it.  People want to buy it.  I finally put it on one of my CDs, I think I put it on the 'New Standards,' I put it on the 'New Standards' CD.  There's some guy in Tennessee that plays it just about every Sunday.  If somebody calls me on Sunday and says, "I just heard your song," I know what they heard.  They heard "What They See Is What They'll Be" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he has a show, a top--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --radio show that does--
Speaker 2: Yes, inspirational music, this guy does.  And, so I'm glad that I was able to bring life to a motto.  And I'm glad that the words and the delivery touched so many people, so many times.  I've had people use it for graduations, all kinds of ceremonies involving children, and that's what it's all about.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now maybe at the end I'll ask you to open up a little bit and give us a little bit of it then--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we close out.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 654922
Speaker 1: You opened for [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers in 2012 at the Atlantic--at the Atlanta Jazz Fest in Piedmont Park [Atlanta, Georgia].  So this is a reuniting with Roy Ayers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Roy and I have performed together several times over the years.  But that year I didn't necessarily open for him, I was--we were co- co-headliners--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the jazz festival.  And I performed at the jazz festival for many years, and I love telling people, I say, "Well, you know, you have to work your way up to main stage and you have to work your way up to," (laughter)--so my story is I've sung at every single slot there was to sing at the Atlanta Jazz Festival, one, two, three, four, five, six, you know.  So to get up to seven (laughter), seven p.m. the later you go, of course, the better.  Was quite awesome.  I think we were 6:30 or something like that.  But, yeah, and then Roy called me on stage to sing with him to reprise--what is it?  'You Send Me,' yes.  And, so we've sung together on many occasions.  I went to, Sinbad used to have the Soul Music Festival [Sinbad's Summer Jam: '70s Soul Music Festival] and I went to the Soul Music Festival with him, I want to say maybe '99 [1999] or something like that.  He called me to come and do that with him and on different occasions in Atlanta [Georgia].  One year, he hired my band to be his band, so, yeah, we've stayed in touch, and I've been able to perform with him on many occasions.
Story_ID: 654923
Speaker 1: Now you retired from the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau [Atlanta, Georgia] in 2015--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --after thirty-two years.
Speaker 2: Hallelujah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we've covered a lot of, lot of ground here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.  Any reflections on that service?
Speaker 2: It was great, it was absolutely wonderful.  I had a chance to do amazing things that I probably would not have had a chance to do and to raise my family.  As I said, I went to a World Series game, been to the Olympic games, I've been to the Super Bowl, visited cities all over this country.  I have relationships with people all over this country, and I've had a chance to pour into Atlanta [Georgia] a tiny bit of how much I love it, you know, being able to talk to people about career choices in hospitality, being able to expose people to the great things about Atlanta through the Heritage guide [Atlanta Heritage] or through the young people in HIP Atlanta [Hospitality Industry Professionals Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], or even now through BronzeLens Film Festival.  At some point, it's all seamless and it's all really just one thing that just happened to be a phase of it.  But I'm very happy to have been able to contribute for thirty-two years.  And then one day you wake up and you say, "It's good, it's enough, let's move on to the rest of life."  And, so while I still have good health and a voice and able to take care of myself, I wanted to just explore what life looks like without nine to seven [o'clock] 'cause there's no such thing as nine to five (laughter), you know.  And it's been great.  I'm just really, just now really getting to it because I retired in June but the sixth BronzeLens Film Festival was coming up in November of last year in 2015, and no sooner than it was over I had already made a decision that we were shifting to August.  So then immediately out of the gate you have four less, four less months to plan because by January we're planning for an August film festival which just occurred and which was our best yet in the shortest amount of time.  But, now I'm breathing, I'm just taking it all in.  My Octobers are back in my life.  I was born in October but I'd been--because our festival has been in November, I haven't had a chance to just fully experience it other than, you know, getting up, going in, leaving work after dark and, you know, same thing next day (clears throat) for weeks on end leading to the festival.  So, now I have October back, I'm back in the studio, I'm writing my first book.  Actually, the first one's done. I'm writing the second.
Speaker 1: So--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I'm doing a series of children's books, and I'm very excited about that.  Just want to get to all of those creative pursuits that I've loved over the years and travel some because that's what I think life should be about.  Just, you've paid the dues and, so I'm just trying to enjoy and continue to be expressive of who I am as an artist and who I am as an African American woman, who I am as, as a mother continue to try to be expressive in those areas.
Story_ID: 654924
Speaker 1: Last year you performed Four Women [Four Women: A Tribute to Nina Simone] at the Atlanta Jazz Festival--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with Julie Dexter--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Rhonda Thomas and Terry Harper, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: We were just in Denver [Colorado] last weekend interviewing [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, and she was performing Four Women--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with Angelique Kidjo and Simo- Nina Simone's daughter [Lisa Simone] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Daughter, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And it's interesting these tributes to Nina Simone.
Speaker 2: Yes, and being four women, we originally had come together for something, for the National Black Arts Festival.  And it was myself, Rhonda, Julie and Dionne Farris was with the original four.  And we performed just the song 'Four Women,' which was very well received and the young man that did the arrangement and everything is Russell Gunn, who is an extraordinarily gifted jazz musician, teacher.  And Russell had this idea to take that concept and expand it into a full show.  So we didn't just do the song--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'Four Women,' we fully did Nina's music, her book.  We did 'Work Song,' we did 'Baltimore,' we did 'Mississippi Goddam,' we did of course 'Four Women,' we did 'Black is the Color of My True Love's' ['Black is the Color of My True Love's Hair']--I mean, just the full range of Nina.  And what was extraordinary about that day is that Nina Simone's sister was in the audience, and she came up on stage with us during the show.  And just to have her there and to affirm the work that we were doing was just wonderful, just a wonderful moment.  But, yeah, we did that last year, and I've since performed with Julie on a few occasions.  In fact, just three days ago.  I performed with Rhonda on another occasion so it was just a kind of good gathering together.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the thing that really makes me feel good about this in talking to you and Dianne Reeves is the collaboration between all the women involved in it, you know.  It's something that you, you know, I can't remember another time when so many people collaborated on a project, you know.
Speaker 2: And that's good, it's just great energy, it's great energy.  Because everybody brings something, and if you truly own what you have then you're not concerned or threatened or diminished in any way by anyone else's gift and the way that they bring it.  So to put it all in one room is a wonderful thing.  I used to do a project for the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], they called it their 'Salute to the Apollo' [sic. 'A Salute to Apollo Jazz and Blues Legends'] or something like that, but it featured all female vocalists, and we would bring the music of certain people.  So I brought Sarah Vaughan, someone would do Koko Taylor, someone would do--what is, what is it?  Washington, Donna, Diana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dinah Washington, right.
Speaker 2: Dinah Washington, you know, someone would do Ella [Ella Fitzgerald].  And it was just a beautiful, beautiful evening with--everybody had their own sound that complimented the sound you were bringing, and I love collaborative things, you know.
Story_ID: 654925
Speaker 1: We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Jean Carne maybe a dozen years ago here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is she still in Atlanta [Georgia]?  When we interviewed--
Speaker 2: She is still--I see her--
Speaker 1: Do you ever have a chance to--
Speaker 2: I haven't seen her in a moment, but on occasion she will say something on Facebook or, you know, make a comment or something on Facebook.  Believe it or not, Facebook is such a great connecting tool at this time in life.  We never--you know, it started off as a college thing, and my kids tell me all the time, "Oh, mom, we're not on Facebook," you know, they've moved on to the (air quotes) Gram, which is Instagram and Snapchat and, you know.  But old folks (laughter) are still on Face- and it's great connecting.  I--that's--remember I told you I stayed in touch with my people from high school [Henry W. Grady High School, Atlanta, Georgia], all of my college classmates [from Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Oh, it's just been wonderful.  Children of your friends that are in other cities, it's been great, yeah.
Story_ID: 654926
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Well, before I get into that, what's your next project I guess?  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Next project is my CD, I don't have a title for it yet I'm just recording, just recording.  I know it will be socially conscious because you can't be African American in America right now and not have something that has hit you in a personal way or hit your heart or hit your soul with what's going on.  So I know there will be socially conscious songs in it, but that's all I can tell you right now.  I hope to be done probably by, by spring.  And as I also mentioned, I am finishing up the second book of a hope to be three book series, but I at least want to get two done so that I can try to see about getting it published.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us the subject matter for the children's books?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's about two little girls, it's based loosely on my twins [Chioma Bertrand and Chinela Bertrand].  I've been saying for years that I wanted to do this idea of a book and then I read something rather recently about the small amount of content there is for African American children of books that look like them.  So that let me know that I'm in the right space at the right time.  So I'm starting with my two little girls, and they are twins but they don't have my daughters' names, but they will, they contain qualities of the whole family, the boys as well.  And I want them to grow, and their brothers [Ikechi Bertrand and Amichi Bertrand] will be a part of the series so that in the future it might be about the two boys that are in the series.  And how to be big brothers and, you know, that's how I see it growing so that--kind of like--I don't wanna say that the Berenstain Bears but you know how the Berenstain Bears had, you know, this book and then this one and then that one and then that one.  I want several books to be a part of a collection so that it's around for years and, so that children can refer to it for years.  And I've--there's a gentleman here that I've talked to about being my illustrator, he does movie storyboards and, so that's going to happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's going to happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is, this is--
Story_ID: 654927
Speaker 1: That's going to happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In this vein then, now tell us about your children and what they're doing now?
Speaker 1: Okay.  My four children, my oldest Ikechi [Ikechi Bertrand] is an IT [information technology] manager for Honeywell [Honeywell International, Inc.].  My second son, and he's in Atlanta [Georgia], my second son Amichi [Amichi Bertrand] is a promoter.  He does comedy promotion, and he loves that and he's here in Atlanta.  My twin--one of my twins is in Washington, D.C., Chinela [Chinela Bertrand], and she is a small meetings manager for the Park Hyatt hotel [Park Hyatt Washington D.C.], she used to be at The Hay-Adams hotel [Washington, D.C.] and she's my one child that got the hospitality bug.  And my other twin Chioma [Chioma Bertrand] is here in Atlanta and she works for a dermatologists' office.  She's like an office manager kind of person, but I don't know her title so I can't tell you what that is.  But everybody's well and healthy and they love their mama.
Story_ID: 654928
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, our level of education would be number one.  I'm concerned with things that I read and I see when the television camera comes in our community and they put a microphone in front of our mouth.  It lets me know that some things aren't being taught or paid attention to in school.  And, so then that makes me wonder how is this young person or person going to be able to get a job.  So not only am I concerned about the level of education and attainment of it and making it still a priority, but I'm also concerned about the number of our youth that are unemployed or unemployable, okay, by certain standards.  Who's going to give them a job?  And if they don't have a job because you can't speak or you can't present yourself well, if you don't have a job, how are you going to make a living?  How are you going to make a living legally?  How are you going to take care of your family?  How are you going to take care of your children?  And if you can't take care of your family and can't take care of your children then what happens to those children--become dependents of the state or the country or whatever the case might be.  So it's kind of a spiraling concern there that starts with education and being able to be employed or to have a job that gives you a sense of worth.  That's number one.  The other overriding concern is what is going on in America as it relates to the perception and the treatment of African Americans, and particularly our young men.  It's scary to me.  I feel like I've been through this at some point in time as a child just being petrified of things relating to white people based on things that you read or that you heard your mother talking about or something that she had heard.  Somebody being lynched or beaten or Sto- stay away from Stockbridge, Georgia.  You know, I used to hear these things.  We had a cousin that was lynched up in North Georgia.  So when you have those kinds of things, you are petrified as a child.  Even when I started driving at sixteen, I would never drive outside of Atlanta [Georgia].  It wasn't until I drove to New York [New York]--whenever I mentioned that to you, I was in my twenties.  That I would never drive outside of Atlanta.  I've had people throw their soda cans at my car, white people, for what rea- you don't even know me, but I had my top back, especially when I had my convertible.  I've had people throw a soda can at me, I had somebody throw a--gum, just took it out their mouth and threw it at me, you know, for no reason.  I don't even, I don't think I've recounted those stories because it so nonsensical, it's just like, okay, let me just let that go and live my life.  But I'm very concerned about how we make it as a people, how we survive, how we get respect.  How do we get to be treated just like anybody else?  Are you really doing these things because my skin is different, because my color is different?  It's greatly disturbing, and it takes you back to almost that primal fear, that gut fear that you had or that I had as a child.  And I tried to breathe through it and be in the moment and release it and pray about it.  And invoke, you know, goodness and kindness and good spirits and just try to surround myself with that kind of aura.  But will that protect my children?  I don't know.  But I pray for them and we, you know, we've talked about it on many occasions.  And that overriding fear of what's going on in America, the overt racism is very scary to me, very scary.
Story_ID: 654929
Speaker 1: Here is something else, I just have to share this.  My son and I, my oldest son and I often talk about politics, what's going on in the world, and I remember that we had this discussion maybe two or three years into President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] presidency.  And he was, you know, saying, "Well, I just don't understand why people are, you know, why this is not happening in [U.S.] Congress or that's not happening, and why people are doing this or that."  And I said, "Kechi [Ikechi Bertrand], it's just racism."  And he couldn't see that.  He thought it was something else or finance or economics or, you know, some other overriding factor.  I was like, it's the R word.  And I said, "You'll have to learn it for yourself, but I see it immediately."  And for whatever all the other excuses are that are out there as to why people can't do this that and the other, it really all comes down to people do not want this man to succeed because of the color of his skin, bottom line, bottom line.  He came to me last Thanksgiving, sitting right here, and he says, "I understand what you meant."  And I said, "What are you, what are you talking about?"  He says, "About President Obama."  I said, "Well, I think it's happening to people beyond President Obama now, so it's a little hard to miss now.  Because it's happening to all of us."  I've had grown men that tell me of bias in the, in the workplace, because there're a group of people that don't want black men to succeed either, you know.  And it's unfathomable to me, really.  It really is.  I came along, remember the hippie, you know, love everybody, and it was getting better, you see.  And you live in Atlanta [Georgia], and you can almost feel like you're in a utopian situation because it is Atlanta and, you know, people of color are in power are everywhere.  And along comes Maynard Jackson and then there's [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, who had been ambassador [to the United Nations], I mean, it's just, you know, it's the good life, you know.  But it's not getting better.  There are better people and better patches, but I don't know if enough of the better things are being told to outweigh the height and the sensationalism of the bad stuff.  You see what I'm saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we know, we know more about it now.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Because of the news coverage.
Speaker 1: Yes, news coverage is twenty-four hours a day.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And there's a lot, there's that much (gesture) news and that much speculation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and social media, too.
Speaker 1: And social media--the same.  There's that much news (gesture) and that much opinion (laughter) about it.  But, you know, the real facts--we just had this discussion.  I miss the old Huntley, Brinkley [Chet Huntley and David Brinkley], Walter Cronkite all that kind of stuff reporting because it was just the facts or, as Jack Webb used to say, "I'm really dating myself."  But (mumbles) you know how old I am.  "Just the facts, ma'am," you know, I miss just the facts because now everything is about sensationalism, hyperbole, you know, what's going to get more people to watch.  As--this presidential candidate [President Donald John Trump] doesn't even have to be true, just say it.  If you said the truth, they say it's not true.  And then somebody picks that up.  It's insane, it's a bizarro world as far as I can see because everything seems turned upside down.  But you have to keep focused on still doing the right thing and still being right by people.  But as much as you do that there's still going to be that occasion when you're stopped for, you know, driving while black.  My son was on his way to graduation, my oldest son, on his way to graduation, 6:30 in the morning.  What on earth is going on at 6:30 on a Sunday morning that you need to stop my son who's in his gown just not his cap?  Going to gradua- doing the right thing, doing the right--just--doing the right thing.  (Shakes head) Driving while black.
Story_ID: 654930
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, oh.  That question there.  My legacy.  That I was able to touch people through my music and my work.  I think that would sum it up because that's what I've always tried to do.  If I'd paid more attention to just being me and singing for me, you understand what I'm saying, I think I probably could have gone in a different direction.  But I've been able to touch people with my work through ACVB [Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau] and the things I've done to uplift the community and to uplift Atlanta [Georgia].  I think the things I've done with HIP Atlanta [Hospitality Industry Professionals Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] to uplift people of color in the hospitality industry, what I'm doing with BronzeLens [BronzeLens Film Festival] to uplift content creators and help them get to their goals in telling our stories.  And certainly, through my music that people tell me it touches so many people, so many places.  I'm grateful for that.  You don't know that you have it until somebody says it to you, you know--
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: --'cause I could not have said these things, you know.
Speaker 1: In that regard, can you give us a little bit of the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] theme song?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.
Speaker 1: Just a little bit of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It goes--(singing), "They can be what they can see, they can be teachers, mentors, fathers just like you.  What they see is what they'll be, so as you live your life remember youth are following you.  And may your footsteps lead them to a path that's true," ['What They See Is What They'll Be'].
