Story_ID: 303891
Speaker 1: Good afternoon Ms. Bussey [HistoryMaker Alice Bussey].
Speaker 2: Good afternoon.
Speaker 1: My name is Edward Anderson, I'm with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].  I'm an interviewer, Scott Stearns is our videographer and Denise Gines is an interviewer as well who'll be sitting in with us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Welcome to the ranks of HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Well thank you.
Speaker 1: Would you spell your complete name for us please?
Speaker 2: Alice, A-L-I-C-E, Mae, M-A-E, White, W-H-I-T-E, Bussey, B-U-S-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And will you give your date of birth and location of your birth please?
Speaker 2: July 31, 1947, Ellenwood, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And you--okay.  Where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: In what we affectionately called the county line community in South DeKalb County [DeKalb County, Georgia] which is Ellenwood, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date and this location please?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 20, 2006 and I'm located at Bussey's Florist and Gifts at 2358 Candler Road in Decatur, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Internationally known Bussey's Florist and Gifts?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's a pleasure to be here with you today.
Speaker 2: Well thank you for having me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 303892
Speaker 1: I'm going to start by asking five People magazine oriented-type questions.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love shrimp.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Anywhere that just put me inside of a spa or in some water (laughter) and I love traveling and I--my most fascinating travel spot was in Africa.  So I would love to have the opportunity to return as many times as often, but that's, that was great for me for vacation the Indian Ocean when I was there in East Africa, Mombasa [Kenya] and I just really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: I see, do you have a favorite saying or expression?
Speaker 2: I do, I like to live daily by reminding myself that, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you."
Story_ID: 303893
Speaker 1: So I just wanna start by talking a little bit about family history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Would you give your mom's name and would you spell it please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, Eula, that's E-U-L-A, Belle, B-E-L-L-E, Shepherd, S-H-E-P-H-E-R-D, White, W-H-I-T-E.
Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in DeKalb, South DeKalb County, also known today as Ellenwood, Georgia and her birth date was March 26, 1912.
Speaker 1: Is she still with us or?
Speaker 2: No, she's not.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you be so kind as to share a few things about your mom?  Where was she raised?
Speaker 2: As far as I know in the same area where we use to go to church every Sunday and that's in South DeKalb County.  The Shepherds, a lot of Shepherds all up and down River Road, when we were small, all over dirt roads and everyone had land or they were sharecropping.  See it was not long after the Emancipation Proclamation that freed slaves so--and they settled in that area there and so the Shepherds had a lot of activity going on and my mother was part of that.  She was the oldest of nine children so that one of her brother had a home and my [maternal] granddaddy [Jesse Shepherd (ph.)] house where he lived was right there in the same area on River Road.  So we had a chance to see our parents, our grandparents some that lived there and then to see how they worked the land.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember my dad [Oscar White, Sr.] having fields and he was a green thumb, he had a--and we had to work in the fields and that's how he made the living.  Then they had sawmills where he worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's the community approach to the culture of the family to make sure the community worked, and so my mom was a real active community person to help make that happen 'cause she, they--she was married early and having produced twelve children.  So those children helped make all of that happen as far as the land, the use of the land and to make sure the living--going, 'cause going to school was secondary with the older ones initially so as they were able to get more of us where we could help contribute, then some of them returned to school, the older ones.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.  So she was from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she also was active I remember being a scout leader, she was a--she created the first choir at my church, Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church [Ellenwood, Georgia].  She was the first president and we'll be celebrating fifty years honoring her this year at the church, and every year we acknowledge her contributions.  She was an usher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was very active in the community, helping go door-to-door to see about the sick and others in the community to make sure that, that neighborliness and, and the community survived with all of the help.
Story_ID: 303894
Speaker 1: Sounds like she [Bussey's mother, Eula Shepherd White] was a significant person in the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was.
Speaker 1: And the community?
Speaker 2: She was.
Speaker 1: I wanna talk a bit more about her.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She had twelve sisters and--eleven sisters and brothers, is that right?
Speaker 2: No she had--there were nine of them, she was the oldest of nine.
Speaker 1: She was the oldest of nine?
Speaker 2: And she had twelve children.
Speaker 1: Had twelve children--so you're one of twelve children?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm number ten.
Speaker 1: Number ten of twelve all right, that answers another question, your birth order.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you get to know all nine of your aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were close, we were a real close family especially growing up there in the neighborhood where everybody built their own house and we had streets made.  I had--one of the streets named after my dad [Oscar White, Sr.], Oscar Road there in DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where we built the house that my youngest brother [Gary White (ph.)] lives in today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So there were a lot of us, we didn't know that we were, were business owners or we didn't say that we, we did our own building, our own growing and we made our own clothes, we did our hair, we were just self-contained.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a community, so we had the painters, the master plumbers.
Speaker 1: So there were artists in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they were--where did they receive their training?  Carried over from the ancestors before them?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or did they go out and get formal training?
Speaker 2: They passed it on, passed it on.  My dad was a carpenter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he trained my brother and then I had brothers who could--builders and like one of my brothers now is a general contractor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And also the plumbing, then one of my brothers is an artist.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then the landscaping, so you had--if you have seven brothers you had enough of them knowing how to do and they had--we all trained each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and the land that's in the family came into the family during your mother's generation or the prior generation?
Speaker 2: During my mother's generation.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Where they worked very hard to buy land.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my brother, my brother helped--when he was sixteen we brought our first house, he was sixteen years old my oldest brother [Oscar White, Jr.] and we still have it there in Ellenwood [Georgia] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so why didn't you name it Shepherdville (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As a matter of fact we had come together to look--we're still looking at that to look at how we can continue the tradition and legacy of homeownership.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We've just gotten six of our, of my nieces and nephews to buy houses in the same area.
Speaker 1: Good, good, that's, that's rather unique for one family to live in one geographical area.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And get along.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, we're quite close.
Story_ID: 303895
Speaker 1: Let's talk just a bit about your mother's [Eula Shepherd White] mother and father?  Who was your mother's father, would you give his name, date of birth and where he was born please?
Speaker 2: The only thing I have on Jes--we call him Papa.  His name was Jesse Shepherd [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he lived there on River Road, the one that when we grew up and we were walking back and forth to church and all he was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I know his, his brother--I don't know his date of birth, but I do know that we had a chance to get to know him but not my grandmother.
Speaker 1: All right, so.
Speaker 2: And her name was Fannie Annie Emma Jane.
Speaker 1: Say that again please?
Speaker 2: Fannie Annie Emma Jane Gleaton Shepherd.
Speaker 1: My goodness.  One of those down home country names plus.
Speaker 2: Yes so that's why we remembered it 'cause (laughter).
Speaker 1: That, would you slowly say them and pronounce them, I spell them please?
Speaker 2: Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Annie, A-N-N-I-E, Jane, J-A-N-E, Gleaton, G-L-E-A-T-O-N, Shepherd, S-H-E-P-H-E-R-D.
Speaker 1: All right so her maiden name was Gleaton?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right and what's her date of birth and where was she born?
Speaker 2: I don't have that information on her.
Speaker 1: Okay, did Papa Shepherd own his own land?
Speaker 2: I believe they sharecropped 'cause I asked that after we grew up, 'cause the house they were living in then, they were sharecropping.  They were the older generation transitioning us the next generation into homeownership.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's why my mom being the oldest worked real hard to buy land and made sure she.
Speaker 1: So it's possible that some of the same land he sharecropped was bought by the next generation?
Speaker 2: Yeah possibly 'cause it's in the same area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, tell me some of the stories that you have heard about Papa Shepherd and his wife Fannie Annie?
Speaker 2: Very strict and disciplined and family, real high on family and he was well respected and the church was at the core of our family and that's why his, his brother was one of the deacons that helped organize Poplar Spring Missionary Baptist Church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] right up the street from where they were living, right up the road and they were meeting on a brush, brush arbor, that's under a trees by some springs so when we actually named the church and get it they called it Poplar after the trees.
Speaker 1: After the tree, the poplar tree?
Speaker 2: And springs like where they were meeting.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So your dad's [Oscar White, Sr.] brothers--was your dad a part of the organizing effort for Poplar Springs?
Speaker 2: No not, my dad.
Speaker 1: I mean your granddad?
Speaker 2: That was my granddaddy.
Speaker 1: I mean your granddad, Papa, Papa Shepherd?  He was among the organizers
Speaker 2: Yeah they were all members, they, they were part of the group in the community that would meet once a month and all but then they decided to build a church and so that was his brother that helped organize.
Speaker 1: All right and.
Speaker 2: Burl [ph.].
Speaker 1: The number of children, how, how many children?  I think you may have answered that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Jesse, Papa Shepherd and Fannie Annie--Grandma Fannie had how many children again?
Speaker 2: They had nine.
Speaker 1: Nine, and did all nine of those children become members of Poplar Springs?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a significant Shepherd presence still at Poplar Springs?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a--those nine, then I have my aunts.  My aunts are still there, my uncle and then all, that's a lot--a significant amount of their children.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And some might be--another name, but we have lot of 'em that are Shepherds and then some are ministers, deacon, like my brother's a deacon on the deacon board.  Eddie Lee White, he's a deacon down there that chairs the building fund so he's still into building and helping, he's a contractor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so he's keeping that legacy going.
Story_ID: 303896
Speaker 1: Let's try to name some names, of those nine children, how many of them can you name right now possibly in birth order, if not that's okay.
Speaker 2: There was my mother, Eula Belle Shepherd White [Eula Shepherd White], then you had Uncle Johnny Shepherd.  You had Ruby Shepherd Clark [ph.] and you had Lucille Shepherd Clark [ph.]--Johnny--then you had Annie Ruth Shepherd Boyd [ph.], Lucille, and you had Josephine Shepherd Heel [ph.].  There's one other guy who lived in Kentucky--can't remember.
Speaker 1: Of those nine, how many remained in the Southwest DeKalb [DeKalb County], Ellenwood [Georgia] area, approximately?
Speaker 2: Eight, I just remembered one of my uncles moved to Kentucky, the rest of 'em live here.
Speaker 1: What, if you had to identify a force, or the glue that kept then nearby, what would you say that glue is that kept them near family and near church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia], and near home?
Speaker 2: We, were close, we got along and we helped build each other, like if one was growing like--young people didn't leave the community so they had acreage and lands and they would build a house.  They would give you so much acreage to build a house and keep you there and that's why we have a lot of property down the streets, we still have those houses there, and we still have family in them even though--and then my cousins some of the cousins started doing the same thing and so we started--we named the town after them, Bowne [ph.] town it's named, right there on Flakes Mill [Road] there, River Road and then they have a construction--a demolition business my cousins who are twins and then I have a nephew who's a twin.  They are over in another country right now singing, but they come right back to the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And give back when we have special events and things like that.  So it was the glue that we were taught from my granddaddy and other--the church, 'cause the church is still a strong draw for our homecoming, those special days in the community, they--wherever you are you travel back home and you greet and you fellowship with family.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's look at your mom again and look at her.  Well, let's talk about your dad [Oscar White, Sr.] first and then we'll talk about your sisters and brothers and those that remain there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll come to your dad in just a second, but first let me just see if I can go another generation on your [maternal] granddad's side, Papa Shepherd [Jesse Shepherd (ph.)].  Do you know his dad and mom?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, any knowledge of whether they were from that same community?  Those are your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, I have--we are in the process of researching that next level right now as a matter-of-fact.  Some of the younger generation, my niece and nephews they're taking that on to help us document continuously our family to get to that next level.
Speaker 1: What other stories have you heard about Papa Shepherd and the type of person he was in the community?
Speaker 2: You've given some characteristics about both Papa Shepherd and Grandma Fannie Annie [Fannie Gleaton Shepherd], but any specific stories you may have heard about Papa Shepherd that stick with you?
Speaker 1: No more, he had a bald head (laughter) and he was just real strict.  You, you'd come around him and he's gonna make sure you knew the rules of how to be a young lady, and how what your role was there as well as young men and I think there was such a strong foundation for my aunts and uncles and nieces, so we all became so ingrained there that it made us be a family and that's what I remember real strong in visiting him and just playing and being in the yard and his being there as a real young child.
Speaker 2: Okay and stories regarding Grandma Fannie Annie?
Speaker 1: I just remember her name that was always fascinating to me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Still is fascinating isn't it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) It still is.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For some--a person to have that many parts to her name.
Speaker 2: Do you know anything about her mother and father?
Speaker 1: Not, not at this time.
Speaker 2: Or whether or they're from that same community?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: All right, anything else to share about the Shepherd part of the family, the Shepherd Gleaton part of the family?
Speaker 1: We had, we found other Gleatons that live in the area and my Fannie Annie, our mother, but she had born, she was a Gleaton, but Phillips [ph.], married name and for many, many years she never missed our--we have several who never our family reunion that was started in the church and we just celebrated sixty years.  So.
Speaker 2: Sixty years?
Speaker 1: There was those who just made it a way to make sure that had our continuous family reunion to keep our family connected.
Speaker 2: Now is?
Speaker 1: From one generation to the next.
Story_ID: 303897
Speaker 1: Is that family reunion specifically a Shepherd family reunion?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a Shepherd's family reunion.
Speaker 1: Shepherd family reunion, sixty years?
Speaker 2: Sixty years continuously, in the same area.
Speaker 1: And what role does the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] play during that family reunion, tell me again?
Speaker 2: We would have our current, whatever the pastors down through the years, we would involve the church and this year we had a drama created so that the young people could learn the elders and the past generation through acting out those individuals and we were able to get the drama department at the church to also be our guest, our special guests in our drama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that involved the pastor and the rest of the community and then we had a--where they would go into the theater so people came dressed to go to the dinner theater and we created--it really was fantastic, because of the food, we had our own, my niece catered it, 'cause we have all these professionals in our family so we didn't have to go outside our family to do it, but it was how we presented it to make it very special to the family and to the community so that the community is so important in our family that we can't not exist without the community, and that's what makes the church, and that's what keeps us the cohesiveness and--involved in our family.  So now we have the younger generation saying, "Oh, I know who Marshall was now, Marshall Shepherd [ph.].  I know."  See they didn't know this before we had the drama.
Speaker 1: Are they very interested in maintaining family traditions?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And being a part of the family?
Speaker 2: What we have decided, we set up a whole youth division to our family.  That we now get tickets to the games because we have professional sports persons in our family and we are have--these are the outings and keep us talking about family, so it's connecting the old with the young and we have teachers, we have--who are writing drama for the next time around, but now the young people come to us and know us and they're not fearful of talking with us, the older--the ones that are eighty and ninety years old that are still living in our family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure, do you have a loosely organized family unit or do you have a formal family association, where there's a president, vice president and so forth?
Speaker 2: We do, we organize that--the generation which is the second generation, like we are five out and they're the second one that's keeping us into who we are.  They educate us, they're the one that organize that association to keep us talking to them and we talking plan the family reunion, we have learned more and more about who we are.
Speaker 1: Okay great, any thoughts of doing a HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview with some of the elders on the Shepherd side of the family to get some of those old stories before they leave?
Speaker 2: That would be fascinating in that they're the ones that tells us about who's in the graveyard at our church, that this--and we go--our Papa [Bussey's maternal grandfather, Jesse Shepherd (ph.)] is there, our you know a lot of our family on my mom [Eula Shepherd White] and dad's [Oscar White, Sr.] side.  So now we have a research project for our graveyard that we are beginning to look into and to develop for our young people so we can have a tour, we're planning a tour of the graveyard and we have a what we call a project identification.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're working with the deacons at that church and others to identify all of the sites and now it's been designated by the historic society because of the age of the cemetery.
Story_ID: 303898
Speaker 1: Let's talk briefly about your dad.  We're about to move to the next tape, but let's at least--if you'll give me the name and date of birth and place of birth of your father, please?
Speaker 2: My dad--name Oscar, O-S-C-A-R, Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, White, W-H-I-T-E, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born February--I always get it mixed up, 3rd, 1905 I believe it was.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: It was in Jefferson County [Georgia] my brother said.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But we call it, we always go to Winder, Georgia.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So we recently took a busload of our young people and other to Winder, Georgia to the original house where he grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how your dad and mom [Eula Shepherd White] met and where?
Speaker 2: That's all--we're trying to figure all that out, but we do know he came here from Winder.  My father when he was a teenager, about seventeen or eighteen and somehow or another got to South DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] 'cause that's where my mom was.
Speaker 1: And she wasn't leaving was she (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not the Shepherd city (laughter).
Speaker 2: By the being the oldest she had that responsibility (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And they married, as a matter of fact, Reverend Walter Williams [ph.] who's still living remembered them before--when they got married and he tells a story about the setting and the--circumstance that existed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During the time that they got married.
Speaker 1: What was his occupation?
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Your father's, yes?
Speaker 2: He did a number of things, he was a very well trained, diverse, so he, he actually worked at a sawmill and he grew--they had, where they had a place where they had did the canning and all the and--I remember all of that and he farmed and he was in carpentry, a carpenter.
Story_ID: 303899
Speaker 1: Let's continue to talk about your dad [Oscar White, Sr.] and his background and his growing up and what life was like in the White household?  His background?
Speaker 2: My dad, was as I understand it, since I'm the tenth one, the older ones I had to get some of the stories through them.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But--because he passed when I was fourteen so I do remember that he was, he was a great worker and he loved vegetables.  I just remember he was the only person I ever knew that had, loved to eat onion sandwiches.  That was something that stood out to me all my life, but he grew gardens and we always--when we were growing up had--he--the most beautiful lawn in the neighborhood [in Ellenwood, Georgia].  We had flower gardens, we had--so they--we built our own house and we made our own lawn.  So in the neighborhood everybody looked at us as though leaders in the neighborhood 'cause my dad leadership and making sure how we looked and how we ate and, and grew up.  Then we could sew, my momma [Eula Shepherd White]--you know we learned to sew and, and make things for ourselves.  My aunt did the hair, so we grew up doing all these things ourselves.  So our daddy was the only one who could read and write at church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia].  So he became the church clerk and he would document back then and when one of my aunts passed in the last few years we found where they were able to go take music, they had--we found documents showing where they could write music and notes and found some of his records, keeping records.  So that was very unique for the history of our church to have my dad being the church clerk and also he was the superintendent of the Sunday school.
Speaker 1: Where and how did he learn to read and write, any idea?
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly but I do know in Winder [Georgia] out here he taught Sunday school when he was a teenager and when he came to South DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] when he met my mom he could read and write and my aunts and all they could read and write, so they had an opportunity, I think that was quite unique, 'cause it was a lot of them, a lot of boys and girls that some of them were able to seek out and get the training and he happened to be one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because they had to leave South Georgia because of the conditions there and one of my aunts went to New York and the other, they dispersed and but some of 'em were able to come back home and we were able to have a couple of 'em here to get some of their history.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But it was fascinating that he loved--one thing he loved hunting 'cause my youngest brother [Gary White (ph.)] does a lot of--has a lot of his traits now.  He loved hunting and when we were growing up he loved fishing so we all--what I remember as a child that I had to clean a lot of fish and we had to process a lot of peaches and you know, just getting items ready for canning and preserving and getting ready for the winter.  So we saw it as work even though it was--there was a lot we were learning and understanding how to survive during that process.
Story_ID: 303900
Speaker 1: You were the tenth child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Born to your parents, how old were you when your dad [Oscar White, Sr.] passed away?
Speaker 2: Fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: And how old when your mom [Eula Shepherd White] passed away?
Speaker 2: I don't know what age I was, she died in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: All right so you were old enough to experience being reared by mom and dad?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me what was life like at your household on a morning before you went to school and on a day when you returned from school?
Speaker 2: We had so many living in one house, so my dad being a carpenter built what we call a smokehouse in the back.  It was a big house, so it was large enough that when one of my brothers got married he and his wife lived in it and when--then two of my brother--I think two or three of my brothers had to sleep there in that house 'cause the house that they built all of us couldn't be there, but we lived there you know a lot of children, and then some of them were traveling, like one of my brothers was in the [U.S.] military you know, they might be coming back.  So it was a day you had breakfast, you had full breakfast.  I just remember when we use to have like fried tomatoes and chicken, things that you have at suppertime that we use to have at breakfast time (laughter), that--because you had to work, you worked in the field and you had a lot of exercise and I learned at recent times why we had such full meal, morning time then at lunch time and the evening time, we use to have those kinds of meals.
Speaker 1: You mean breakfast, dinner, supper.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You don't mean lunch do you?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You're right (laughter), we call it different, but food was important.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: In the scheme of things in the household.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I think that's why I kept saying he would grow all this food and they canned and they preserved so it was an on-going task 'cause there was so many children and then my--what was real fascinating with us that we didn't have Christmas that I remember that if we could get--we always looked forward to--we didn't get gifts and toys like what we see Christmas these days, but we'd get this--these large apples and oranges, you might one or two and a little piece of peppermint, and you--we were so excited just getting that, that nice piece of fruit, it was larger than life, but the biggest thing we had by one of my brothers being an artist, we would have the best Christmas tree decorated in the whole neighborhood and all of us would participate in it, but he knew, he would be the guiding force to help guide how the Christmas tree.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So that's, those are the little things but it was how it kept family--then--my mom, then we would have all these cakes and pies on a buffet just cooked and I was recently asked when my son asked well what do we during you know--I said you know I remember we had all of those cakes.  I don't know who ate (laughter) you know.  How we got rid of so many cakes and pies and food that was cooked, 'cause we just staying with mom we would just cook so many days, just getting all that food ready and those were the things that helped us learn--that passed along skills.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And made sure those special days meant a lot to us.  So that was our household, when you get up in the morning you helped cook, you helped make sure the house was clean and we always cleaned the house, that was our job--
Story_ID: 303901
Speaker 1: Did dad [Oscar White, Sr.] and brothers and uncles learn the fine art of installing plumbing?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh yes, they, they did all those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: I mean what, my point is did you all have running water and toilet and bathrooms and everything back then?
Speaker 2: Not in the beginning, I remember when they built the house we had a well outside.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 2: We use to have a tubs I remember before they built--the house before the one they built when they put all the--I was still young but I--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I could imagine on the other end when my older sisters and brothers didn't have that but I had some--get some transitional opportunity to experience what the well drawing the water and what it was to live--how they created the look and how we survived and the cooking and how you had those springs.  How you have your and health from a health standpoint we had the berries, the trees the fruits and that real water, our well water and that seemed to have meant a lot to them in making sure that we had healthy, we were eating healthy.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And that exercise so it seemed to me those things stood out because that seemed to have been what was important, the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia], going to church.  We did that and we were eating and making sure we were clean, our house was clean as well as our bodies.  You might have had only one pair of shoes or one dress for Sunday but you kept it clean and ready for that.
Story_ID: 303902
Speaker 1: What was your dad's [Oscar White, Sr.], dad's name?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea where he was from?  Was he also from Winder [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what we're exploring right now.  We're trying to dig deeper to get more information on my dad like we have done on my mom [Eula Shepherd White].
Speaker 1: How about your dad's mom--her, have you heard any talk of her?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I just don't have all those details.  My sister talks, she could--she has a lot of.
Speaker 1: What stories have you heard about her or your grandfather on your dad's side?
Speaker 2: I've heard some but it was more or less how she did a lot of what I'm talking about from the standpoint of maintaining the house and the children, 'cause that was the role for the, for the wives at that time as far as the cooking.  When the--when you hear and talk about--they'd center around food and the children.
Speaker 1: Any other stories regarding any of the grandparents, any other stories you recall or you've heard that you'd like to share with those who are interested in the life and times and career of Ms. Alice Bussey [HistoryMaker Alice Bussey]?
Speaker 2: I only think as I have been exploring the Shepherds family here recently with the drama and with my papa, well [maternal] granddaddy, Jesse Shepherd [ph.].  My cousin is named Jesse Shepherd.  So that was of significant importance to--in my family to name us after significant individuals.  Like I'm named after my aunt, the name of the children was very important.  Like my sister Eula [Eula White] is named after my, my mom and then I have my brother Oscar [Oscar White, Jr.] named after--so I don't know if we have gotten away from that, but that too was a very important process in our family as how to carry the family name forward.
Speaker 1: Any idea of the origin of the name White or Shepherd or Gleaton, whether it was a name assumed by an ancestor after the days of enslavement or whether they were enslaved on the plantation and assumed the name of the owner, any stories on that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what we're in the process of trying to find out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Since we are sort of quite a number of generations down and we have that interest and we have a better way to look into that now too.
Speaker 1: Any stories of your heritage as it relates to the Native American population, any stories of being part Indian?
Speaker 2: I--well I've heard that we have some Indian in us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't to--how that all came about.
Speaker 1: All right, are there any stories, legends or songs that were passed down; any knowledge of having to repeat the twenty-third psalm every Sunday morning?
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: One of those?
Speaker 2: The Lord's Prayer.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The twenty-third psalm, the hundredth psalm.  When we grew up we had to know all the Christmas carols and we--there was so much you had to learn to keep in sync with the standards of what the family culture.
Story_ID: 303903
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your early, earliest memories.  We've talked a lot about them already, but let's just have you explore some of your earliest memories as a child, in whatever forum, whether it's at home, at school or in the community, earliest memories?
Speaker 2: I remember having to walk through the snow, we walked for miles to get to the bus, to change, the bus, to pass schools to go to a school out of our area.
Speaker 1: Now why did you have to do that?
Speaker 2: Because of discrimination, we were just--could not go to the local school.
Speaker 1: So the local schools were for, for whites?
Speaker 2: Whites and then blacks had to be transported into the, this distant area, and we had to change buses.  I remember going from Ellenwood [Georgia] side of--over to Western Chapel [Road], we changed buses there to go to Hamilton High [Hamilton High School] in Scottdale [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Who provided the bus transportation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The school system, it was a yellow bus.
Speaker 1: So rather than have you go to those schools they paid for transportation?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, in many communities the churches had a one or two room school that provided education to the youngsters, do you recall Poplar Springs [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] ever having a one-room school and providing a limited education to his children?
Speaker 2: Our--the other church in our community, County Line United Methodist Church [Ellenwood, Georgia] provided the foundation for the first public school.  It's right around the corner from Poplar Springs.  Those are the two oldest churches in the neighborhood that anchored the community and we were--they didn't have church every Sunday so one Sunday we would go to Poplar Springs, one we'd go to County Line so we grew up that way, but County Line [County Line School, Ellenwood, Georgia] was the public school system location and--where my older brother and sister attended public school there.
Speaker 1: Okay and so apparently there was a consolidation of schools and, and County Line church school was closed down and y'all then had to go to the larger public school someplace else?
Speaker 2: Well that was the elementary and then there--they built the elementary school there at County Line right there right next door really to the County Line United Methodist Church, there was a school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: When I was in the first, second and third grade.  Then another was built on Linecrest Road when I was in the fourth grade.  So that was the elementary schools, so when we finished elementary--we did have those being built early on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was a youngster but we didn't have a high school so by the time I finished that we had to be bused to go to high school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And we went to Hamilton High School in Scottdale, Georgia.
Story_ID: 303904
Speaker 1: You've just shared some of your early memories and we talked about what life was like in your home on a school day.  On special holidays, and other special events, what was life like in the White household?
Speaker 2: A lot of noise (laughter), music, we had a singing, we have a singing family, a lot of talent in our family, and I play the piano.  My mom [Eula Shepherd White] and dad [Oscar White, Sr.] they made sure all of us had some form of training, music, whether we learned to read notes and in the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] and all some of us would either take music lessons.  So I was one of the ones able to take music lesions and I had the opportunity to play for our youth choir for some time as a teenager while I was in school.  So that helped us to have the relationship connection to the school as well as to the church and the community.  So it kept us busy and kept us learning and learned how to deal with different people, adults as well as my own age level at and then to carry out a responsible role getting--dealing with deacons and ministers, and so that was one of the memories from back then but one of the other one was how we had our school--we had our own ball diamond in our neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we created entertainment for ourselves, so that was exciting as a youngster that we could go on a Sunday afternoon and have our own baseball team in the community and we put up concessions and we had what we--and we would come and people would come around and that was the--and then my older brother said when they were growing up they had a racetrack right there where my church is, where my church is before the houses and things.  So just recently we had been advocating for the county that we needed more recreation and more--a new parking area and we just got the county to go back and buy some of that same land what that had grown up and when we were children and they're gonna--we're gonna expand the park back to that old ball diamond that we had when we're growing up, 'cause I played on the softball team that we had, the girls softball team and we use to have May Day.  So we had a lot of community activities that kept us learning but kept us involved with each other as a community.
Speaker 1: Gotcha, you mean you had enough cousins to make up two baseball teams (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true (laughter), that's--(laughter).
Speaker 1: That's fascinating (laughter).  So most of your neighbors were your relatives?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Many--do you recall any neighbors or friends in the nearby community that were not related?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah like the Rice [ph.] family, they were the, one of the original families of the church, but we grew up so that we, we act the same and we act like sisters and brothers, so when people come they don't know we're not, but we're really not blood, but our, our mothers, born the same day, and they, they were close in the church, they were, they, they made sure that we were connected.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: From the school and all, so we've just recently been looking at our characteristics, that how similar we are through the church and we still--now are the leaders in the church, and but it was because our parents made sure that we had developed the right demeanor and the right skillsets to be able to carry on the leadership of what the foundation that they had laid.
Story_ID: 303905
Speaker 1: All right, Sister Bussey [HistoryMaker Alice Bussey] the next one is a tough question.  I need for you to give me the names of your sisters and brothers in their correct birth order?  Maybe it's not so difficult.
Speaker 2: Let me see, 'cause I don't--sometimes I don't know what age they are, 'cause they're close, they're real close.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But I'll do the best I can.  Reverend Oscar Curtis White, Jr.  You just need to know the name, that's it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I always get this one confused, I think it's Deacon Eddie Lee White or Annie White Johnson Sinkfield [ph.].  They were real tight, so that I might have 'em mixed up.
Speaker 1: All right that's three.
Speaker 2: And then I have I think it was Jacob White, then Pearlina White Jones [ph.] and you have Eula Juanita White Robinson [ph.], and then you have Thomas Huey White, Sr. [ph.] and you have Charles Joseph White [ph.] and Marguerite Louise White Jackson [ph.] and Alice White Bussey and Melvin Eugene White [ph.] and Gary White [ph.].  I hope that's all of them.
Speaker 1: That's--that puts you, number ten and that gives us twelve.  Congratulations you did it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you.
Story_ID: 303906
Speaker 1: Was becoming a member of the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] a rites of passage in your family?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't ever remember becoming a member, I just remember my always being there.  You know, you know how you would join a church?  I think I did it about eight years old.  You go through that, but you were already working in the church and all you had no other choice.
Speaker 1: And that was true for all of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why we have like.
Speaker 1: And it's still true?
Speaker 2: One of my brothers, well two of 'em moved with California with my aunt and uncle and then one, then they moved back, my oldest brother [Oscar White, Sr.] who just passed a couple of years back and then I have another brother.  We got him to come back, we got him to come back home you know as they were getting older, so he is not there with--Sunday, but every Sunday we have like, I think it's seven of us at church.
Speaker 1: And tell me again the age of the church and all of the founders of your church that you know of?
Speaker 2: I don't know all the founders, I know the Rice [ph.] family, the Shepherds, McKinley [ph.] family, the Rice, Robinson [ph.], there's Jack--it was only a handful of families that were just meeting there, then others came but the one who really organized it the Shepherds, the Rice, the Jackson [ph.], there are a lot of Jacksons, McKinley.
Speaker 1: And how many years ago was that once again?
Speaker 2: 19--it was 1871.
Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy-one [1871].
Speaker 2: So we're 135 years old this year.
Speaker 1: Has there been much intermarriage in those four or five families that founded the church?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Or were y'all like sisters and brothers and married someone else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how it grew you know, that's why it was a small group and then people were coming like we had Reverend A.D. Williams [Reverend A.D. Williams King] of the King family that was the pastor for a while at our church.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: So people were coming and going there until they were able to get some.
Speaker 1: Did a family member ever pastor the church?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's hard for one to pastor his cong--his family?
Speaker 2: But we've always been involved in the choir--you know organized the choirs the deacons, the mothers, the missionary.   Like my sister now has created the senior ministry.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: At the church and she's over that and they're on a mission--and just all over.  We're all over the church and different ways--and we like working in the background too.
Story_ID: 303907
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells you experience now that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Homemade biscuits, you know, a pot of greens on the stove you know, country fried chicken (laughter) and then beautiful flowers, you know gardens--flower gardens.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And a beautiful lawn that's when we were growing up and a clean, like hardwood floors, 'cause my mom [Eula Shepherd White] all--we had to--we had--you wouldn't tell if we was just outside, but we had the cleanest house ever (laughter) even though we didn't know what we were doing at the time but they were preparing us for all whatever it was we would have to wash, and iron our brothers' shirts and they was teaching us how to be a family.  And how those things and you carry on these roles, and we can do real well now because of that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 303908
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: County Line elementary school [County Line School, Ellenwood, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And name a teacher or two that influenced you while--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Everhart [ph.].
Speaker 1: And how did she influence you?
Speaker 2: Ms. Moseley [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh, there are two or three?  Name ways in which they influenced you.
Speaker 2: Taught me fractions in the fifth grade, note singing that I still can do, and learned the foundation that I could--I was real well--did real well in school.  I finished at the top of my class and Mrs. Everhart became the principal.  She was the principal and she was real close to my mom [Eula Shepherd White].  See teachers back then made sure they were real tight, and Mr. Hatton [ph.] who was the principal of the school in Hamilton High [Hamilton High School, Scottdale, Georgia] because we had to be bused, and I was active in sports and track and other, and sometime we wondered how we did that since we didn't have bus services and we didn't have cars back then, but the community we built our own in-town travel, transportation system where parents and people would pick up your children and do it.  It was really amazing how all of that worked with no formal system, it just happened.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you, were you well mannered, were you rambunctious, were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: I was real quiet, I didn't talk a lot when I--I mean believe it or not.  It was only my adult years that I learned to really talk (laughter), but I was a real, a real quiet student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did my work, I--so from elementary school I was a real good student, and from middle school, what they call it now, but when I, when we had that little graduation on seventh and eighth grade I graduated at the top of my class and I also did that--I was valedictorian for my high school at that time writing speeches and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then I was able to continue college [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] 'cause I got scholarships and I, I went to business school 'cause I got--did real well.  In high school they prepared you to function where you would continue to college and I, so from typing, shorthand, from business skills that they taught us in high school and they exposed us to business and one of my teachers, Dr. Harlan now I still have relationships with.
Speaker 1: What's the name?
Speaker 2: Dr. Jennie Harlan [ph.], she taught me in the ninth grade, in the tenth grade, but we have a relationship now where I invite her to events and I wonder how old was she then, but she influenced me a lot in high school, in business and she made sure we were able to visit businesses and see what happening in the world of business.
Story_ID: 303909
Speaker 1: Do you recall having dreams and aspirations even when you were a young child?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What were some of those (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To travel, I wanted to travel.  I loved reading vicariously I, I was able to visit a lot of places 'cause I loved reading and we had--we challenged each other in school to read books and learn words when we were standing in the lunch line.  See how many words you could learn overnight and I have some of those books now that I share with my own kids [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey], but the--my dream was to travel because we didn't learn about our African history, we didn't have that exposure so the first opportunity I received, I was able to go to Africa and spend six weeks.  I, I looked at the possibility of going to the university there and I met professors I had at when I attended school in California and others through that process and my husband [James Bussey, Jr.] and I, that's why we were able to grow our business [Bussey's Florist and Gifts].  We traveled extensively in other countries and other places to look at flowers to look at the growth and the connectedness of what our industry is about.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: As we had looked at our lives 'cause we traveled a great deal before I got married and then I made sure that was a condition of marriage that we would continue to do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So that, travel has added a lot to our base of who we are.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And how we're able to service our customer base and to channel information into our church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] to make sure that the next generation is being exposed and that's what I do a lot at my church.
Story_ID: 303910
Speaker 1: Where did you attend junior high school and who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: High school?
Speaker 1: Junior, well yes okay, that's right they didn't have junior high here?
Speaker 2: No they just had--we went from elementary [County Line School, Ellenwood, Georgia] to high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Elementary to high school, okay where'd you attend high school and who were some of your friends?  I'll need a quick answer I got one minute before this tape is out.
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to high school at Hamilton High School [Scottdale, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Carol Holk [ph.], Gwen White [ph.], they were, we formed this little organization from our last name, about six or seven of us who were top in the class, and we maintain to this date some of that group.
Speaker 1: Now where is Hamilton High School again, where was it?
Speaker 2: In Scottdale, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Scottdale, and Jennie Harlan [ph.] was the teacher there at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, and she taught at Clark [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] on recent times.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and she influenced you as a young person out here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she taught business, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 303911
Speaker 1: So you were influenced by Ms. Jeannie Harlan [sic. Jennie Harlan (ph.)], and I think you mentioned off-camera Narvie J. Harris [HistoryMaker Narvie Harris].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us how these elders, these mentors influenced you and describe some of your experiences with them?
Speaker 2: Well when I was in ninth grade [at Hamilton High School, Scottdale, Georgia], Dr.--well Ms. Harlan, she was Townsend [ph.] then but when I was in high school she would have us during the summer, we were--school was continuous all year for her so she had us practice typing that we had to be of a certain speed by the time school started back, and I was able to do that and then she wanted us to creative learning shorthand.  So I was able to do a book of poetry in shorthand.  She had us doing all kinds of creative projects in school to create interest and she would have little incentives that she would give, it might've just been a ream of paper or some--but she created the interest for you and so Dr.--Ms. Townsend-Harlan she also would have us become professional like secretaries for the teachers.  So you had to dress up and come and pass inspection with her before you could be assigned to the teacher or the prize would be assigned to the principal, so I was all--able to be assigned to the principal's office and things.  So those are the kinds of things that she helped us learn, how to dress, how to act and the practical approach as we were learning business and taking business classes in high school, because we weren't assured that we were gonna go to college, so they had to prepare us to make sure that we could function when we finished high school.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then Ms. Harris worked closely, Narvie J. Harris worked closely with my mom [Eula Shepherd White].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause my mom was very active in the community and Ms. Harris was our, informal black superintendent to make sure she traveled the dirt roads 'cause others wouldn't come and made sure we got used books, and that we had materials so that we can have school and that's how through--down through the generations from my older sisters and brothers down to--that we have been able to know each other with my mom, my dad [Oscar White, Sr.] and learning to read and write and being the ones in the neighborhood who could read and write and we were very popular growing up in our neighborhood, the White family, and we were known to know how to do things and, and if people were seeking information they would seek us out.  So that kept us learning, I mean from one of my, one of my younger brothers making, building a car to a master plumber, to being a an artist, to drawings, to building houses, buildings to painting just all just area and then my other brother [Eddie White] who's a minister who could preach and so, we, we could do the, and then we relied up each other's advice.  That and consult--so to be sisters and brothers and then to have the extended family to do that, the counseling was real important.  So Ms. Harris played into a lot of that 'cause she was outside the community so she could bring resources and information to us or through our parents and then recently we had her to be our grand marshal for our community parade last year.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: And we were able to get her reacquainted with her old neighborhood with old friends and relatives and she was so excited and to be honored in that way.
Speaker 1: Good, good did she get to know most of you by name?  Was it that type of relationship?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes she knows my dad when they--my mom.  She tells me things I didn't know about my mom and dad.  Now that's why we're in our church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] and then the community bringing her back to the community 'cause she knew so many families that we're trying to identify our own history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And those families in the neighborhood, so by her being our grand marshal we're gonna invite her back this year too.
Speaker 1: Good yeah.
Speaker 2: So that we can continue 'cause last year we took her around to some of the ones who are eighty, ninety years old to their home.  She was just real excited about that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And they knew her when she walked in the church.  So many people knew her.
Speaker 1: Yes, we're honored at HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] to have had the opportunity to interview her in the last couple of weeks and we're doing a special for her on the 14th of March and we would certainly like to ask you to come out and join us as we honor her at the school.
Speaker 2: I would be happy to, yes.
Speaker 1: At the school which is named in her honor.  Ms. Narvie J. Harris truly is an institution in this community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she is.
Speaker 1: --and has meant so much to so many.
Story_ID: 303912
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you this, in terms of the curriculum in your high school [Hamilton High School, Scottdale, Georgia] and you've mentioned how it prepared you for college and beyond.  Would you comment further on the curriculum as well as the extracurricular activities you participated in, in high school?
Speaker 2: We had tough courses from trigonometry, all--you had to know how to work statistics.  We had a lot of courses in math and science and then we had practical, like the business that Dr. Harlan [Jennie Harlan (ph.)] would have us do in the ninth and tenth grade.  She didn't just do that, she took us on field trips to these major corporations in other states, that was very unusual, because, because we were in a--from a poor community without a lot of resources and how she was able to pull that off, we don't know to this day, but she was able to take us, those who were expiring and show the worth of doing that.  Then she motivated us to work in the summer so we had curriculum to read books, so we were--the librarian would bring books to the school and the library--paperbacks and you had to figure out ways to get enough money to get this paperback and we challenged--then we formed groups and we would challenge each other, 'cause the reading would allow us to learn new words and the words that we could learn to help us were being able to do well on tests and others, so that was strategies that the teachers, the principal, the librarian, all of 'em had to help us in the curriculum development to learn the basic, 'cause we didn't have any problem passing tests or reading and writing, so I was able to do very well in school and I was able to graduate at the top of my class, writing speeches.  Then I helped others in the community and I was playing the piano and but outside of that I was involved in sports.  So I ran track and was able to do the physical as well as throw--do that long throw of what they were calling the javelin at the time.  So we, we were very active, we had the opportunity to be into sports as well as the music, and I think it was a balancing that our parents [Eula Shepherd White and Oscar White, Sr.] with the teachers, 'cause they worked very closely with the teachers ensured that we had that balance in our curriculum.
Story_ID: 303913
Speaker 1: By the time you reached high school [Hamilton High School, Scottdale, Georgia] your dad [Oscar White, Sr.] has passed way.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did this impact the White household when dad passed away?
Speaker 2: It was a--it impacted us tremendously because he was our leader, he was in the community, very highly respected in the community and in our church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia].  When one of the members recently put--wrote up about my dad in our church bulletin that she remembered him always going to the church in that potbellied stove and making that fire in that old church.
Speaker 1: Was he the sexton?
Speaker 2: Well I guess, all she remembered that he made the fire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For the church to be warm (laughter) when they got to church and I didn't know that, I mean but she, that's what she remembered about him.  So it was a big loss in the community and the church as well as our flower family, 'cause he grew things he loved and loved the children.  He spent time, a lot of time with us.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when your dad passed away, by the way tell me again the year you were born?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-seven [1947], now you had several older brothers as well as older sisters, was there a stepping up to the plate by older brothers to, to fill in the role of dad and take on his responsibilities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --to ensure that the younger members of the family continued to be taken care of?
Speaker 2: Oh yes they did that and still do., I mean our family, we do with our nieces and nephews now (laughter).  We do--I mean it's something that we developed in our family that we take care of each other, so to make sure that whatever the needs are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Village concept very much alive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Were there problems, non-problems or what, we talk and we make sure that we help resolve whatever it might be.
Story_ID: 303914
Speaker 1: So not too long after your dad [Oscar White, Sr.] died, there were several other deaths outside the community, but of national and international proportion.  A couple of years after your dad passed away, the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] of the United States was assassinated.  Where were you, what were you doing and how did that impact you and your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was sitting in a biology class at Hamilton High School [Scottdale, Georgia], I just, it, it really impacted us 'cause we, we were watching and well we were hearing and trying to follow issues, but that, that was not good as far as us being students and what, what impact that made for us as far as the opportunity we felt we had under his administration.
Speaker 1: That's saying.
Speaker 2: But that's where I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Around that same time the Civil Rights Movement had taken place and there was hope, hope was alive and the death of the president kind of dashed that hope for a while but in our gaining new hope we saw Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the March on Washington in 1963, what, what were your feelings around that time?
Speaker 2: I was involved, I was in college--I was in school so I was basically learning 'cause--remember I was telling you that we didn't have enough books and, and learn enough about who we are and some of those things, so that was very important and I remember it in California, hearing Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] saying, talking about, "I am somebody," attended forums and places there.  After that, you know a few years after that so what--in '63 [1963] all of that prepared me to make me aware that I needed to learn more.  I needed to really delve into what this is all about.  So when his--when they had his funeral here I attended that, we were marched onto the State Capitol [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia] steps, and we participated in some of those things because I was exploring, I was trying to get a sense of who, how that impacted me and what that was gonna have--what impact it would have for me for the rest of my life and so I believe it helped set the basis for my going to Africa, and I was researching and spent some time in other countries 'cause we went over to Europe, and we went to the Caribbean we looked at the connectedness there.  And then when I lived in California for about seven years when I was in school I had a chance to really look at what was happening there from the standpoint of how that was a state of free education, supposedly before Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] became president, you could go to school, you could do things, and if--you and you had a lot more opportunity so I was able to look at that from the East Coast and West Coast and then I just decided to do a lot of traveling and I spent a lot of time in libraries when I was in Africa looking at the theater, looking at the prison system, the monetary system, and then I did my master's work [at Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], graduate work and where I, I did some comparative analysis of some of these systems that I had been exposed to other than the--just strictly democratic system, but some of the Socialistic systems and the whole thing about socialism as well as the Marxism and so my whole thesis of, of doing the graduate studies helped me with those travels and helped me explore that, and it brought me back to the basis of what some of this talk and the civil rights and public policy and that's what helped me move into the public policy arena in my graduate studies.
Story_ID: 303915
Speaker 1: What impact did the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] have on you?
Speaker 2: That was part of it, it just--here this man, young, didn't realize he was so young at time but I knew he was a young man that was a preacher and by coming up in church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] I knew how those commitments were, but I didn't know enough at the time to realize what impact until I finished school and started dealing with my own kids and, and my own community, and I dealt with Coretta, his wife, Coretta Scott King for about twenty-five years 'cause we were (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In what light, in what regard?
Speaker 2: Well we would talk, I mean we like, all her kids 'cause we were, we were her personal florists and we would do all the decorations once she got the King Holiday [Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday] established where you see on TV the stage setting, we did all of that and anything they needed as far as flowers.  We would be in the midst of consulting with, but other than that just talking with her and dealing with the non-violence and The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause we were there with seminars and helping establish and garner support for what she was trying to do, we were involved in all of that.  So for about twenty-five years I dealt with Coretta Scott King, not just casual, but in, in direct relationship with knowing them, she and [HistoryMaker] Christine King Farris and the children, I know all her children and, and doing that, to me that helped me to carry, help carry out some of what Martin Luther King had put his life on the line for.
Speaker 1: If we can just stay there for a few minutes I'll have to reverse and go back to an earlier time, but what impact--let me just ask what impact did the death of Mrs. Coretta Scott King have on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was devastating, 'cause hadn't been long talked with her and we were, and it wasn't expected, it just.
Speaker 1: Did you know she was ill?
Speaker 2: I didn't know she was ill, and so the day of services we just stayed there, we just tried to be there and be a part of it.
Speaker 1: You able to attend her funeral?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't able to attend, it was just.  That's why we stayed--went home and just stayed there and.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And dealt with through TV and just, just stayed right there with her and all of that.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: But her spirit, it's just, it still is it's--and my daughter [Alicia Bussey] see in growing up and introducing her and making sure she knew them, had met them and they.  So it was a sharing, it was a real family sharing 'cause all of us.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, and my sons [Prez Bussey and James Bussey III] and--see in doing the flowers and being involved with The King Center and the church and the rest of 'em, all my whole family, we made sure that all of us was involved in that process.
Story_ID: 303916
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the '60s [1960s].  Now, the '60s [1960s] were a time of uplift with the Civil Rights Movement, but there were other things present during the '60s [1960s].  There was the Vietnam War, did that impact your family?  Did your brother--any of your brothers have to serve at that time?
Speaker 2: My brother--I--they weren't serving at that time but I had two that did go in the [U.S.] military, and one of my brothers became a minister at--'cause he almost lost his life there in the military, but the war itself--I always remember that war from this close friend of mine from the County Line United Methodist Church [Ellenwood, Georgia], he was the only son of three children and I couldn't, couldn't to this day understand how they allowed him to go to that war and be killed 'cause I always thought they wouldn't let the only male do that, but he went and he was killed so that always stayed with me, the things, the picture of that wall is his picture.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: It was a very negative impact.
Speaker 1: There were other negative aspects of the '60s [1960s], drugs began to work their way in our culture.  What is it in your family background that enabled the White family to stay strong and continue to grow and become professionals in spite of a culture that started to pull so many in our community down?
Speaker 2: I think our parents [Eula Shepherd White and Oscar White, Sr.] protected us, 'cause a lot of things that were happening we did not know it.  We didn't have the TV early on--I remember my aunt--one of my aunts had a TV and if anything that would happen that was special they'd let us go see--meet at her house but we didn't the TVs early on so we would, we were not exposed to a lot of--they could control a lot more, and then they didn't let us out of the neighborhood so when--we said the extended family--how this family, so the discipline and, so we knew how to act so my beautician right now was talking about that Saturday, 'cause she's my sister-in-law and she said, "My daddy made sure I was taught this and--."  You know she's still living by those principles.  Her daddy's still living, he's eighty-three years old and but we he also taught us and he's like my dad too.  So we grew up knowing that we had to be respectful and honor the teachings of our elders and just because we were getting older that doesn't mean we had--we would deviate from that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because then now we have children [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey]--that was one of the reason I took my children back to the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] and the neighborhood to make sure that they had a touch of that upbringing and that teaching.  So now they've bought into it so they're there (laughter).
Story_ID: 303917
Speaker 1: How early in your school career, we're still in high school.  How early did you decide that you wanted to go to college and how early did you have some idea of what you wanted to really do with your life?
Speaker 2: I think that was like ninth, tenth grade.  Dr. Harlan [Jennie Harlan (ph.)] and others--because if you worked hard and you did well in class, you--there was no reason not to.  I didn't ever just decide that I'm going to go to college 'cause I liked doing the technical skills so I was able to ahead and get technical skills so I could survive and do whatever needed to, that's, that was the teaching and training.  Vocational skill and so I was able to do that and then I was able to write papers and use my skills to help pay for going to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when I did well in class and then graduated I received these scholarships.  My, my choice then was now, am I going to receive these scholarships?  'Cause it, well not--the idea that I'm just going to go to college, 'cause I had several options open to me and my brother lived in California with all--giving me an option to come out there to go to school and I had done well here and I was receiving offers in other states to go to school, so as a seventeen year old, sixteen, seventeen year old, I had a lot, lot of options.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And choices but I enjoyed my church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] and my family so I didn't want to leave home.  I was playing the piano for the youth choir and, see when you have a balance in your life--so that played into whether or not I was gonna chose a scholar--to go out of the country or out of the state or what I was gonna do as far as continuing my education.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said earlier you finished valedictorian in your high school class?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was Hamilton High School [Scottdale, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: I went to business school here first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I received a scholarship here so I decided to--Dr. Harlan because she played a role in that too and I'm glad I did that because I received a different discipline and, and solid basis from the high school to finish, to round that out to help me in college so I went, I decided to go to California, and go to college.  I went to several colleges out there and universities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And completed, once I finished here I received a full scholarship to several of the--in North Carolina, at the university and others but I went to California because I knew my brother was out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that worked well for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that business school or college in California?
Speaker 2: That was college and university; I went to several college and university because I was able to get two undergraduate degrees and a master's degree over the period of time I was out there.
Story_ID: 303918
Speaker 1: Well tell us about that then, sounds like you were a bookworm?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell us about your work towards these two degrees, what were they in and where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Well it was, the first--I just made an application when I got there--the first college received--the first one I could get in.  I was accepted it was Compton--I think it was in Compton [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just Compton College [Compton Junior College; El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California] and then I transferred to the next one you know after that to I think Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California], 'cause I was living in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And out there it's like the suburbs they're not that far apart, so you could get around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So and then I did well I got a scholarship--actually I was offered a full scholarship to go to law school when I was working at the university 'cause when I went out there I was working for the government here and then I transferred 'cause I started as a student 'cause I did well on the test.  They were coming to the schools and administer tests and they wanted me to work for the government.  So I, at sixteen I decided at seventeen to do that and to get more exposure.  So I was always working getting experience, practical experience as I was in school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: From like ninth grade or so, and I didn't stop that in college, even though I had scholarships I felt that experience was more important.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I was able to continue down there all the way through school and that's why I wasn't rushing to go through school 'cause I like traveling.  So I was able to travel a different place in each summer.  I would make it be a part of my experience for the school, whether I was working on a paper or whether I had to deal with in class, I would the summer as an extension of that.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: And so I would go to different places and I might come through here on my way to Africa and places and so I was--and my family thought I was quite a non-conformist so (laughter) I, I went--'cause nobody was talking about going to Africa at the time and doing all those things.  So I just used education since I had a strong foundation I didn't have to worry about the academic portion so much, cause I was--I could do well in school I could write and 'cause I, we they had taught us to read so you, we knew language and I knew a lot about places and things so you had to have a way to use it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What I basically did was create my own way of going to school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And, and once when you couldn't get classes over here I was at the university over here and at the college over there, 'cause California had a lot of students.  In one class I remember I was ninety-three in that class.  So it was a different mode of education--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --independence and you had to learn how to survive with adults 'cause a very competitive process in the school system out there and I was able to develop, get classes I needed, travel as well as read and I continues to read so when I went to Africa I was in the bookstores and libraries trying to see if what I--if what had been printed was actual since we didn't have access to African American history at that time.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So that, that was the first--and I decided to go into public government, urban studies from a business, I moved from business to sociology to government urban studies and then I decided to go into graduate studies, I went into public administration.
Speaker 1: Public administration.
Speaker 2: And so all of that has come in handy with helping develop laws and helping to fight for small business in, in my latter years that I didn't know I was being prepared for back then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 303919
Speaker 1: So how long were you in California?
Speaker 2: Seven years.
Speaker 1: Seven years.  And is all of your formal education from California schools?
Speaker 2: Basically.
Speaker 1: Okay, the business education, is that from out there or here [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I went two years here in business.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Then transferred out here.
Speaker 1: And what brought you back--where did you go from there should I ask?  Where did you go from California?
Speaker 2: I met my husband [James Bussey, Jr.] out there (laughter) and we.
Speaker 1: Is he from California?
Speaker 2: No, he's from here (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did y'all meet?
Speaker 2: It was the James Cleveland's Gospel Music Workshop [Gospel Music Workshop of America, Inc.].  He came out there for that and his--I was living in a duplex and the ones who owned the duplex were from here and he had helped him--knew him from here from the Gospel Music Workshop because he was a musician and that kind of thing and that's how we met through that Gospel Music Workshop piece, and I was just helping bring his friend out that kind of thing but I was able to do his food and all that 'cause remember I learned to cook and that and he was just fascinated that I could do all those things and come in there and put all those hors d'oeuvres and those things together (laughter), and bring all these people and we had laid it for him and stuff like that, and just doing it, I mean it was the thing to do, that's how we helped each other, and that's how I met my husband for--future husband then, but it took us about five years--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --to finally get together, but we never lived in the same place, he--but in the meantime he worked with my mom [Eula Shepherd White] here on boards of directors on in the EOA that's Economic Opportunity Agency and in the community that I didn't know, she didn't know that's who he was until we decided to get married.  So God had fixed it altogether.
Speaker 1: So,  he's from here and you're from here, you met him in California and eventually the two of you come back here and get married and are living life happily ever after (laughter), that was--how did it happen that your mom came to know that she was working with the person that you were dating?
Speaker 2: When I sent a picture they would get an invitation (unclear).  She said, "Oh I know him." (Laughter) That was amazing.
Speaker 1: Did y'all get married out there or back here?
Speaker 2: No, here.
Speaker 1: Here, all right, all right and.
Speaker 2: They had a day for me out, the city of, the City of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, how long have y'all been married?
Speaker 2: Since--what year was that? Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: Thirty years.
Speaker 1: What brought you back here again, what brought you back from California?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was only out there--I wanted to raise a family, I wanted to get married and have a family but I didn't want to do it in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I always knew I was coming back home.
Speaker 1: When did you return to Georgia?
Speaker 2: That--'75 [1975] right before, before I got married.
Story_ID: 303920
Speaker 1: Then what happened?  What did you do next?
Speaker 2: I sat still for moment--actually I was working I had a job because I interviewed for a job here--transferred--I was still working with the government.  I always worked with the federal government and even as a student, remember I was telling you as a student, so.
Speaker 1: Throughout the time you were in California you're working for the federal government (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I transferred out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As teenager working for fed--then I transferred back here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I had a hard time with that adjustment because the individuals felt I was too qualified--I was overly qualified for the job and they didn't want to give me the job, but I needed a job--not to break my tenure you know in the federal system.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so I had to sort of convince them that I knew the laws and I knew that they would have to give me the job, those kinds of things.  It was real different, it was--you know having lived in Los Angeles [California] out there working with the likes of, and dealing with a lot of gangs and working at the university [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], you know you--that environment was quite different, you had to learn the survival and you learned how to deal with people as people.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But you also had to learn the law and the rules and what governed your behavior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what happened, I just came back and made sure I, I didn't have anything that negatively impact my tenure with the federal government.
Speaker 1: All right the tape is about to end, we'll continue on the next one but first tell me exactly what agency within the government did you work and what was your--the name of your job?
Speaker 2: I worked with the U.S. Department of Labor--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --at the federal level and I had an array of jobs starting at from the grad--the beginning and got promoted throughout, just got promoted, working in jobs that I wasn't supposed to be because I would do the work, I would create systems and do the--do jobs that required a lot of work and lot of thinking so I would take on the task.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then the other part, the money part will follow, but I was--I had a lot of energy so I was able to work with the U.S. Department of Labor, in jobs ranging in from being assistants to specialists and I finally became the first African American to be a federal representative over the State of Georgia.
Story_ID: 303921
Speaker 1: Ms. Bussey [HistoryMaker Alice Bussey] you returned to Atlanta [Georgia] from Los Angeles [California] in 1975?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You continued to work with the federal government, the [U.S.] Department of Labor at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For how much longer did you work for them and what else, if anything, were you doing in terms of developing your careers?
Speaker 2: I continued to develop with the Department of Labor and looking for opportunities because I just accepted a position so that I would not have a break in service, and once I returned I began to look at, now what other opportunities?  And I found that there were opportunities in areas that I wanted to work with my background dealing with public policy, dealing with those most in need and I asked to be a part of the team dealing with women on welfare, dealing with the food stamp program and dealing with veterans, high school dropouts, the training--to look at how public policy impacted those groups, and I was able--I also asked as part of civil rights laws that were put on books under Title VII, that each employee or individual had to have the opportunity to be trained that was a federal employee and the also in that there were certain rights for women that were not known and I asked to become the Federal Women's Program manager for the southeast region.  As a part of my position that I knew the law that I could so, so that was--that meant my supervisor had to give me 25 percent of my time to deal with those functions as the regional Federal Women's Program manager where I had the opportunity to help write the manual under the Title VII training manual for women for the thirteen regional offices here in the state and I was able to travel from Florida, be on the radio and (unclear).  So that was a dimension of giving back and helping to change public policy and the condition of a group that I knew was not being dealt with internally so I wanted to use the outside force to impact the inside, and in my regular position was that of a specialist, a manpower development specialist they called it at one time where I would help look at cities, municipalities, government, colleges, universities that received grants and monies from the government.  I was able to approve or I could disprove.  It was a very unique position, not knowing it at the time but it was very unique in that I learned how systems work.  Since I had studied that in, in my studies, remember I said I went from sociology to business to government urban studies to public administration.  So I became an interpreter of tax laws, 'cause taxes was one of the highlights of things I knew how to do and liked doing.  So we had a lot of tax law and policy integrated into what we had to interpret to implement programs at the federal, state and county level.
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's how I got to know Shirley Franklin when she was running the City of Atlanta.  Michael Lomax when he was over at the county 'cause I was the first African American to be over the State of Georgia; for about six years I was able to put millions of dollars into the state to manage programs and I called audits when those who didn't feel that these funds should go to African American communities, I could call audits and make sure that we were getting due process.  That's what I moved into from starting out at the bottom and just stayed there to get tenure to learn systems and learn ways to impact my community.
Speaker 1: And how long did you continue with the Department of Labor making this impact (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I stayed there until '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: 'Til '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: I had about three years before I was eligible for retirement.
Story_ID: 303922
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why did you leave [the U.S. Department of Labor]?
Speaker 2: Actually it was a growth time, growth spurt for our business [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] and I had to decide.
Speaker 1: What business is that?
Speaker 2: The flower business.
Speaker 1: You were in the flower business (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, at the same time doing all that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right tell us (simultaneous) about how did that work?
Speaker 2: 'Cause when I came back in '75 [1975] I married my--we got married, and that meant I married a business and learned that and figured out to integrate some of the training?
Speaker 1: So your husband [James Bussey, Jr.] was already in the floral business?
Speaker 2: Yes, he started this business as a teenager his first year at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I call it taking it to the next level of, of real business.  You start out when--and you look at what you can do individually, but then I had to set up systems and set up the infrastructure and that's what all that other training and all.  I was able to bring to the base of what I saw that their industry was about from the standpoint of helping the industry because when I was elected as a delegate to the White House Conference on Small Business from the state (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this?
Speaker 2: That in '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay, please proceed.
Speaker 2: And this industry was not officially according to government standards an industry because it did not have a SIC code, that the specific industrialization code [sic. standard industrial classification] assigned to it.  So those florists that were elected delegates from across the country, there was about five of us got together and were able to meet at the White House and in Washington [D.C.] to help change that and we were able, we were successful in doing that.  So that meant part of what I was able to do was help change the industries for the better from my background as well as look at what I could do individually, locally to expand and develop our business into a premiere business, but then when I did the other research and found that there were not that African American owned businesses who could do the level of work at a full service shop and we wanted to make sure we could all the diverse activities needed for the diverse community needs, whether it was a large business, small business, whether it was a church or individual or just a baby being born, or just someone coming in such as an [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton won the Trumpet Award [sic. founded the Trumpet Awards Foundation], taping with the right kind of arrangements.  We shared--we wanted to be able to have all of that experience inclusive of when, when Ambassador Young's [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] daughters wanted to get married, we were able to transform the older daughter's wedding.  He wanted a public wedding at City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] so we were able to transform City Hall into public reception.  So we, we were able to get all that kind of experience by making sure that we connected ourselves with those that we needed to as well as getting the experienced, help and training and later on we found that African America was moving into different positions, but yet didn't know the etiquette of the use of flowers so we created a training program at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] for six years we trained to help make sure that we could give back and make sure that the proper training was available to those who needed it to make sure that they--'cause they, many of them we found when they called us did not know what a conference, a major activity, or what the decorum needed to be, nor what the people needed to wear or how the room looks so that--those are the kinds of things 'cause that was not that kind of training school and high school nor in college for us.  So we were able to really help our colleagues so to speak learn how to use this product and enhance what they were doing and its usage (laughter).
Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting.
Story_ID: 303923
Speaker 1: When your husband [James Bussey, Jr.] got started in the business and later on as you became involved, who were some of the other prominent African American florists involved in the industry in the Atlanta [Georgia] area?
Speaker 2: What we found there were a lot of--those who wanted to do the work but they worked from their homes and they were well known.  They had good business but they were limited because the business depended upon properly trained people, and whether or not you had the capacity to deliver and service that clientele.  So you could either stay and maintain that core business or you could expand beyond that.  So we had Marie's Florist [Marie's Florist and Garden, Atlanta, Georgia] that was over on Martin Luther King Drive, [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] we had a florist Heavenly, Heavenly Florist [ph.] on Auburn Avenue, had been there about thirty-nine years, and so you had strategically-located florists in our, in the corridor of where we did business and traveled and then those who knew about those worked at home, that's what they did.  They just called 'em at home and worked on that, but we didn't have enough of it, enough of it so we have since helped five individuals open up shops, like at Cascade [ph.] at the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] and so we're now looking for someone to help in Lithonia [Georgia] so that we have, if you have a choice at least we want you to at least look at those that are in our community first and that's a process we're working on to help make sure that you do have a choice, that you don't have to go outside the community to find what you need and especially when it comes to flowers and gifts.
Speaker 1: And so you've taken the floral business to the next logical level and tell us what exactly did that entail?  Are there special designations that you received, special licenses, exactly what does that entail (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we worked, what we did here in Atlanta that was very unique, in the '70s [1970s] there was the energy crisis and it cost a lot just like today to deliver flowers, but most people don't think in terms of where we get the flowers from, or they come from other countries most of 'em 'cause we're losing the farming market here in this country and that's part of what we dealt with in Washington [D.C.] too.  Why we don't grow more products and, and farming, the growing of the flowers means that we had to buy them from other countries.  So that's gasoline costs, that's, that's a cost, and then we would have to deliver them locally, that's a cost.  So that has nothing to do with the cost of the item you're buying.  So we, we had to train individuals to know that we just don't grow these products here and then you have all the different units.  So we, we got in the business of looking at, how can we teach and make sure that our customers, we can have better customers if they are informed?  And we have spent years doing tradeshows.  We took a--the business to another level making sure that we--I mean whether it was white, black or any other.  You will very seldom see a florist out there in tradeshows and in other markets to make sure the consumer was getting the information.  So we [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] became a premiere florist for make sure the industry was showing in tradeshows and other places.  I started some thirty years ago doing that and we started bringing in product like from South Africa that, that is grown.  Eighty percent of the flower, Proteas, exotic flower is grown in South Africa, so--but we use it a lot here and you get good value for it but it's very hard--sales where you can get us to use it unless you know what it is.  So we started using these exotic flower, make sure you knew the history of them and we were able to get more customers to purchase them, but then that meant--that's one of the things we taught [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young about when we did the trade mission.  We did a trade mission that focused on African Americans in 1989 and we went to three different countries.  It took me four years to plan that trade mission and we planned it so it would be the last one that Andrew Young would do so that it would focus on African Americans and the ones on the trade mission would be basically other African Americans and it became very successful in that it allowed us to educate Ambassador Young as to the kinds of crops that could be grown in some of these countries that would help create jobs and our public policy had changed to allow for us to have duty free and relieve the taxes through the Caribbean based on initiative that very few of us were taking advantage of.  So we were trying to make sure that not just big business were using the new legislation just to go to Europe and other countries, and still leave out small business so we were able to take the law, train the ambassador and other leaders and to look at the ministers of agriculture and others in other countries and get them trained into ginger lilies and other exotic flowers like orchids might be the way you need to go, and we were able to change some of those crops that way.
Story_ID: 303924
Speaker 1: I've heard of the FTD desig--what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That's Florists' Transworld Delivery.
Speaker 1: And what does that have to do with your business and the floral industry?
Speaker 2: It is the premier organization, it's an association of florists that's been around over seventy years that allow us to ship flowers worldwide by using other florists.  We've become partners in the business in that we take care of each other by calling each other to send the order that you as a customer has given us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We don't go directly there, but we use another intermediary to do the work for us.
Speaker 1: And so part of your taking your business to the next level--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was being a part of the FTD network whereas others, your predecessors remained the mom and pop businesses operated from their home without the FTD designation?
Speaker 2: You had to have a certain standard in order to pass the inspection in order to get--become a member, and we [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] were the first FTD shop, African American owned in the City of Atlanta [Georgia].  It took us over a year to get through that process because it's not a corporation, it's not--it's just an association and you have to be able to pass a test 'cause they send test orders through you too, so you don't ever know when you're getting a test order.  You have to have the right set up to do that, and so we were able to do that but it was harder getting the application.  So once we were able to pass--finish that process we were able to get some applications to get other African Americans involved in it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why was it hard to get an application, is it something that the--?
Speaker 2: Well it's that limited, they want to limit who had access to the business because you be a member you are assigned zip codes and the fewer people in those zip codes, 'cause automatically you get business because of the zip code, 'cause people don't know who you really are, it's just by zip code.
Speaker 1: So and you've been able to help other African Americans receive the FTD designation?
Speaker 2: Receive the application, we've been able to help other individuals go into business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And too we've been able to help organize and help them know the process and set up systems because I was telling you way back when you say well, what did I do in this business?  I helped create the system, the foundation so that it will allow us to be able to receive orders from all over the world, to be see walk-ins, 'cause you have to have different systems--church orders, then corporations they have different billing systems, and so you need to be able to be flexible enough to handle diversity in how you receive payment and how you're willing to allow your customers to, to be satisfied through you, 'cause that's what the challenge is because of the nature of the business 'cause a wire service, FTD and others 'cause you have Teleflora, you have 1-800-Flowers, those are wire services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's not a product, they're just a service and you have to have a different system and you have to have different bonding and others to facilitate that service to our customers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to actual retail; we do consulting, we do actual retail, we do actual just service to service.
Story_ID: 303925
Speaker 1: Are there florists who specialize in just one of those (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, you have--yes.
Speaker 1: What is the advantage of diversifying as opposed to specializing?
Speaker 2: In our [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] case we wanted to make sure that, that our community knew that they had a florist that could do all of these things, 'cause at the time when we started twenty-five, over twenty-five, thirty years ago that was the aim because it was not enough capacity for the upcoming markets and opportunity and then as we grew we helped other florists grow so that we had more than us, we're replicating that capacity, but then that didn't mean we still didn't need those who worked from their homes and other smaller shops 'cause they specialized in weddings, which is a great service to offer, doing corsages or just helping with the school decoration for proms 'cause that's a lot of tedious work where you need specialized skills to do that work and it still needs to be local, so everyone doesn't need to be in a wire service or do all of the large events, conventions that we do, but we still need what they have to offer to help satisfy all the needs in the community.
Story_ID: 303926
Speaker 1: Are there special professional societies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --or associations that a good florist needs to be a member of?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes I mean--
Speaker 1: What are some of those?
Speaker 2: We have the Society of American Florists and all the wire services have continuous schools, design shows we call 'em.  They have--that work with the wholesalers to make sure we see the product, new product that's being grown or created so we can design it and know how to produce it and, and share with our customers.  We have printed material that's provided to us so we're constantly learning.  Sometimes we have seminars at the universities and then we have to know culture 'cause you have to know how to deal with the Jewish community versus what those traditions in sending flowers and not sending them and then other cultures and other--even in our own cul--communities, there are different things that churches do and don't do, for weddings you have to know what those conditions are and be willing to work, and be flexible enough, 'cause experience teaches you all of that and so what we [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] try to do to get newcomers to come into the industry 'cause they have to learn, you have--it's a real apprenticeship.  You can't learn just in a classroom and so we are constantly trying to get younger people and we train on site, constantly during holidays and then we have these other association meetings we'll send them to represent us and give them access to the information.
Speaker 1: How much interaction is there across racial and culture lines in the floral industry?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's great interaction, I think it's one of the most integrated industries where we deal on a daily basis and I was telling you in the '70s [1970s] when we had the energy crisis we decided to organize a co-op.
Speaker 1: We, we being?
Speaker 2: Florists.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The local florists.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Decided to come together--those, we sent a call out to those who wanted to be a part of it and those who responded we organized a co-op.  So over twenty-five years, we have a delivery co-op where we deliver each other's flowers in the eighteen county area and that's all races, sex and from drivers, to designers to shop owners.  We interact on a daily basis, six days a week to make sure that all our customers in the eighteen county area are taken care of.  It's something to see.  We just went through the Valentine, we sent thousands and thousands of items through this co-op, and you had to work almost twenty-four hours and we have rules that we set up for ourselves.  We fine ourselves to make sure everyone is operating with the same standard and at the same pace to make sure that everything is done according to the rules.
Speaker 1: Yes, is there a need for an African American association of florists?
Speaker 2: We do have one, it's been around over forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because years ago we could not become a part of FTD [Florists' Transworld Delivery] or other organizations so we created a way to get to know each other and it's called, it was called back then the International Florists Association [ph.] and now it's called National Florist Association and we are--we're into leadership, at one time we rotated in and out, and we helped do group co-op buying.  We meet once a year like a convention, training, going to church together, learning what and keeping up with what we're doing.  We have a directory that's printed, newsletters, and that's the National Florist Association and those are black florists across the county.
Story_ID: 303927
Speaker 1: Is there a market that you and other black florists have not penetrated, that you desire to penetrate?
Speaker 2: We need black wholesalers and distributors that--I mean we, we buy most of the product through the wholesalers locally, but you can buy directly from the grower which mean that's why the airline--the flowers don't cost as much as the transportation (laughter).  So that's why the cost--air cargo and all of that prohibits you with increased costs and the scheduling if you wanna be able to buy and be cost effective direct.  So locally we've had a merger of wholesalers, so we need more competitiveness in that area of wholesalers, and that's one of the areas that we've looked at as far as distributors, and freight forwarding, that why we need African Americas more than into freight forwarding position, to move freight 'cause you don't necessarily have to have storage of the freight, it's just moving the freight.  We, we get most of our product, cut flowers out of the Netherlands who go to Africa.  They don't actually grow, they ship it from Africa and other countries, Brussels [Belgium] and places around and they just ship it all over, 'cause they have a system.  They've gotten airlines and other things and they have developed a system to move the product.
Speaker 1: Why don't we grow more in the United States, and what's the prognosis on growing more flowers in the United States?
Speaker 2: I just think of the high cost of farming.  You know if you--that's a small industry and the conditions, the cost.  You know, you see how these, these--if they have greenhouses--it's the cost of the energy and all to do that.  We use to do it, a lot of it but some of the congress people talked to us and wanted to know about the rose market and what was happening 'cause you know in North Carolina and Fresno in California and others they grow a lot of flowers, but it's not enough for the capacity 'cause our capacity's growing in this country because more people have discretionary income, we're building more buildings and we have more events and so you use these flowers and use the plants and we don't have enough capacity.
Speaker 1: What is the future of the floral industry?
Speaker 2: I think it's great, it's blooming (laughter).
Speaker 1: If you had to ensure that you were up to speed and could deal with the future, what area must you now concentrate on in order to be competitive in tomorrow's market?
Speaker 2: Looking at the technology and the--we can use systems, but just using a system to call a shop, it's still personalized service.  Even though we--you have to have a way to still integrate that in the, into what you're doing in some form or fashion, perhaps on a smaller scale, but people need to know that they're--we're working a miracle for them when they call that they are secure in knowing that this florist, that why a lot of florists call us from other places, 'cause they--we've been referred to them and--know that we can guarantee service.  They want service.  So even though we have the Internet, we have a lot of capacity through technology, websites and all that florists are looking for a guarantee of service when they want an item and when people come in they are looking for a guarantee of service.  So it's how we can continue to grow and integrate the new technology, the new systems into that assurance that you would get service, is what I would think that we need to work on for the future.
Story_ID: 303928
Speaker 1: As we wind down this tape, let me just ask how you feel that the James [James Bussey, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Alice Bussey business has fared over the years?
Speaker 2: Our business has really matured because we--when my husband started as a teenager he was trained as an apprentice by one of the great designers here so, and he started as the first cashier in the Municipal Market [Sweet Auburn Curb Market, Atlanta, Georgia] downtown, as a twelve, thirteen year old and that's where they got exposure to the flower industry.  Then he was able to train as a youngster back then how you have these little opportunities to have jobs and all, and but in order to get it integrated at all and moving beyond the local community that when we were married that's what I, we were able to do.  We traveled, we explored, we researched and we decided to take it, take the industry to another level through our shop to help our community.  So it wasn't just about expanding our business, and as such we have helped others open up flower shops, we have helped those businesses improve and we have become a resource for people who are trained, because we have people we trained through our shop working at other shops, in the flower, in the delivery co-op as well as the wholesale.  So it's not just one area you can work in and now we're trying to get those to travel like with the state department [U.S. Department of State] or lang--you know learn the languages.  You could learn to be a buyer, so we're trying to expose young people, like I had a shadower this summer, a young man in the tenth grade saying these are some of the careers that you can look at in this area.  Learn languages so that you become diverse and whether you're buying flower or what commodity it becomes one of those things that you can do.  So we're trying to help create diversity because Bussey's Florist [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] has allowed my sons [Prez Bussey and James Bussey III] and daughter [Alicia Bussey] to grow and learn the thinking of a business and learn how to design, learn how to sell, learn how to fill out forms, and how to think so they can work in whatever area they decide to go in.  They still could have a base foundation to fall back on.
Story_ID: 303929
Speaker 1: HistoryMaker Alice Bussey has worked beyond, obviously the floral industry and has been a vital part of other organizations in the community.  Would you name some of the organizations that you're a part of and when we return to the next tape I want you to elaborate on some of the positions you have held and how you have worked to, to ensure growth in businesses in the African American community through those positions, through those organizations, just briefly if you'll name some of them and we have about thirty seconds left on this tape.
Speaker 2: Some of the organizations through the years that I have worked on OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] which Dr. Louis R. Sullivan [sic. Leon Sullivan] created in the '60s [1960s], a board member helped create training programs.  First female president of the Atlanta Business League [Atlanta, Georgia], also on the board of the Concerned Black Clergy [Concerned Black Clergy of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], on the board of the Private Industry Council in the past, we're on the board of the National Florist Association.  So we tried to make sure it was diverse enough that it covered a broad range of what our interests are.
Speaker 1: As it was in your youth so it is now, you have a full plate?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have obviously found the time to the best of your satisfaction to work in these organizations?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 303930
Speaker 1: HistoryMaker Mrs. Alice Bussey you've just recited some of the other organizations that you're lending your leadership and talent to.  Let us explore the Concerned Black Clergy [Concerned Black Clergy of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  First of all, are you an ordained minister?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: My understanding is that the CBC or Concerned Black Clergy is a community forum that meets every Monday morning for the benefit of the community and ministers and non-ministers are a part?
Speaker 2: Just the community at large, to help the homeless, those who need help.
Speaker 1: Tell us your interaction with the Concerned Black Clergy and how you--and what you can share with them that's beneficial to the community, as well as the ministers?
Speaker 2: I became involved with the Concerned Black Clergy as I was working with the U.S. Department of Labor.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I was over the State of Georgia and I wanted the leadership in the black community, normally through the black church, to become aware of public policies that were coming down to impact the black community.  And that's one of the basic reasons I started attending the meetings over twenty-five years ago, and I started asking questions and sharing information to help edify to bring about an understanding of what was happening in the larger community, and through the years I've been able to help ministers and other lay individuals who attend the meeting and business owners, cause many of them attend the attend the meeting, get more information or better understanding of the connectedness of business, the church and government.  That was the basis of my going to the Concerned Black Clergy, but I wanted to make sure I was helpful to the leadership of our community, so in recent times I've been able to--I was asked to serve on the board of directors.  I now chair the economic development committee and we've been able to develop buying lists for churches to use researching their congregation for black businesses.  We have developed a campaign called Operation Turnover that the Atlanta Business League [Atlanta, Georgia] created in the '70s [1970s] to get blacks to buy from blacks.  So we're in the process of facilitating black churches looking inside their congregation and support first those businesses that exist within those congregations and then step outside the door in, in the larger community before they go outside the community.  That's the overall campaign we have gotten the Concerned Black Clergy to undertake in partnership with the Atlanta Business League.
Speaker 1: My sense is that the information you provide, the service you provide is well received and appreciated.
Speaker 2: Well thank you.
Story_ID: 303931
Speaker 1: Other organizations that you have worked similarly with include the Atlanta Business League [Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Would you tell--would you speak of your role with them please?
Speaker 2: I became involved with the Atlanta Business League just by being on a committee and then it needed some new blood.  So the old guard came to me and it was interesting 'cause it was basically men at the time and I didn't know I had that kind of support when the election was held.  So I was the first female president to be elected, president of the Atlanta Business League which was formed in 1933 as an affiliate of the National Business League, which was organized in 1900 by Dr. Booker T. Washington.  So we're the oldest business association in this country because Dr. Washington helped organize the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, twelve years after the founding of the National Business League.  So that history is real important to me in where I spend my time and commit my resources.  So the Business League after I researched and found out what Dr. Booker T. Washington was trying to do at the time and looked at the vocational training and skills--I knew that related to a lot of what I had been doing with the U.S. Department of Labor and public policies and I decided to work with the Atlanta Business League in helping to create training, helping to get--create more business and that's when I came up with the idea of if I'm the first female and I only have one year that I could--I knew I had to work with, I wanted to be able to do something for other black women in the neighborhood and in the community and help create more black-owned businesses operated at the time by black women.  So I was able to pull in the Federal Employed Women, the Federal Women's Program, the women in the medical field, women in the--at the university and colleges.  I started looking at women who in domestic violence programs and community organizations.  I just pulled all--even from Shirley Franklin at the time running this City of Atlanta [Georgia], and then you had Beverly Harvard the police chief.
Speaker 1: Shirley Franklin as chief of staff at that time?
Speaker 2: At that time, she was running the city for, for the--two other mayors and we pulled these significant women into a room.  I wanted to--I really wanted to have women, black women at the head table 'cause as we traveled in our business and other--I very seldom saw women at the head table function.  So my goal was to have one hundred women at the head table and of course the board didn't understand that (laughter) and so I decided to make it work and created it through Bussey's Florist [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] being the one as the key sponsor, and one--I figured if we could do that and sell it and make it work for the leadership to understand the significance of it and it took several years but now Super Tuesday [Super Tuesday Conference, Atlanta, Georgia] held every September as a part of Minority Enterprise Development Week that the federal government sponsors.  It's the only activity that the Lord just wants for black women in the state.
Speaker 1: Tell us more about Super Tuesday please.
Speaker 2: Well the whole basis is to bring women, African American women together, but other women come but it's focused on teaching, helping us to see each other, what contribution we make but the bottom line is to get us to think in terms of if you're working in corporate America, if you're working in churches and other places, look at eventually creating your own business or partnering or being involved in entrepreneurship, and that should be the outcome, depending on how many years, or where you are or even the next generation but we need to get back to self-help and, but we have to do that first through coming together, knowing what resources exist and spending time with each other.
Story_ID: 303932
Speaker 1: And so Concerned Black Clergy [Concerned Black Clergy of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] has positively and affirmatively responded to your input as has the Atlanta Business League [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Atlanta Business League, I've worked in several capacities with the Atlanta Business League.  That's when I worked with [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, four years prior to '89 [1989] to create the first black trade mission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we went to three different countries, 'cause I wanted at that time, it was Mrs. Henderson [Freddye Scarborough Henderson], the Hendersons, who really were the travel agency here, Henderson Travel [Henderson Travel Service, Atlanta, Georgia] and got them involved 'cause I wanted us to go beyond the borders and get African Americans involved in international travel.
Speaker 1: Tell us what the trade mission was all about, when exactly did it take place and what was its purpose?
Speaker 2: Its purpose was to bring--to have a trade mission focused on African Americans.  Andrew Young at the time was the mayor and, and his second term, that's eight years, there had not been a focus through the chamber and others on the growth and development and evolvement of African American businesses.  So that's why it took--when I was involved with the chambers and I was involved in business that was a gap I saw, so I wanted to be able to use the resourcefulness of the Atlanta Business League and the mayor's office to help close that gap.  So that's why we took our time to plan the first black trade mission and we went to three different countries to look at opportunities 'cause we had those prime ministers and the leaders of those countries, the businesses of the country so we wanted to make sure that we planned it well that something good would come out of it as we were moving from one country to the next.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And in follow up to later years and sure enough right now we have flowers and others was educated.  We have, we have major things happening in the medical area as well as the water, our major projects and we had others to look at the possibilities 'cause they understood the laws that we helped bring before them that the government here was helping facilitate for doing business in these different countries.
Speaker 1: Elaborate on what you mean when you say the water a major project?
Speaker 2: Well there was a major water problem like Germany I think at the time dealing with this water deal that was gonna back out of it and, and when they learned Andrew Young was coming along with this group and of course the prime ministers and all, we were able to call meetings and to facilitate the discussions and all to make sure that water deal went through.
Story_ID: 303933
Speaker 1: And you found the time to get involved with OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I, I when I was in the federal government and I was assigned to the State of Georgia for some six years, I was able to find millions of dollars to help develop OIC which.
Speaker 1: And that's the acronym for?
Speaker 2: Opportunities Industrialization Centers of America.
Speaker 1: Is that the organization headed by Reverend Leon Sullivan?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Please continue.
Speaker 2: Thank you and so I knew a lot about OIC, I respected Reverend Sullivan, the history 'cause he's created the model for training in the basement of his church in the '60s [1960s] and then he used his skills to go international and our government spends, allocates a lot of money for training other countries, using the model that Dr. Sullivan put in place so it's, it's more popular now in other countries.  So what we were trying to do is reactivate the spirit and the training capacity here in Atlanta [Georgia], 'cause we spent $6 million to build a whole center for training in southwest Atlanta, and with the childcare, with the automotive, it's a one of a very unique building and that's why when I had the opportunity to serve, we were able to reactivate a number of issues and one happened during the Olympics, that--during the 1996 Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] when the stadium was gonna be built and they needed a way to use the local individuals and I was able to--I was called by the mayor to come to the meeting to help them to know how to establish the right kind of contract to deal with the different governmental levels to accommodate the major build--builder for that stadium to be able to get access to those neighborhood individuals to train, and so that was a major opportunity for me to really use the expertise I had developed over, through the years to bring those different entities together.
Speaker 1: Interesting and PIC what is that?
Speaker 2: Private Industry Council.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was all part of the training program that the federal government--when they changed from CETA that was the Comprehensive Employment and Training Program [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], then you went to targeted jobs to training.  It was a lot of different names put to the old jobs program.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And the Private Industry Council one of those entities that came out of that so that the local community could have input into the development and training, and my husband James Bussey [James Bussey, Jr.] served on that council as well and we just really was out here involved to make sure that we had the business sense from a small business standpoint, input being considered during the discussions.
Story_ID: 303934
Speaker 1: Throughout all of these experiences it's been a partnership with you and your husband [James Bussey, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Keeping the business [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] going as well as working with--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the community and other organizations?
Speaker 2: Yes, as well as working inside the industry with, with the florist groups and the--to make sure that we were helping to stay connected to our own colleagues and then outside the country 'cause we didn't wanna just to deal with growers 'cause we always wanted to have an opportunity in case things didn't work out here in America so that we could continue to serve to our customers.
Speaker 1: Yes, and I wrote down an acronym NFD or P?
Speaker 2: National Florist Association.
Speaker 1: Oh, NFA all right, please, of course you're involved with the National Florist Association.
Speaker 2: Yes, been around over forty years.
Speaker 1: All right and that's the predominately African American?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, please tell us of your involvement there and?
Speaker 2: Well we have developed a lia--as my husband was brought into with the old-guard florists and then as a youngster--as we started growing we wanted to bring in other florists and so we researched florists and we helped recruit them and we helped recruit some of the leadership right now and we would travel and then we have--our kids [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey] grew up in it and every--and we made sure they would attend those conventions and so the old-guard would get to know our kids and the kids would know the industry and the--so it was that generational connection as well as the different size of florists and, and we would learn a lot if those of us who were involved on the larger scale if we would bring back that information to that group so that everybody would benefit from what was changing and happening in the industry.
Story_ID: 303935
Speaker 1: You spoke of your children [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey], are they involved to the extent that you want them to in the development of the business as well as these other entities that you just spoke of?
Speaker 2: Well, all my children grew up, we had baby pen--they grew up in the industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean here from babies, they know how--then when we opened Underground Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia] in '89 [1989] my two youngest ones, one was fifteen and the other about eight, nine.  I let them that summer just manage the whole underground to learn how to fill out forms, how the school, schooling related to what business is and how you need math and how you need--what you learn in the room and that really did help them bond and come into the understanding of the business, and from that time on my oldest son who is at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], we had to rely upon him to manage the underground because he had grown up and he was older, he knew more.  So he was the one that managed the underground store for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as a result of that he's now--then when we moved back to Decatur [Georgia] 'cause we wanted to come back home, we had him handle all of that so my other son just recently came said "I wanna do what, what Prez," that's what we call him, what he did so he could learn.  So they, they're real close but they also wanna make sure they are learning from each other and they have the same opportunities.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So we give 'em all the same opportunity.  They know how to design, they know the operations, they know the people and the people know them, and then in the Business League [Atlanta Business League, Atlanta, Georgia] one of my sons will always come to the meetings and the--from the chair of the board to the president, they know him well and he will bring others, his colleagues from college to come to the business league.  So that generation (unclear), now my daughter's doing the same thing.
Speaker 1: And so if Mr. and Mrs. James Bussey [James Bussey, Jr. and HistoryMaker Alice Bussey] were to step aside tomorrow the business [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] would go on and the contacts would still be intact?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what we're doing now is we're transitioning more of that so we can do more travel again, and we--it's sort of going full cycle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And through the church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia], 'cause my son plays the organ and piano at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they--he's involved with the funeral homes.  See they have--they're very diverse just like we are, but they know time management.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They learn how to use their skills and then they learn how to work with other people.
Speaker 1: Okay, you spoke of your oldest son being a Morehouse graduate and this being the day after Founder's Day, I'm sure he's probably resting a little bit and just as he's following you in the--following your husband in the floral business my understanding is he's following his dad as a Morehouse man, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Well that is true that my husband attended Morehouse and that so they have that uniqueness that they like to deal with, but also the whole thing of designing 'cause we do business with Morehouse you know.
Speaker 1: Awesome.
Speaker 2: It's real unique, I mean we have such a unique opportunity through this florist business to touch so many lives from the school that we had from growing up and from the elders in the community, that's why this is a very unique business.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And we try to make it really special and make sure our children are learning that it's just not selling and it's just not an item, but it's the service and the, the--so that's that teaching that intangible item that we have to have that we give that makes us, that's what's gonna keep the legacy of the business.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Is that what we do that so special that you cannot pay for it but it's done because of the caring that we know we have for the people and for our community.
Speaker 1: As a mother and wife of a Morehouse--of Morehouse men is it really true that you can tell a Morehouse man, but you can't tell him much?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All I know is you have to have a unique personality to deal in this business.  I've--my husband has a unique personality, he said he wanted to study--either be a psyc--florist, or psychiatrist, and he decided it would take too long to be a psychiatrist but he felt that the training he had gotten early on really helped him in this business (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Wonderful.
Speaker 2: He's real unique, a very unique person.
Story_ID: 303936
Speaker 1: As we begin to wind down the interview, let me just ask is there anything else you'd like to add that we didn't ask about the business [Bussey's Florist and Gifts], about your community involvement, about your leadership, about your family, about life in Decatur, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm just excited.
Speaker 1: Your church [Poplar Springs Missionary Baptist Church, Ellenwood, Georgia] as well?
Speaker 2: I enjoy living in Decatur in Ellenwood [Georgia], I've enjoyed my childhood and I like the idea of being able to be involved in my church.  My family helped organize and we give a lot back to the community through the church but also through our business 'cause we're able to make contributions to the church and we're able to help the seniors learn how to make bows and whatever they need.  We share the knowledge as well as the opportunity.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That is what I like as far as what we've been able to develop with our children [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey] so they share it through the music and through their time and they made a commitment 'cause they see how we do it through the flowers, and we also--what I like about what we do, we're here and we're able to share our knowledge to other florists, our colleagues and we are able to take care of each other.  So that's unique being in part of an industry where you, you can have that kind of relationship, worldwide with your colleagues and finally with my family we have a very close-knit family and we're able to come together to meet, talk, share knowledge and help each other with the next generation, with our children.  We help raise our own, each other's children and those who're with expanded community.  So we do that informally, through the church as well as our family reunions and through our community day that my older brother founded, Reverend Oscar C. White, Jr. created that we've been able to keep the legacy going and last year we had over three thousand people we asked to come back home to the County Line [Georgia] community and so we can--what the elders bring in, coming and the others bring in the mom, the grand moms, and we spend a day together to fellowship as a community and we have our two-host churches to lead this effort on that day and it has developed into a community day that everyone looks forward to and we have talking circles where we can sit down and talk about how this community built--was built by African Americans that you don't see too many for churches and others that you can have that kind of beginning.  So to be a part of that continuation of the community legacy, my family legacy that was involved in that, then this business legacy that our next generation, my children, that we're helping them to transition into, but the important thing that we try to get them to understand is, is "If you're fussy, call Bussey" (laughter), and what that means in that slogan.
Story_ID: 303937
Speaker 1: What would you want the viewers who you've never met before to take from this interview?
Speaker 2: I would like for the viewers to know that Bussey's Florist [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] has been here since 1962 in the community, serving the community and helping the community grow.  We help our industry grow, but we personally in our families have grown and become closer and what we have done is expand that to extended family so others own businesses, but we're also the family, like my nephew and I have other family who opened up flower shops.  So when you can extend yourself and unselfishly help others to grow in skill, knowledge and independence that's what I feel that our forefathers and our legacy, the strength that we're standing on is to help us to be independent and own land, own businesses, ownership is the only way that we have as an opportunity to be free.
Story_ID: 303938
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you now?
Speaker 2: I feel very good as to how I have lived my life and how I've been able to impact other and from the community from organizations such as the Business League [Atlanta Business League, Atlanta, Georgia] the Concerned Black Clergy [Concerned Black Clergy of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], the OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] just, I can go back to any of those in the down line of generations and how I introduced my daughter [Alicia Bussey] and sons [Prez Bussey and James Bussey III] into that so they have a relationship, but I also know that what I would like for everyone to know I'm just proud to be a mother and a wife.  To me it's nothing greater than being able to have a family and then have your sisters and brothers, your nephews and aunts and uncles all to be a part of that and feel good about seeing you.  When my nephews fly in from Singapore or over in Japan wherever they're touring, they signing, they'll come here 'cause they grew up in this flower shop and they'll let me know that what you told me about making sure this happened, that you stay level headed on this and that, that we listened, that it's coming and we're finally seeing what you meant, that's what they'll come and tell us.   So those little lessons the shop [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] has provided to be a learning ground and our home for many of our nephews and nieces and others in the family and that's what we're proud of 'cause we have a real strong grounded family.
Story_ID: 303939
Speaker 1: I know Bussey's Florist [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] has been in business since 1960--
Speaker 2: Two [1962].
Speaker 1: But how long have you been at this location, here in Decatur [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: We moved back from downtown Atlanta Underground [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1997, we came back to County Road [County Line Road] and then we moved across the street and in the last three years we moved here to this location.
Speaker 1: For those going into the florist industry or the florist field, what suggestions do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Practice and talk to someone who already practiced.  Business is an attitude so it's not about the product and all that, it's learning what the mechanics are and the thinking and, and keeping the customer as the target of the thinking and then find out what the techniques are to serve that customer, and it could be any customer.  It's just not about flowers, so the technique will work for any business.
Speaker 1: Would you choose a different career path if you had to remake your choice?
Speaker 2: Oh, no I think this--being able to travel, go to school and have two or three paths at one time even though I was young and didn't know what I wanted to do as far as a career, and then but I learned so many different things that I was able to never fear job loss or never fear I could not make a living.  Never had to deal, worry or deal with a resume so I feel that kind of independence started when I was real young when I saw my dad [Oscar White, Sr.] and my brothers and my sisters and all working and we worked together.  They brought us into that knowledge, and having a strong family that you could communicate with and that you could sit around.  Our nieces and nephews now say, "Here they come, they just sit around.  They don't do anything but just sit around and talk."  See they never understood how we could just enjoy each other.  Now they're, they're coming around, they wanna come and be around us and talk, but early on we, we--they didn't know that that's what keeps us comforting, expanding, solving problems and, and raising and making sure we have what we need.  As we get what we need in church, you get what you need for families to support you and to me that's invaluable and those are the intangibles that we need young people to know 'cause it's not all about book learning, about having a job and about the money, or having materialism of what are those intangibles that you need to strengthen you in times of needs or emergencies or just to have a better quality of life.
Story_ID: 303940
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: I want, all I like--real estate and I started out in dealing with that real early and trying to amass some of that.  Now I have my daughter [Alicia Bussey] who's really getting it, into it 'cause my mom [Eula Shepherd White], my dad [Oscar White, Sr.] and all, real estate was key.  So I would like to be able to get more of my family and myself owning, and, main--maintaining and make sure that we can retain real estate in our families.  That's one of the issues that's real important, 'cause I think we're losing a lot generically that's been in the black family but we have gotten more of our nieces and nephews to buy and own houses now but we also need to own our businesses, so those--that is the next frontier in addition to some more travel.  I wanna get back into doing more travel 'cause when our kids start growing and went to school we had to spend more time 'cause I became a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] president and others to make sure they were moving through the system.  So now we can get back into more of the travel.
Story_ID: 303941
Speaker 1: Is there anything you have done already that you would like to have done differently?  Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: I would've probably restructured the deal I did at Underground [Underground Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] differently (laughter) when I was there.  It was just different circumstances 'cause we [Bussey's Florist and Gifts] liked being in Underground, but it was beyond our control because there were no--they didn't have the contract anyway when we were ready--when our contract was up to negotiate with the deal 'cause the city [Atlanta, Georgia] was going through those transitions 'cause our kids [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey] liked being down there and the people loved our being at the Underground.
Story_ID: 303942
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is that we can get back focused on the mission of being human 'cause I have a real concern about carelessness of life and, and caring for others.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's important, when we were growing up, it's it didn't matter whether you had any materialism or a car, or a house, it just mattered that you were a person, that you had feelings and that we took care of each other's needs from the standpoint of the goodwill, and that's missing.  We were just talking about that today with some others that we just people, and we didn't--we rich in what we had and that's why we stay healthy and that's we were able, that's why we have a strong community and we can go to each others' homes and talk, (unclear) with each other and fellowship with each other because that's what the core value of what we needed to survive, and that's what I feel is missing in the, in the--in our neighborhoods and I just feel that for the future for our young people, that we as adults are not doing what we're supposed to do to teach them.  It's not just up to them to know this. We are supposed to teach them.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 303943
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about the value of education?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think education is tops, that's why I spent a lot of years in school, and in training and then that's the great investment I committed to for my own kids [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey], but it's education, it depends on the connotation of how you look at it, 'cause I feel that it's not--when you say education not it's just about college, most people just go to college.  It's what you do when they're babies and how 'cause they're young, they learn early and they know how to manipulate so you have to help them understand discipline, that there are ground rules and so that children have, have something to not do and to do and to guide their behavior and when you do that they are--that's the foundation stay with that and then education then becomes all the other things to learn how to be a family you know?  You have to be educated on how to be a family and we don't spend enough time on that.  We just think we become a family, we stay a family but we have to be able to talk straight and be able to deal with hard issues and educate each other on those things and then education to survive and be independent to make a living that's another type of education.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And so I think we get mixed up in our, in our culture and our system that we need to be educated by who we are in order to have balance and stability and, and have hope and pass on what we're supposed to pass on.  So education has, it has many tentacles for me as far as how I approach it and how I have lived it.
Story_ID: 303944
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about the role of religion in the African American family and community?
Speaker 2: Oh, we can't survive without it.  We, we have to have the basis of God's laws to carry us in our daily walk.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And we can't, we don't abandon man's law, the good one is supposed to be guiding us to make sure we don't have auto wrecks and do other things to keep us moving, but in order to have the hearts and the minds that we're supposed and then as human beings, decent human beings, we have to have our spiritual growth and development.
Story_ID: 303945
Speaker 1: Do you have any specific thoughts on the Civil Rights Movement and its meaning in your growth and the growth of our people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I think we need every bit of what has happened as far as our moving in the direction I think because we were so successful at it.  There're so many moves to take them back.  One is the voter ID bill right now, it's an affront to take the power of the vote away from us that we have which has nothing to do with money and when we use, and we have been using it recently because money cannot control that (unclear), that we've--when we come together in the black community we can make it happen, and we've been able to show that and do that, so now there is a move to make sure that we don't have those rights.
Story_ID: 303946
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life what really stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What stands out is how I've been able to survive (laughter), survive and, and feel good about it and be happy about it and I have challenges and I have a major one I had to go through recently, but I feel it's all part of the growth and development, 'cause I didn't have anything any major challenge in my life and I use to say you know it's, it's just amazing how I've gone through life and have family, I've gotten educated, I've traveled, I've just done all--God just really put me in the right place and with the Business League [Atlanta Business League, Atlanta, Georgia] to be able to take an organization and to help develop it and then make changes in other organizations, to use my mind and my experience.  I mean that's, that's a wonderment to me in and of itself.
Speaker 1: Yes.  What values do you consider most important and why?  Do you have the same set of values for living and being involved in your family as you have with your community and the organizations and entities that have been a part of your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes your word is your bond, whatever I say I'm gonna do I'm gonna do it and, and do it respectfully with the right--do it the right way.  Whatever organization--whenever I walk into a room, home or in the business people are people and I should not have to try remember how I acted in one place or another.  So basically I just try to keep my word, be on time and follow through.
Story_ID: 303947
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you really want people to say about you when you're gone?
Speaker 2: Just a good soldier (laughter), I just wanna be remembered that I really enjoyed my family, being a wife and a mother.  I enjoy being in business, being of the community 'cause I never think--separate the two 'cause they're one and same to me, but I enjoy my family and having a family.  I enjoy my sisters and brothers, my nieces and nephews, the larger family, my aunts and uncles.  I'm just so blessed to be a part of a family that they enjoy, wanna know how I'm feeling, what I'm doing, and they'll call and wanna make sure that this happened or that happened.  That they're really proud of what we're doing, that's the type of family I have and I'm just proud to be a part of this family.
Story_ID: 303948
Speaker 1: What message or lesson do you have for your children [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey], your grandchildren and the rest of the world?
Speaker 2: It's always love, just make sure to love, take time.  Nothing is as important to do than taking time for each other.  The other part of that is just stay focused and learn but always seek out advice of the elders, you can't just do it by yourself and be willing to listen 'cause it's not easy to listen.  It's a--you have to learn how to listen and then be happy, just learn what makes you happy and be happy.
Speaker 1: Okay why do you think history, our history is important?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's so important, I'm a strong advocate of history.  It helps to me to guide my thinking and who I am make me proud and then it helps me to know what I need to do, so it guides my behavior and helps me to feel proud of what I'm doing and why I'm doing it, otherwise I'd be deterred and get off track because I'm just doing something, so if I'm doing it on the legacy then it helps me to know that someone is still gonna carry forward.
Speaker 1: You mentioned a few minutes ago that you had not had many challenges but you experienced one.  Is there something that you would want to share with the audience or--?
Speaker 2: Well not necessarily, it's just that you know I go through, go through--I just have found it amazing that you know, you know you live a lifetime, no health problems, you just, just so whatever comes after you you're ready for it.  That's what, that's all I was saying so when you do get those, 'cause you're gonna have something.  It's just that I was able to go through life for a long, long time and accomplish a lot.  I mean always being able to be at meetings, and you know I think about it.  I never had to miss meetings, never had to miss school, even when I was in school I went, I had perfect attendance and all kinds of things that happens but I just, they never I never had those challenges 'cause we didn't have problems with accidents and things like that.  You know you hear a lot of things that happen.  We were just blessed, didn't have to have--be hospitalized.
Story_ID: 303949
Speaker 1: Before I ask the last question we wanna give you a chance to pay tribute to the whole family.  We talked about aunts and uncles; we talked about sisters and brothers.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You've had a chance to mention your husband [James Bussey, Jr.].  I know that you have children [Prez Bussey, James Bussey III, and Alicia Bussey], you have a daughter-in-law and, and I don't know about grandchildren or anything?
Speaker 2: One, yeah.
Speaker 1: But would you like to just lift up their names and maybe mention them on this tape as well?
Speaker 2: Yes I think when I was saying that we hadn't had a lot of challenges, I think God has sent us some very good people in our live to continue to expand our family and we adopted and that happened through my children, other families and other states and through the colleges and, and then through the churches so through my husband I just think he's a very unique person and that's, that's what makes our relationship work from the standpoint of our being individuals but we have the uniqueness to own our situation that we're able to blend and come together.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But he's always been unique in that he allows me to be able to function and I thought, I always thought that was unique and to have my thoughts and ideas and he supports them and we support each other in that way and then our children the same way and then our children support you know what it is we're doing.  They really think a lot of us and love, and they love us and they support us and that's take--that's a great accomplishment, I think from the standpoint of when you're raising children and you're growing a business and you're traveling and you have so many distractions that you're able to come back to the core.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In the end so we can spend that time and continue to mature our relationships, that's what we've been working on and continuing to grow so that has nothing but good to do with all our new additions to the family like my daughter-in-law Trina [Bettrena Bussey] and who married my son, Prez and then they have a--TP [Thaddius Prez Bussey II], he's the second and he is two years old and he's the jewel of their eyes, in all of our eyes but I tell you he's a joy to be able to get on that track of, of helping to guide grandchildren.  So we can enjoy that, and so I'm looking forward to that with my other children from the standpoint of the relationships that they have grown and developed.
Story_ID: 303950
Speaker 1: Lastly, HistoryMaker, Mrs. Alice Bussey what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I tell you just I helped, helped to keep our families, our traditions that was important to our families and installed standards to go by.  That's real important to me from the standpoint of our next generation, 'cause we have to guide their behavior and if we don't take the time to document us and help talk to them, to our children and then to have our children relate to their cousins and their aunts and uncles.  It's real important and to do that under the umbrella of the church and the community as one.  If, if we can accomplish that and make sure that they interpret that and able to do that, as they do that what makes them happy then our future and our legacy will be intact.
