Story_ID: 26158
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Warren Wesley Buck, III, W-A-R-R-E-N, and Wesley is W-E-S-L-E-Y, Buck, B-U-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 16, 1946, and I was born in Freedmen's Hospital here in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Story_ID: 26159
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Well I'm the third, so my father was junior and his father was senior.  And I, I don't know--, the family history doesn't tell us really how Warren Senior was named, but that was his name and he was, he was in the [U.S.] Navy and early on; African American, black African American in the Navy.  And worked for the postal service and smoked a pipe.  And so my father was the second oldest of nine and he was the oldest male, oldest son.  And so that's how he got to be junior, and he had a very interesting career, it was really quite, quite nice.  He was--he got a bachelor's degree from Lincoln University in Missouri, Jefferson City, Missouri.  He was Phi Beta Kappa, which is a, a National Honor Society founded at [College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia].  And he was, he, he, he was an industrial engineer, which basically was a draftsman.  And he then worked for the Weather Bureau which later became NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration], so this weather bureau early on in the '40s [1940s].  And he didn't go to World War II because all of his brothers went and, and because he wanted to draw really good maps, weather maps to give them the best reconnaissance information weather that they could get to help them stay alive.  And then one, one of his brothers was a Tuskegee Airman who flew in Italy.  So--and then the others were in the [U.S.] Army, the other two were in the Army.  And so then I came along and I'm the oldest of, of two, and so I, I got to be the third.  So that's--
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about, yeah, family history as we go along.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 26160
Speaker 1: But, okay so you're the third [Warren Wesley Buck, III] and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm full professor of physics at the University of Washington in Bothell [Washington], and I also have this title of Chancellor Emeritus, which was a, was an administrative job I had some, some years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, Chancellor Emeritus.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 29, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Presently we're on New York Avenue in my hometown of Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26161
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, into depth, I'm sorry, are there five lightweight questions we also ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, I think one of my favorite foods is green chili in New Mexico [Arizona], green chili and sopaipillas, warm sopaipillas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is cerulean blue and, and, and actually burnt umber.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they're kind of equal.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I like all the times.  Spring is great because things are blooming and I love that, you know and, and fall is great too.  Summer I can go sailing, you know, so I'd say spring, all the year, even the winter is fun.  I enjoy the snow, so I can't say I have a favorite, favorite time of the year.  And it depends on what, where in the world you are.  So in some places in the world you go and winter is terrible.  I mean you know minus 50 degrees and you know don't think of that as being a fun place to be.  So it just depends on where, where you are in the world.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: One, one of them, yeah I have many, I have many favorites actually.  But one of them is sailing up in the San Juan Islands of, of Washington state.  That's beautiful.  Get on my sailboat and, and sailing around those islands.  That's really quite nice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Everything will change, there's nothing permanent.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26162
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask about your family history now.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll ask about it separately so we can keep them straight.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Mildred George Buck Talford, so she got remarried.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Talford?
Speaker 2: T-A-L-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 7th, 1919 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay now what--is there a story behind your mother's name?  It was--George was her maiden name I take it?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Yes, George, George is her, George is her maiden name.  And she's one of four children.  And, while she was born in Chicago, she lived and grew up in, she grew up in Evanston, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26163
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother's [Mildred George Buck Talford] side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them and, and what are the stories associated with that side?
Speaker 2: Well let's see.  So my, my mother's, my mother had three siblings.  Two women and one man who--and her brother was also a Tuskegee Airman.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Wilbur George.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came at the end of the war, but didn't fly.  But he, he did join the corp there.  And my mother's parents, her father's name was Isaac Wilbur George.  And her mother's name was Josephine George.  Actually Josephine Jackson George.  And both of her parents, Josephine and Isaac, were from Louisiana.  They came up actually on a riverboat as far as I can--folklore will have it, to St. Louis [Missouri] and then up to Chicago [Illinois].  And he was born I think in Monroe, Louisiana, and, and she was born in Madisonville, Louisiana, off Lake Pontchartrain.  And his mother was a, a seamstress, and his father was a minister I believe.  And her mother was Choctaw, Choctaw Indian.  And, and her father was not clear, I don't remember all the things around her father.  My grandfather's great grandfather was a slave.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather's--
Speaker 2: My grandfather's grandfather.  I think I said great, but I think it's my grandfather's grandfather.
Speaker 1: Which would be your great, great grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, would be my great, great grandfather was a slave.  And, and there was an uncle, my grandfather's brother, excuse me, my grandfather's uncle, Uncle Sam he was.  He was Uncle Sam.  And I don't remember his last name, all we knew is Uncle Sam.  And that family--his side of that family came from Louisiana as well, they were mostly southern--they went down to New Orleans [Louisiana] for the most part, so there's a lot of that wing of the family down there.  And, and he were, they were business people.  So they were, they were business and sharecroppers.  So that's what I can remember about my mother's family.  So that's, that's--
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from slavery from your, from your--about Emancipation or what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not, not much.  I can't, I can't--I wish I had, I wish I had those stories, but I, I really don't.  I, I do know that during, during--I do have one story, though that, that is family lore.  There's an uncle, and I don't know what side of the family he was on, and I can't--trying to think of his name now.  But he, he lived in New, in, in New Orleans and was free, he wasn't slaved, he was free.  And the rumors were that everybody called him Mister and he was a--he dressed well and, and for--I just can't think of his name right now.  I'll probably think of it in a few minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't think of it right now.  And that was during the slavery, slavery period.  That was in 1860s, so--and I think my grandfather was born in 18--they were nine--nineteen, I think nineteen and seventeen when they got married.  So and they came up, and that was 1880s, 18--, 1880s they were born, something like that.  So it was twenty--, twenty years after Emancipation.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26164
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] say about growing up?  Did she grow up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: She grew up in, she grew up in Evanston [Illinois], actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: North of, north of Chicago.  And she was--she went to Evanston Township High School, which was predominantly white, and she was one of the few people of color at the high school.  And she has great memories, she had great memories of it.  I never--she was a--the family's always fighting, you know we, we look at positive things and turn it around, turn negative things around to positive things.  But she had great times there and, and recalls going to hear Duke Ellington [composer and pianist] and Nat King Cole [singer and musician]--would go to their high school parties, sing at the high school part, and sing at the high school parties in Chicago.  So, so she has great memories.  And of course she grew up in the [Great] Depression [era] too, so when they moved from Evanston, they moved from Evanston to Maywood, Illinois, which is in the western suburbs of Chicago.  And they grew crops, you know my, my, my grandfather was really into organic gardening and I remember when I was a young boy, he would send us organic farming magazines.  So they grew, they grew their own food, except for meats, protein products, to survive through the Depression.  And, and I always got the feeling from my mother that, that she had a pretty joyous childhood.  I, I never got a sense from any of them, even my uncle and my, and my aunts, that there was any gnarly things that just wouldn't work out, knots that--so I think the family was very fortunate in that way.  I don't think they had a lot of money, but they had a lot of talent and they didn't allow that talent to be stopped.  So they moved that talent in a positive way.  And so I think their childhood was, was, was pretty good.  She, she's now deceased and so we can't ask her those, those questions to clear it up, clear it up.  But I think she had a great, a pretty good child life.  They, they also--my--and later in life, sixty years ago, about sixty years ago.  Now my mother died in 2001 and about sixty years ago, her father and mother, my grandparents, the, I mean the George grandparents, bought some land in Wisconsin, in central Wisconsin and, and my grandfather was a poet.  He, he didn't get out--he didn't go any further than sixth grade and my grandmother never went to school, so they were kind of maybe typical in that age, but they, they didn't have a lot of schooling, formal schooling.  But he wrote beautiful poetry and when you talked to him, he was just, you know you wouldn't, couldn't tell.  You would think he was quite educated, you know formally.  I was always impressed how he could talk and he wrote these beautiful poems.  But about sixty years ago, he, he and, and grandmother bought some land, a quarter section of land in Wisconsin just so the family could grow up and see trees.  That was the purpose.  They grew up in the city, Chicago, Evanston's a suburb of Chicago.  And he grew up in trees, and he wanted everyone, including the, the grandkids to know what trees were like, to live with trees, live with, live with nature.  And so I got early on a great education about, about nature.  We still have that land, actually.
Speaker 1: About how much is it?
Speaker 2: It's about--right now we got 134 acres.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26165
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] go on to college?
Speaker 2: My mother did.  So my mother and father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] met in college.  So my father had a bach--had a bachelor's, has a bachelor's degree.  My mother--
Speaker 1: I'm gone ask about him in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother, my mother did go to college and that's where--she was a math major.  And she did almost three years of college.
Speaker 1: Now where, where did she go?
Speaker 2: She went to Lincoln University in [Jefferson City] Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where she met her husband.
Speaker 1: All right.  And she majored in math.
Speaker 2: She majored in math, yeah.  And she had, she had a, a teacher, a math teacher, a calculus teacher by the name of Walter Talbot, T-A-L-B-O-T.  And Dr. Talbot had gotten a Ph.D. in mathematics at age twenty or [twenty] one or something like that from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and could write with both hands simultaneously.  And so she would tell me about this, this, this math professor all the time who could write with both hands simultaneously.  So she had great experiences with, with college.
Story_ID: 26166
Speaker 1: So give me your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My father's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly, same as yours.
Speaker 2: Yeah my father's name is Warren Wesley Buck, Junior.
Speaker 1: All right and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was December 1, 1915.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, how far back can you trace his side and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Not, not as far back as my, my mother's [Mildred George Buck Talford] side I'm afraid.  Her--his mother was orphaned, and so we don't know anything about her family.  And her name was Beulah, B-E-U-L-A-H Buck.  And, and I really don't know much about my, my, my grandfather's background either.  So just know that they were in, in, in Missouri.  The family lore is that, that his father and some relatives were actually buffalo soldiers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, in the Midwest.  But I have no, no, no real proof for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now they have the rolls of soldiers, I don't know how--what it proves, but you might be able to find his name.
Speaker 2: Probably will find a, find the names.  I, I was in Tuskegee [Alabama] one year and found my, my uncles' names on the back of a t-shirt.  So that was kind of--that was exciting to find that.
Speaker 1: The Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee Airmen, yeah I found it.  So yeah they had their buffalo soldiers' rolls and I haven't gone through.  I just haven't, haven't done that work.  But I think after this I probably will see if I can find, find out any Bucks that were buffalo soldiers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any stories about--you were telling us some, something about what your grandfather did for a living right before.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, my father's father, was in the [U.S.] Navy, he served in the Navy.  And he, he was, he was one of the early African, black African Americans who served in the U.S., the U.S. Navy.  And he then became--he worked then for the [U.S.] Post office.  I don't think he was a letter carrier, but he was, he was an office, office fellow.  And he used to always wear bow ties.  And he wore bow ties and smoked, smoked pipes.  So I can sort of smell the pipe smoke right even as I, as I speak now so really, very distinctive.  And he had--he almost always, you always found him with a jacket on.  It was always a suit coat or some jacket on.  He was always well dressed.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's see.  Now he would have been--did he serve in World War I?
Speaker 2: He did, it wasn't, it was World War I that he was actually serving in.  And, and I don't know the unit he was in.  But it was, it was World War I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't know where he was deployed, so I don't know that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26167
Speaker 1: Now your father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior]--what did he say about growing in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: So my father was--he was the second oldest of nine, actually there was originally twelve of them, and triplets died early.  I think they perhaps, I think it was three, three years old or something like that.  They did die early.  So it was nine who survived, and he was the second oldest of nine and the oldest son.  And a lot of things he did, he used to tell me he did, was really taking care of the kids as they grew up so the family, parents could work.  And so they called him Brother.  He was, he was--that's his family nickname is Brother.  And my cousins called him Uncle Brother.  So he was, he was kind of a--the guy in the house when, when his father was gone.  And, and so he looked after the kids.  And so he played football, played football, he was a, he was a, he was a, a athlete as well as a, a smart, smart guy.  I mean he was pretty smart.  In fact that whole family is brilliant, brilliant, brilliant intellectual people.  And, and he--they dressed really well.  They all, they all were very sharp dressers and hopefully we can get photographs of them out and show you, but they're really quite nice.  So his, his memory--I mean I, we never heard about--we never in my family growing up, I never heard about historical--I heard about historical racism and larger issues of, of fighting for, for equality.  So we would, we would talk about those things.  But it was rare that we'd find--although so, so my father--it's rare that we would get into a lot of discussions about racism in the family over the dinner table.
Story_ID: 26168
Speaker 1: But my father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] went through a major racist experience which one day I was sitting at the house, and I, I believe I was an undergraduate.  So I was 17, 18, 19, maybe 19 years old, something like that.  And he--
Speaker 2: About what year is that?  That's like--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that must have been '60s [1960s] in the--'63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '65 [1965], maybe '66 [1966], something like that.  And he walked in and gave a, and, and put a transcript down on the table.  Actually it wasn't just put, he slapped it down on the table.  Here, he says here, read this, might be interesting, and he walks away.  This is sort of how my father operates.  So I looked at it and it was a court transcript.  And so apparently he had sued the federal government, so he was working for then weather bureau, but then they became--then he--at the time I think he was working for Agriculture Department, he was drawing crop maps at the time.  He sued, he sued the government for racial discrimination because he wasn't getting the, the, the increments in his pay or position.  He was his own attorney and he won the case.  That in a nutshell was my dad.  So this is how he operated.  And we didn't know anything about it until, until the transcript showed up on the table.  He didn't talk about it, just here it is.  He was a guy of action.  He would do things and he would tell you about the results as opposed to what he's going to do, so--
Speaker 2: So did he win some sort of a settlement?
Speaker 1: He won a settlement, yeah won a settlement, got his raise and retrograde, raised his grade in the government and got pay and it was, it was--and I don't how the extent of that worked throughout the federal government, but certainly a suit like that was probably a big thing in those days.
Story_ID: 26169
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] get a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: He did.  My father did go to college.  He spent four years at Lincoln University in [Jefferson City] Missouri.  And--
Speaker 1: You know what high school he came, came out of?
Speaker 2: Yes, he went--he came out of Garfield High, High School in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now what was he planning to become at--I mean what, you know, was he pursuing at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: He, he started pursuing his degree as an engineering, early engineering, and I believe he got a degree in industrial arts it was called.  And he, he took that degree and became a draftsman, so he was, he, he took instruments and, and hand drew maps of all sorts, weather maps, agricultural crop maps.
Speaker 1: So he was like, what do you call them, a map maker.
Speaker 2: Map maker, he wasn't--he was an--he, he actually drew the maps.  So he didn't actually take the photographs or, or do the surveys.  He never, he never did survey work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he would take the survey work and, and whatever information he could get to draw--for example where are the lows, where are the weather lows located in a certain region, where are the highs, what's, what's the rainfall.  And so they would--, in those days they would draw them out, so they have, they have these isobars, lines of constant pressure, that they would draw and he would draw these isobars so they could show--and then people can interpret those isobars of--as to what the weather's going to be looking like.  So if the isobars are close together, it's a high gradient of pressure; you're going to see it's a strong front.  If it's--, if they're further apart, it's a weaker front.
Story_ID: 26170
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] met?
Speaker 2: Yes, there's a big story as to how my parents met.  So they both were--my mother was a math major and my father was majoring in engineering, industrial arts.  And both were required to take calculus.  So they met in this calculus course, they were in a calculus course together.  And it was taught by Walter Talbot, a young Ph.D., black African American from--got a Ph.D. at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and something age twenty, twenty-something, early twenties he got a Ph.D.  And he could write with both hands simultaneously.  So my, my parents were in the room, in the classroom with him and, and my mother, my mother's very, was very emotional.  She, she was really a, a real true feminine side of the family in that way.  And my father was, you know really a, kind of strong and unyielding type of person in that way.  Almost, almost extremes.  They were both extreme in that way.  And so, so she would challenge Dr. Talbot and he would not.  He would, he would, he knew that he had worked out the right equation.  So my father was very good at the math, so he knew that things were right.  My mother would always ask questions about what's going on.  So they met in the class cause they were kind of confronting each other onto, you know, the techniques of the, of the professor as well as the material.  And so, so they, they got to know each other through, through this class.  And, and my father was also on the football team.  He, he played guard, he was a guard and a letterman, a letterman for Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri].  And so my mother would go to the games and watch him play.  So he had, you know he, he, he romanced her you know through, through that, through the, through the classroom and through football.  And so they, they--so much so that they fell in love and she never finished school, she never finished college.  She left and came here to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] so he could get this job at the Weather Bureau.  So it was a, it was a, it was a really hot love affair early, early on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so, so they were married in what year would you say?
Speaker 2: Let's see, when they were married, I, gee I don't know.  Let's see, it would had to be '30s [1930s], it was in the '30s [1930's].  Gosh, I don't know, I don't know exactly what year, but I would say it was probably '39 [1939] or '40 [1940], maybe even, maybe even, maybe even '42 [1942], but I, I--it was in there, somewhere between 1939 and '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I can't, I can't remember that.
Story_ID: 26171
Speaker 1: All right, so, now you, you are the second oldest in the family?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest in my family and I have a younger brother, one other sibling is my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother Lawrence.
Speaker 1: So you were born in '46 [1946], and your brother was born in--
Speaker 2: '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: '48 [1948], all right.  So when you think about your parents' Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] talents, their aptitudes, how they looked, how they walked, talked, what they thought about, who, who do you think you take, take, take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both, both.  I think in my, in my--as I get older, I--my emotions come out more.  I think that was my mother.  My mother, my mother would, would cry at the drop of a hat.  It was kind of a, a, a running thing in the family, it was really understood.  Everybody come see Millie Buck.  Her, her, her nickname, her family nickname was "Millie."  And you know we'd leave the house to go across the street to visit a friend and she'd cry and say honey, be safe and, you know, take care of yourself.  And then we'd come back, she says she'd cry, I'm so happy to see you.  So she was, she was always like this; this was just her, her state.  And just very, very sensitive to almost everything that went around.  My father was--rarely cried.  I never, I never saw him cry except for once, and that was when his father died.  That was the only time I'd ever seen him shed a tear.  And he's very analytical, he's a very analytical thinker.  He could, he could speak German and he was--he helped me a lot with my mathematics early on.  In fact he taught me how to use a slide rule when I was in elementary school; when I was, I think it was the third or fourth grade.  And, and the teacher made me put that slide rule away so I could learn the, learn the times tables without the slide rule.  So, so I think I take after both of them.  There's, there's pieces of me that I can clearly see are, are in both.
Story_ID: 26172
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: One of the earliest childhood memories, and it's kind of associated with my, my family nickname which professionally very, very few people know.  But after this filming they'll--probably everybody will know; everybody who looks at this at least will know.  When I was, when I was born, we lived in a apartment complex on Nash Street in northeast Washington [District of Columbia], right off Minnesota Avenue.  And there was a creek behind our apartment building.  And I think it was 4912 Nash, I think that was the address.  And I used to be--, and I lived there from zero to six, six years old.  And there was a creek back there that I used to go back and, and float leaves on and, and put ants on the leaves and let them float across the little creek and, and there was a, there was a man who'd come down there and he'd, he had a really gruff voice and he says, "Oh, a little cap'n, little cap'n is there and floating his boats."  My mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] used to say--you know she was, cause she was very proper in that way.  She would say it's captain, say cap-tain.  And the man could never say captain.  He would always say "cap'n, cap'n, there's little cap'n."  And I remember his voice was really rough, you know.  And so she says, so my name was Warren and my father's name was Warren and she called him Warren.  So it actually prompted her to call me Skipper.  So my, my nickname since age two was Skipper.  And the man could say Skipper.  So he would see me and say, "Oh, the Skipper."  So my mother was very happy.  He pronounced it, pronounced it right and it was--had a theme, a nautical theme, which went along with my play behind the, behind the apartment complex there in the creek.  So that was a, that was probably my earliest memory of, of my life.
Story_ID: 26173
Speaker 1: Now, now you grew up in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  In what, what neighborhood would you call it, the name of it?
Speaker 2: So the neighborhood I grew up in, in D.C. was--we first lived on Nash, on Nash Street, 4912 Nash Street in, in northeast Washington off Minnesota Avenue from zero to six [years old].  And then from six, seven to about thirteen I guess, 13, 14, no, no to about 12, 12 or 13, we moved to 36th Street, Northeast, off of another part of Minnesota Avenue near, near, right, right next to East, East Capitol Street.  And, and then the--and it was a row house, it was our first house that we bought.  The family bought this, this row house there.  And then the third place I lived was from 13, 14, thirteen years old to seventeen [years old], was on H Street Southeast, in southeast Washington, off of Benning Road, not too far, between Benning Road and Ridge Road near, near the Fort DuPont Park, not too far from Fort DuPont Park.  And this house was a independent family home, so we had yard all the way around.  And that was our, that was the first place we had where it was all--we had yard all the way around the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26174
Speaker 1: Well can you describe you know, the demographics and, and some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in these neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I told you a little bit about the Nash Street house and there was a, also a Nash Street Apartment.  There was also at Nash Street a--I can't remember his name who used to visit and he always smelled like grease, cause he was a, he was a mechanic.  His fingernails were always, always dark.  I remember, I can remember seeing his fingernails, they were always dark.  And they lived in the, the same complex but in a--I think a lower floor, maybe right under us or somewhere on another floor.  That was, that was an interesting smell.  That, that smell was--he was a working, he was working--and his hands were big.  He had big hands and I don't remember his name.  And his wife was, was also--but his--but the smell in reference of smells, that was one of the earliest smells I have.  Then in--on 36th Street, which where we moved this, the, the first move after my birth, there was a lot of kids in that area, on that street.  So there was a lot of people we'd play with and a lot of, lot of running.  I remember a lot of running around and playing, playing catch.  Base--throwing baseballs in the street and when the cars come by, you know, you move out of the way.  And the cars go, go by, you know you get back in the street and play catch and throw baseballs, footballs, you know, kick balls when you could.  And so the smells were--and there was a, there was a, there was a, a tree that I'm trying to think of the name of this particular tree.  It was out in front of our house.  And it had--in the spring it had these balls that would fall and break up into feathers.  You know little, little feathers.  And we would throw these, throw these balls and break them up and, and there was also smells of firecrackers in my--I smell it.  You know we, we could get fireworks and, and firecrack--put them in cans and try to blow up cans and so I can remember smelling that.  But these, these little balls, we would stuff the cans with these little, these little balls from the sycamore tree, it was a sycamore tree.  And put ash cans, you know we'd get ash cans in those days pretty easily and, and cherry bombs, into a can and blow it up.  So, so you can get the smell of gunpowder.  And, and food, lots of smells of food in the, in the neighborhood.  It was great cooks there and particularly my mother's [Mildred George Buck Talford] rolls.  Her yeast rolls were like--I can smell those today.  I mean--and we try to reproduce them and nobody can reproduce those roles.  But soon as she started baking those rolls, people would come.  Somehow people would know, they would smell it and knock at the door.  You know people would show up just as the rolls hit the table.  And we would, we would--even before we ate anything, we, we'd be eating rolls, right.  And so soon as they hit the table, my brother [Lawrence Buck] and I duty was to butter those, butter those puppies up.  We'd put a lot of butter on them and, and, and eat them before even the veggies or the other meat came by.  Nothing else--so we had no room for anything else after our rolls.  So the, so the smell of rolls, of yeast rolls is really very, very strong.  And also during that period I, I got into scouting.  So when I was, when I was eight years old went into cub scouting.  And my father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] became the Cub Master, he was a Cub Master and my mother was a Den, a Den Mother for us, my brother and I, he came in a couple years later.  But I was in my, in my den, and there's the small of canvass, smells of, of, of khakis and things you go camping in, things like that.  A lot of those smells are still in my, still in my psyche.  In high school I, I went to the Boy Scouts, so there was, it was continuing to add to those smells.  But the food smell was very, very strong.  Very strong in the air and it was great food so you know, you could get--gumbo, my mother cooked great gumbo and, and other, other people down the street--there was a fellow on the corner who was a fisherman.  He used to make his own rods, he made his own fishing rods.  And so there was smell of fish, you know, so those are some, those are some, those are some of the smells I had.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26175
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: So, so I started school at River Terrace, it was River Terrace Elementary School [Washington, District of Columbia].  And that was, that was during, during discrimination.  And it was a place where the, the black African Americans would go to school.  It was the only school available and it was across the, across the bridge on, on, on the, on Benning Road.  It was across the Benning Road Bridge.  Where, where Benning Road crosses Minnesota [Avenue], you had to cross the bridge to get to River Terrace.  And so we would walk and, and sometimes take the bus, but we would, we would walk mostly over across that bridge to school.  And so I started there and then discrimination was ended in '54 [1954] was it, something like that.
Speaker 1: The Supreme Court Decision, Brown vs. Board [of Education; a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court declared state laws establishing separate public schools for black and white students unconstitutional].
Speaker 2: The Supreme Court decision was ended, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now so at your school at River Terrace was, was that an all, all black school?
Speaker 2: All black school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was all black.
Speaker 1: Teachers, everybody?
Speaker 2: Everybody.  Benning--I can remember, now at, at River Terrace I remember it was all, it was all black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There may have been one white, white teacher actually.  But we did have may--we did the May Day thing.  Every, every May 1st we would have a maypole and weave, you know weave the--which is, which was more--kind of a world thing.  It's more, it's not so much of an African American tradition.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So, but I think most all of those teachers were black.  And all the students certainly were black.  And then in 1954 because of our district, we went to another school, which was a mixed school.  So it was--and, and I think the first year all the white students left.  I mean I think it was--I'm not even sure--there weren't, there were a few, there were some white students in the class, and a couple of white teachers.  One of, one of whom really took a liking to me and helped me a lot.  But--
Speaker 1: Now what, what, what was her name?  This was at Benning?
Speaker 2: This was at Benning, Benning Elementary School.
Speaker 1: And you're what, about nine [years old] now?
Speaker 2: 1954.
Speaker 1: You would be eight [years old] I guess, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Or nine maybe.  So what was the name?
Speaker 2: What was her name?  I--let me, let me work on that now.  I can see her face.  I think it will come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's, let's see if it will come.
Speaker 1: All right now why was she your favorite teacher there?
Speaker 2: She wasn't my favorite teacher, but she took a liking to me.  She was a, she, she really helped me as opposed to told me what to do.  I mean it was--you know sometimes people would, many times people would say you know, do that, and then walk away.  But they gave you no hints as to how to do it.  So you're struggling to try to work it through, and especially during desegregation and some of the teachers you know, didn't want to be there.  You know they, they didn't want to be there with the black students.  And so it was, it was, it was harsh in places, you know it was just harsh.  I could feel, I could feel the discrimination when I went to that school.  And--but she would come by and say well this is how you do it.  And so she would show how to do it and then would give me an example and I could work with that, which was very good for me.  And, and I can't think--Mrs., Mrs., I just--I wrote it down.  I wrote it down just recently actually too, so last couple of months ago, but I, I don't--I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And, okay so, so then that--that was Benning.  So then at Benning Road, now at Benning, Benning--Minn--that was off Minnesota Avenue.
Speaker 1: So we don't need to go to another yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you like what was your subject in elementary school?  What did you gravitate towards?
Speaker 2: Arithmetic and singing, I used to--music, I used to sing quite a bit there.  And arithmetic, mathematics was good.
Speaker 1: And, and you were a Cub Scout during this time I guess.
Speaker 2: I was a Cub Scout then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26176
Speaker 1: Now what was your neighborhood integrated when you were going to this school?
Speaker 2: Partially, you know we, where the, where we were on, on 36th Street [Washington, District of Columbia], the next street over there was one white family I remember there.  But they didn't last very long.  So they weren't there that long.  But, but I do remember in our back--looking out my backyard, our backyards were across from each other.  There was an alleyway between them.  And I didn't know them, but, but there was a family.  So I would say it was very sparsely integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now what did you like to do as a little kid?  I mean elementary school kid.
Speaker 2: I always liked to do new things.  I was always interested in all sorts of things.  And I liked to play kick ball, I was, I was athletic, athletically inclined.  I liked to sing.  I was, I was--I sang a lot there and the school--I think it was in the fourth grade, fifth grade, I was a--I did a solo, couple solo songs for Christmas, Christmas pageant.  And sang White Christmas.  It was, it was a--so it was real--I really enjoyed the voice part of it.  I enjoyed the Cub Scouts too.  I enjoyed that because it was something new and it was expansive in many ways.  And I was always looking for something, something that was interesting that, that grabbed me.  Not just always as doing certain things that didn't grab me.  I mean I--some things, you know, I mean I, I could play, I could play baseball all day, but it wasn't something that grabbed me, you know I played baseball, I was a pitcher for a while in elementary school.  And in summer league, summer--the rec league.  But it, it wasn't something that I really gravitated toward.  But I did gravitate certainly towards singing and, and toward mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26177
Speaker 1: Now did you know any scientists growing up?  I mean at, at the grade school level?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no.  The only, only--
Speaker 1: Your father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] was--
Speaker 2: My father was there.  I mean he was, he was close as I knew and he was, he never really called himself a scientist, but he, he knew mathematics and he knew calculus, so he could, he could help, he helped a lot with our arithmetic.  And, and he loved gadgets and he liked to--and one of the gadgets was a slide rule, so he taught us how to multiply and add through slide rules.  So yeah, so those are things I, I really gravitated toward.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about--did you like science shows on television or radio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I liked science shows.  Yeah, there we go there's a--and it was a show called Rootie Kazootie [The Rootie Kazootie Club] and there was a, it was a, it was a cartoon.  I used to like the cartoons.  We had a TV and it was a big old, you know, big old thing that sat in the room and, and with tiny little screen on it; piece of furniture.  And ornate, and Rootie Kazootie would come on Saturday mornings and, and, and, and there'd always be situations where Rootie Kazootie would get into trouble.  And we had to bail him out.  So we had this magic screen that you mail, you mail ordered, you mail it--they mail it to you.  It was a, it's a piece of plastic that you'd lay on top of the TV screen and you have this marker, this, this pen which came with the screen.  And so you had to draw like a, a rope for Rootie Kazootie to swing across a, a gorge.  And so you'd draw this rope on the screen.  So we would do that all the time, it was great.  But then of course when the screen wasn't there, some of the kids would draw right on the screen, you know.  So that, that didn't work very well with the family members cause they'd come to our house, they'd draw these--we'd have a bunch of kids over and they're drawing on the, they're drawing right on the TV screen.  And of course you get them off with alcohol, but it just caused, it caused a little angst to the parents, you know.  So we were kids, just nature of kids.  And so I really liked the cartoons and Tom and Jerry and just I liked, loved cartoons.  That was, that was a good thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did, did you ever see, watch Mr. Wizard?
Speaker 2: Loved Mr. Wizard.  Saw Mr. Wizard almost every, every week and really enjoyed that.  I enjoyed--he was--he made it so easy for us, you know to, to follow.  And, and at my school there was no labs.  You know I didn't have any labs at the school and so to, to--
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but we'd try some of the things, experiments at home.  My parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] were very encouraging of us, my brother [Lawrence Buck] and I, to experiment with things.
Speaker 1: Now did you--did they buy you a Gilbert Chemistry [set]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a chemistry set.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a chemistry set.  I had a--and I didn't blow up too many things, didn't, didn't hurt anybody.  But I made--put chem--chemicals together and had a Erector set and a, a Lincoln Log set.  Also had a train, Lionel, Lionel train which we built on top of a--we had a ping pong table that we, we played ping pong with.  And neighborhood kids would come over, we'd play ping pong.  And after a while the ping pong, nobody played ping pong, so we converted the ping pong--my father led the way and we, we, we turned, converted the ping pong table into a train, train set.  So we built trees, we made trees and roads and you know we did our best for putting it together and had little bridges and you know it was really quite a nice little set.  So that was, that was all very, very much fun.
Story_ID: 26178
Speaker 1: [I'm] thinking about 36th Street [Washington, District of Columbia].  We--my brother [Lawrence Buck] and I, we went over, we had--there was still creeks.  We always went to the--I always went to the water, somehow in my life always goes to the water, right.  So we had this creek and we, we, we found little, little tadpoles swimming around.  So we went back and got some jars and dipped it into the creek and capped them off and brought them back, we're going to hatch some, we're going to hatch some frogs.  So we had this basement on the 36th Street we had a basement where the, where the ping pong table was.  And so we, we, we poured the, poured the jars into a, a, a big tub, one of those big, white porcelain tubs.  And went away.  We'd come back and check periodically and you know, they're still swimming around.  And one day we opened up the basement door and there was mosquitoes all over the place.  They weren't tadpoles, those were, those were mosquitoes larva.  So we filled the whole house with mosquitoes.  I mean it was, so but it was, you know it was learning, you learn.  You learn the difference in tadpole and a mosquito larva.  A lot of times we would have a little animal zoo.  We'd have this--we'd get--and this is the Cub Scouts' way.  They would show us how to do this.  We'd get some aspirin get a little water, take an aspirin and crush it into the water at the bottom of a, of a jar.  And then you could get a bee, catch a, catch a, a bumblebee.  And if it hits the, hits the aspirin, it, it drugs the, drugs the bee.  So we would, we would then drug the bees and not leave them there long, cause you, you'll kill them if you, if you do.  So you, you stun them and we'd take them out and we'd make them walk tightropes.  So we'd have these strings and the bees would walk along the tightrope cause they're still kind of stunned, they couldn't fly.  And they'd walk right along the, the rope to the other side.  So we had this zoo, we called it a--it was actually an insect zoo, not an animal zoo, but an insect zoo.  And we'd do that with ants and we also had, we had some, some pet mice for a while.
Speaker 2: Now did the same technique would work on ants, the aspirin?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but the ants were, the ants are naturally likely to walk across stuff, you know.  But, but the bees would, you know tendency is to fly away.  We also worked on flies, flies would work that way too.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 26179
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said you, you, you had mice too, right?
Speaker 2: We had some mice, you know we had some mice that we had for a while and, and we learned--we--that these mice, actually the, the one mice was pregnant.  One mouse was pregnant and, and for some reason, and probably cause we didn't feed them well.  I mean I don't know, we were kids, we didn't quite know--we were learning how to do it, but the, the mothers are eating the kids, eating the, the newborn and we thought this is gross, you know.  So we stopped--we didn't, we didn't raise anymore mice after that.  But that's when I realized they were eating their, their, their newborns which was--that was pretty gross.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and we had dogs.  We had, we had, we had two dogs, one was Jingles.  This was on 36th Street [Washington, District of Columbia], Jingles, they were boxers.  And Jingles was a hair lip, she had a hair lip and we, we liked her cause she was, she was different from the rest and, and she was smaller, smaller than the rest in her, in her litter when we got her.  And so she grew up and we grew up with her and then she got pregnant.  She got--we had it, we got her spayed, I mean--
Speaker 1: Neutered, well spayed yeah.
Speaker 2: She had--after she got pregnant we got her, we got her neutered.
Speaker 1: Spayed, yeah, spayed.
Speaker 2: And she had a litter.  [Unclear]how many in the litter, maybe it was four or five.  And we gave one to each of the grandparents, to the, to the Buck grandparents.  One to the Buck grandparents, one to the George grandparents.  We kept one, and then there was another went somewhere else and I've forgotten where now.  It was with a relative.  So the one we kept was named Taffy.  And it was a--both were female, so Jingles and, and Taffy.  So we, we grew up with them and, and that was fun.  So that was, that was a lot of fun, growing up with those dogs.
Story_ID: 26180
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, went to junior high school and that was called Woodson, Woodson Junior High [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was right across the street from Benning Elementary [School], directly across the street.  And across Minnesota Avenue.  So I went there at, at grade seven, seven to, seven to nine went to Woodson Junior High.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did they have a science facilities at Woodson?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I can recall, but what I do recall was that I did a science fair project, a, a district science fair.  I entered the district, and I got third, I got--actually got honorable mention in the district science fair.  And, and third somewhere else, but this was in a, in a lower judging.  But I had--it was on weather of course.  I had access to weather maps.  And so it was about clouds.  So it, it was a--the project was about clouds.  And so it, it, it was recognized as a nice project, but didn't win, didn't win the first three rounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do?  Did you have like--did you make any real clouds or did you have a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and I, I used some of the chemistry to, you know, and, and I had a--we actually in a, an aquarium.  So basically I had an aquarium, a small aquarium with a glass top on it and water in it.  And so I would heat it up and the water would rise and, and stick to the inside of the glass and it would condense and, and drop, and so it was rain.  And so I could make rain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was, that was the, that was the, the, the example that I had about clouds.  So it wasn't, it wasn't making clouds as much in there as I was making rain.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were there any particular teachers or mentors or coaches or, or anybody at this stage in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually there's a teacher in, in elementary school too I can remember.  Not, not, not the one I'm forgetting, but there's Mr. Downing.  He was the first male teacher I had, African American, black fellow, who was my math, math teacher.  He taught me math and a bunch of other stuff, so, so he was very pivotal in my life and I stayed in touch with him for a long, long time after I left, I left there.
Story_ID: 26181
Speaker 1: But in junior high school [Woodson Junior High School, Washington, District of Columbia], I had no teachers there that I feel that I--that stood out as much as Mr. Downing and, and this other teacher in elementary school.  I had, I was, I was in junior high school starting to feel my oats.  You know what I mean, so I was in, in, in elementary school I was on the hall patrol, so I was a lieutenant in the hall patrol.  So I was doing some good things there.  In junior high, I was still singing, we had a group of little, little three, three person group that I was singing in for a while.  We, we had--sing popular songs and made up some songs of our own.  And that was, that was fun to be in.  And then I started running track there, so I really, I started running track in junior high school.
Speaker 2: This is about 1959, fifty--
Speaker 1: Fifty, yeah '58 [1958], '59 [1959], '57 [1957], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], yeah, yeah.  And, and I remember a couple, some very int--some, some incidences that, that stood out in junior high school.  One was they had a definite dress code.  And these were the days where you'd wear these dinner, dinner jackets.  You know, well these kind of Nehru jacket [a hip-length tailored coat for men or women, with a mandarin collar, an apparel worn by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the Prime Minister of India from 1947 to 1964] type of, type of thing.  And, and so I was in my Nehru jacket and the vice, vice principal--I was in a music class.  The vice principal came into the class and basically yanked my coat off my back, just yanked it off.  Didn't tear it, but yanked it off.  And I thought well what--you know, she says this is an outside jacket that, that does not get worn inside.  And so she took it off and took it to her office.  And I was very, very angry about this.  This was my jacket.  She could have said take it off and I would have taken it off and kept it on my, in my, on a chair or someplace, or hung it up in the, in the closet.  But no, she just ripped it off my back. So after class, I walked into her office.  She wasn't there, I found it, I saw it sit--on her coat rack.  I took it off the coat rack and went home.  The next day, she was very angry with me because I had, I had intruded into her space.  And who knows what else I had seen, what else I had taken?  And I got suspended for a, a day I guess it was because of it.  Now my mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] at the time worked at the cafeteria at the junior high.  And so anyway it was complex, and so I managed to, to, to not get anything worse than a, a one day or I think it was one day.  It wasn't any more than three days.  I think it was one day suspension.  But it could have been worse.  And that, that, that assistant princ--that vice principal never liked me.  She just never liked me at all.  There was nothing that I could do to, to help her, nothing.  And I became--we had a group of, of boys that we hung out with.  And we went through, I don't know, three or four teachers that one year.  Nobody could control us.  We were, we, we do all kinds of things, all kinds of antics in the classroom.
Speaker 2: Now were you, were you ever a problem before this year?
Speaker 1: No, no I was a good kid.
Speaker 2: So you, you think this in, incident kind of just--
Speaker 1: It may have, it may have triggered that, you know.  There was no, there was no sense of, of anyone, anyone wanting to help me.  I never--junior high I never got that sense.  And it was a black school, you know, but I never got a sense that--and you know maybe, maybe, maybe one of my teachers who might hear this now remembers me and might think otherwise.  But I just can't think of any, anyone who really came forward to give me a great boost, except for my track coach.  And so I was, I was running with these, these young, these young kids you know.  And getting in fights.  So I had, I had a, I had two guys--I was a skinny kid.  I was always a skinny kid.  And, and I liked mathematics, you know, so I was kind, I was kind of geeky in some ways, but, but I was also a, a jock, and so they respected me for that, so I had a lot of respect just because of that.  But you know there was always some people want to get lunch money.  You know what I mean?  This was a classic thing and happened to me.  And they would always try to pump me for lunch money.  And one day I said I'm not giving you anything.  And they said meet me out back.  So after school, you know it was, it was just classic.  You know the kind of things you hear everywhere on TV or wherever, you might even have experienced something like that, you know.  It was just the classic thing.  And so I went, I went out and I was nervous, I was very, very nervous, you know.  My heart was racing and I thought my goodness, you know, I'm going to get hurt.  And, and it was two of them, not one, but two.  And they, they got on me and I, I broke my thumb, I actually won.  They never bothered me again after that.  I, I took, I took--I gave them a good, a good, a good beating and that was part of my father's [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] genes in me and how he taught us to fight.  And so junior high was a, was a--had mixed, mixed things going on in junior high and I, I think that if I didn't have a good high school experience and I didn't have good parents supporting me, who knows where I would have been?  I mean I don't--I, I would have been on the streets somewhere probably.
Story_ID: 26182
Speaker 1: Now you were running track and you were--Boy Scouts too I guess.
Speaker 2: The Boy Scouts, yeah, yeah, and came--
Speaker 1: Productive kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, productive, you know productive and, and I got--being an Eagle Scout.  I mean Eagle Scout and--
Speaker 1: Did you?  You made it--
Speaker 2: I made it to Eagle and the second, second black Eagle in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] history.  And the first one was from my troop, and he, eh got me by like two months.  So, so we were really close together in getting these Eagles.  And I have a poem too, I have, have merit badges over--I have three merit badges over the, the twenty-one needed.
Speaker 1: Well who was the first one?  What, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Man, you got me.  Philip, Philip--I have pictures.  I have a picture of him and we'll have to see that and--
Speaker 1: I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no.  Mr. Spears was the, was the troop, troop leader.  He was the, he was the Scoutmaster.  And it was Troop 580 and in D.C.  And that, that gave me a lot of grounding I think, being in the scouts and running track.  So it, it took me away from the element within the community that, that could have been bad influence on me.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Boy Scouts, did you go to scout camp?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to scout camp almost every summer.  And also, also went to Philmont, now Philmont is spelled P-H-I-L-M-O-N-T.  And that's in New Mexico.  So, so we had--my brother [Lawrence Buck], my brother is also an Eagle, Lawrence is also an Eagle Scout.  And so we--one summer I guess when I was sixteen [years old], we went to Philmont.  It was, we--there was two of us from that, my troop went there.  It was a bus of kids from the [D.C.] metropolitan area, and there were I think three or four black kids on the bus, and the rest were all white.  And we drove the bus from here, well we didn't drive, but they had a driver.  We rode this bus from here to, to Philmont, which is northern New Mexico near Cimarron, New Mexico.  And experiences like that were fabulous.  I mean that, you know we, we also stopped in Colorado and went to a, a real pow-wow with real natives and, and talked with them and it was just, you know it was just an uplifting thing.  I, I was also a mem--member of the Order of the Arrow which is a brotherhood member of the Order of the Arrow.  And you know there was--it's kind of a survival thing.  You go out in the woods for three days, out you know, just yourself and a knife and come back and--
Speaker 1: You went out in the woods for three days with just a knife?
Speaker 2: Yes sir, yeah.  So, so it was really very interesting.  You know I had a very interesting life there, but there was another element that was creeping, you know at junior high.  It was, it was, it was kind of--not a good, not a good element that we're starting to see.
Story_ID: 26183
Speaker 1: So now you were out West back in the days when cowboys and the westerns dominated popular culture in the country.  It's pretty much true, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: The movies--
Speaker 2: It was 1960, I think it was 1960 I was--
Speaker 1: Television movies, there were so many westerns on and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was '61 [1961], it was 1961 I think I was at Philmont [New Mexico], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, most kids wanted to go out west and see it.
Speaker 2: So there's--there was a kid in my neighborhood who was also went out, he went out there the year before.  So I asked him, I said what's it, what's it like?  He says you won't like it.  He says don't go.  I said why?  He says there's nothing there, don't go, don't go.  And so I remember coming in asking my parents, I said well he said there's nothing there.  Maybe we should rethink this.  You know, cause I had, I had a, a, a, a Washington Post [newspaper] paper route which I, which I, which I, which I had.  My brother [Lawrence Buck] and I ran this paper route.  And we'd saved up all our money from the paper route so we could pay for this trip.  And so my mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] said very wisely, she said well for him there was nothing there.  But for you, maybe there's something there and the only way to find out is to go.  Which was a very, very wise piece of advice for anybody.  And so I went and found the most miraculous things happening.  Hail, you know it was hail storms at 10,000 feet.  Every day with hail, you know and then it would go away for about fifteen, twenty minutes it would hail really heavy, then it'd stop and the sun would come out and--you know we'd hike.  We had, we had a run in with a bear.  We had porcupine, we had, you know mountains to climb.  You know we had to, we had to carry our tents in, carry, carry them out.  We had to pack water.  We had to find out how to sterilize water.  You know it was really, it was, that was a great part of my life which I relish even today.  Probably can imagine from my expressions, it was really quite nice.  So that all started, start to cultivate in junior high school.  That was, that was a part of what I was leaning--that was my home life.
Story_ID: 26184
Speaker 1: Now, and the running of track, now you were running I think, well maybe in high school.  We'll get to high school.  Well okay so junior high school [Woodson Junior High School, Washington, District of Columbia] ends around 1960?
Speaker 2: 1960, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you go on to high school in, in '60 [1960].  So you were there from '60 [1960] to '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty '63
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: '60 [1960] to '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, for the last three years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what high school did you go to?  This is--
Speaker 2: The high school I went to was called Spingarn High School.
Speaker 1: Now that's name for Joel Spingarn.
Speaker 2: Joel Elias Spingarn, yes.
Speaker 1: One of the founders of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Spingarn Collection over here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Mooreland-Spingarn [Research Center at Howard University] is named for that Spingarn
Speaker 2: Yes, the same.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that was my high school.  And it was right off Benning Road, right across from RFK [Robert F. Kennedy] Stadium, which is still here now.  But also those--RFK Stadium, before RFK Stadium was built, those grounds were the circus grounds.  And Barnum and Bailey, Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey and would come to the city and pitch camps, pitch their tents right up on that, on that lot there across from Spingarn High School.  When I was a kid, my father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] would take us to the, to the circus, my father and mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] would take us to the circus and we'd watch the elephants pull the tents up and you know that was another smell that, that, that comes out.  Just the smell of elephant dung, and hay and animals.  But I went to Spingarn and, and now my first year at Spingarn, because of my junior high school academics were not very stellar, and I hadn't, I hadn't shown anything to people there.  I was kind of an, kind of frustrated there.  D.C. high schools, the D.C. school system had, and I think they still do, or even if they had it then.  I can't talk about it now cause I don't know about now, but in those days they had, had four tracks.  They had Track One which was the honors track, Track Two was college preparatory track, and Track Three was general, and Track Four was basic.  And so my homeroom was in a basic track.  So my, my homeroom desk was a lathe and they were expecting me not to do anything further than you know, do that.  Well it worked--turned out beautifully because as, as, as my life goes.  I mean I always--usually take negative things and I think a negative and maybe turn them into something positive.  But because of that, it took me to graduate school.  I learned how to--I knew how to work a lathe, got to graduate school and I could do some things there, but we're jumping ahead of ourselves now.  But, so my, so my, so my tenth grade homeroom, Mr. Barnes, was the name of my homeroom teacher.  He, he ran the shop.  And so, so I was in, I was in Track Four.  I think very quickly, I took math and did very well in math.  And I went to Track Three.  But I never got any further than Track, Track Three in high school I was taking some Track Two mathematics courses and French and language courses, and Latin, but I wasn't in Track Two.
Story_ID: 26185
Speaker 1: Now was your school [Spingarn High School, Washington, District of Columbia]--what was the racial demographic of your school?
Speaker 2: My school was almost all black, Spingarn was almost all black.  It was a, it was, you know and there were some very--I had great teachers there.  Mr., Mr., my gosh I'm blanking out but I had, I had--there was a lot of jocks there, so there was a lot of, lot of people who, who--Elgin Baylor came from my high school.  Okay he was a basketball player.
Speaker 1: Right, one of the great basketball players.
Speaker 2: One of the great basketball players came from my high school, he was before me.  Dave Bing was at my high school.  Fatty Taylor was at my high school.  We had one of the great Green Bay Packer [NFL football team, Green Bay, Wisconsin] defensive backs was also from my high school, there was Willie Wood was from my high school.
Speaker 1: Okay we have [unclear].
Speaker 2: So there was a lot of, a lot of, a lot of very intense athletes that were there.  And, and that was a, that was an environment that was, that was kind of helping me come out of my junior high school dark days. Those were kind of the dark years at, at the school.  Not the [Boy] Scouts, but the, but the school part.  And so I started--I kept running track; I also ran track in high school.
Speaker 1: Now we read here that you, you were--you ran in the Penn Relays [the oldest and largest track and field competition in the United States].
Speaker 2: I ran in the Penn Relays, yeah I ran in the Penn Relays.
Speaker 1: The great Penn Relays.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got a gold medal, Penn Relays and--
Speaker 1: Gold medal, and what event was it?
Speaker 2: It was the, it was the four by, it was the, it was the, it was a one, it was a mile relay.  Every, every leg ran a 440 yard dash we call it.
Speaker 1: Now this is for those of us who ran a little track, we know the 440 is a grueling run.
Speaker 2: The 440 [yard dash] is a horse race.
Speaker 1: Yes it is, real good [unclear].
Speaker 2: It's a horse race, it's a horse race.  I mean it--so I'll tell you this story about, about my Penn Relays experience.  It was a, I was a, I was a junior, no see--no I was a senior, I was a senior in high school.  And I went both--I went as an altern--I was an alternate runner in the, my junior, junior year.  So I went, I went there but I didn't run.  But my senior year I ran.  And our coach wanted to--we were, we were good enough, we had set some records here in the district and our nemesis here was Cardoza High School.  We had some Cardoza High School runners.  We--they were, they were pretty--they were very, very good.  And we started beating them and they had been the best along the east coast pretty much.  And we started beating them and, and so we asked the coach to put us in the, in the Championship of America Race at the Penn Relays where the best of the best get in this race.  And we qualified to get it in.  But the coach decided not to do that because he wanted all of us to get a medal.  He wanted to be sure that we get a medal cause we're all seniors.  Cecil Turner was on that team.  Cecil Turner played for the [Chicago] Bears [NFL football team, Chicago, Illinois].  He won, he won the, he won the Rookie of the Year Award in National Football League [NFL].  He was a punt returner.  And he was fast.  Cecil--he was one of my buddies.  And so anyway there was--here we were and the coach says we want to get you a medal.  So we, we, we got into the open races.  So they, the let us--they have these heat races.  And so we won.  We just--and Cardoza [High School] was in our, in our heat.  So we, we had--it was a really good heat.  And, and we beat them.  And the, and the--when it came to me, I was running the third leg.  And I--the year before I saw this guy way out in front and then this fellow--I've forgotten his name--come behind him and just lapped him.  I mean came up so fast and the crowd was going wild.  The crowd--you could hear the crowd going, I can--I was thinking my goodness, this guy is intense.  He was catching up to this fellow.  I mean it was like, like the guy in the lead was, was standing still.  And wins the race.  You know he runs some incredible like 47 or 46, 47 in high school you know, it was really big.  So, so we were out in the front.  So I got the baton in front.  And, and I took the baton and started running.  And the crowd, I could hear the crowd going crazy.  And I thought oh my goodness, somebody's behind me trying to catch me.  Somebody's going to burn me right in front of, you know, thousands of people on TV.  You know--so, so I just started picking it up.  And they were just going crazy.  And so then, then I ran out, I ran out of steam.  You know I wasn't trained for that and I ran out of steam.  We still brought it in front, but didn't make up much room.  So, so they were--what the crowd was--later my dad [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] filmed the whole thing.  He was a, he was a, he was a amateur photographer and he had a lot of photographer--he got moving pictures when my brother [Lawrence Buck] was born in 1948.  So he got a, he got a sixteen millimeter then.  And so later you could see I was way--I was stretching, I was stretching out.  I was, I was really going really pretty fast.  And so the crowd was yelling at me.  They were like to see me doing this.  And I thought there was somebody behind me doing this, catching up with me.  So I was running like, you know--
Speaker 1: You almost burned yourself out cause of--
Speaker 2: Burned myself out.
Speaker 1: 440, you have to make sure you make that turn.
Speaker 2: That third turn.  That fourth turn, that was really hit me, it hit me then.  The monkey jumped on my back and--but the guy didn't catch me, he didn't catch me anyway.  But we won.  And we set a--we had the best, the best record that year in all the open races and we would, we would have placed second in the Championship of America if we had run that, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, that's a big story.
Story_ID: 26186
Speaker 1: So, now in high school [Spingarn High School, Washington, District of Columbia] did you run for student office, or--
Speaker 2: No, I never, I never ran for political office in, in high school at all.  Never did that.
Speaker 1: Were you in any clubs or any--
Speaker 2: I was in the French Club.
Speaker 1: French Club.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the French Club.
Speaker 1: And, and you were taking higher math, right?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, you know like did they offer calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: They, they, they did but I didn't, I didn't take calculus in high school, I took pre-calculus.  Because they only let the, the, the levels of [Track] Two, One and Two take that and I wasn't ranked, you know third, the third general zone [Track Three] there.  So--
Speaker 1: So how did you do in pre-calculus?
Speaker 2: I did well, I did A, I got an A or a B.  You know I did real--and my As and Bs were in French and, and math.  Everything else I was not interested in.  History I didn't do so well, Cs and Ds.  In fact I've forgotten what rank I even graduated from high school, it was pretty low.  I mean it was--I've forgotten how many people we had there, it may have been 800 people or something like that graduated and I was probably 600 or something like that.  I was way down in the list.  And--
Speaker 1: How did you--what, what about the sciences?  How, how far did you go in science?
Speaker 2: They wouldn't--I didn't take physics.  Physics, I didn't take physics in high school; they thought I couldn't do it and so they never let me take it.  And you know when I, when I--when it was--it was also during the Vietnam War and I was right--the counselor, high school counselor recommended that I go to the war.  That that was best--it'd be best to do the war and not go to college.  That was my advice.  So fortunately my parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] didn't agree with that advice.  But--
Speaker 1: Now was your counselor black or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he, and he said that you'd--
Speaker 2: It was a woman, yeah.
Speaker 1: Woman, she said you'd be better off going to the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember that distinctly.  And so I remember going home and you know, kind of saying well what should I do?  You know.  And my parents says well we'll get you, we'll get you to college.
Story_ID: 26187
Speaker 1: So graduation was anything, anything special about graduation from high school [Spingarn High School, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Special about graduating from high school.  No, I think I was happy to get out and you know we had just gotten a Penn Relays [the oldest and largest track and field competition in the United States] medal and you know the Spingarn High School by the way is going to close up this year.  So this is its last year and I plan to get over there I hope before it closes.  The medal case is still there and I'd like to see those old medals and trophies that we won over the years.  You know I was in the, I was in the, I was in the Varsity S Club, so with the athletes.  I would say there was nothing special about the graduation.  I did get a, a, a partial scholarship in track to Lincoln University in [Jefferson City] Missouri.  And of course my parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] had recommended that I go there. And I never took the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], never took the SAT cause there was, it was not something that--they were just starting it in those days.  But there was no entry exam that I took to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Lincoln University, now did your parents go with you since they were alumni of Lincoln, did they, did they--
Speaker 2: They didn't go with me.  I went out, I went out--actually I--see that first year, I'm trying the remember the first year or the second year I, I flew out there.  So I got on the airplane, put me on the airplane.  Was my first airplane ride.  And flew to St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: St Louis, okay.
Speaker 2: And then, and then took another flight to--I think I took a train.  I did, I took a train from, from St. Louis to Jeff City, Jefferson City on the Missouri River.  So that was my first, and that was--I did it by myself.  I had my trunk, I had this green trunk, you know about, I don't know, five feet by, by four, three feet, two, three, two and a half feet, something like that.  You know the standard with a rounded top on it.  And I was--I had put all my, all my worldly goods in there and, and went out to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was Lincoln [University] like?
Speaker 2: It was a place where--so, so I made, I made a couple of--there was three reasons why I went there that I, I thought, maybe four.  My parents went there and they liked it and, and some of their relatives had, had gone there too.  And I had a--so I had a cousin out there, first cousin, Charles Underwood.  My, my--he was, he was the son, the only son of, of my aunt Audrey who was my mother's sister, youngest sister.  And so Charles was there and he, he wanted me to come cause he could, he could show me around and he could, you know, be the big, my big brother on the campus and, and the second reason, another reason was, the third reason was that Charles said the women were beautiful there.  So I thought oh, good, this is a good place to go, you know.  Got my cousin there, a place where my fam--so family school, beautiful women and the last reason was Dr. [Walter] Talbot [Buck's parents' math professor while they were students at Lincoln University].  So I wanted him to teach me mathematics cause I had heard about him writing with two hands simultaneously, and I couldn't still quite believe I and my parents never I don't think ever told me any, any deliberate lies.  But it just seemed like so unbelievable there was a person in the world who could do that.  So I wanted so this, this fellow in, in person.  And I always, I always had been kind of evidence-based person myself, so I wanted to find if this was true or not.
Story_ID: 26188
Speaker 1: So I went out there [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] and my cousin [Charles Underwood] was there.  I didn't find the women as beautiful as he, he said.  He, he found his love of his life and of course since he found his love of live, he thought everybody was, was beautiful.  So he was, he was, he's a good guy, he's a good, he's a good man and was trying to help his cousin out.  And Dr. [Walter] Talbot [Buck's parents' math professor while they were students at Lincoln University] had left.  He, he--I hadn't done my homework and he left, and left the school after, I don't know, thirty, forty years, whatever time he had been there.  I had my track scholarship and that was, that was nice.  I ran track.  And, and I also, I also be--got on the Rifle Team.  In high school [Spingarn High School, Washington, District of Columbia] I was also part of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], so I had, had--I was--did ROTC in high school.
Speaker 2: Were you on a R--ROTC--I mean did you go to ROTC at Lincoln [University]?  Did you participate in that?
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did, I was in ROTC at Lincoln for the first year.  And then also on the, on the Drill Team.  I was on the Drill Team in high school, actually.  I was on the Drill Team in high school and a little Drill Team in Lincoln.  It didn't--but it was too much to do.  I was doing too much at Lincoln.  So when I first went there, I was seventeen years old and I was--it was the first time away from home.
Speaker 2: This is 1963, right?
Speaker 1: 1963, yeah, September, '63 [1963].  And I didn't quite understand the Missouri culture.  It was, it was, it was middle-, Midwest culture, west, middle west cause people would come from Oklahoma--, my, my cousin Charles, his wife Janet is from, from Guthrie, Oklahoma.  And it was a, it was, it was still foreign to me.  And so the culture were, was odd and I was doing too many things.  I was on the Rifle Team, I ran track, on the Rifle Team, Drill Team for a while.  And my studies--Dr. Talbot wasn't there and I didn't like my phy--I took physics, I was a math major.  Took physics and didn't like it at all.  In fact I got Ds in my physics courses.  My, my first two semesters were two Ds.  And I felt I couldn't, I felt I couldn't do anything there.  I felt nonproductive.  The track was pretty good.  I, I ran, ran great--ran in the, in the Emporia Relays and, and that was big time and it was--first, first time running into Roger, Roger Sayers, Gale Sayers' [football player] brother, Roger Sayers.  And he was a, a Olympic, Olympic 100 yard dasher you know.  And so--and he ran a four, he ran a 440 [yard dash] on the sprint medley--sprint medley relay and I--and the sprint medley, you started off with a quarter mile, and then you have two 220s and then a half mile ends it.  So, so mine was leading off.  And I started off and it was really slow.  I mean I could feel it, the race was slow.  I thought man, this--I'm gone steal these guys on the back stretch, back stretch.  But then not--they're sleeping and I'm just going to steal them.  So I stepped out and, and this other guy stole them at the same time, and it turned out to be Roger Sayers.  And man, we were stepping, step and step the whole time.  He beat me out, he finally beat me out but it was a good race and I was, and I realized afterwards that that was Roger Sayers.  I had no idea.  I used to, I used to get so nervous if I knew who I was going to run against the night before that I couldn't sleep.  So I would not want to know who I'm going to run against.  I just get out there and do my thing and concentrate.  Whoever it is, I deal with it.  But if I knew--if they were a famous name, I, I just--I would freeze up you know and I would run a poor race, I'd get nervous.  So, so Lincoln, my experiences at Lincoln were, were--so I stayed there for two years and then I, then I dropped out.  I went back the third year and, and dropped out.
Speaker 2: So you didn't really connect with anybody there really as a mentor or, or anything like that.
Speaker 1: I did not.
Speaker 2: Or, or favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Nobody really, really--
Speaker 1: No I didn't--there was another place.  It was sort of like junior high [Woodson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] in some ways, although it was, it was kind of the--the high school was a highlight.  It was good.  I had some good experiences there.  And the college, Lincoln University just--it didn't fit me.  It didn't fit my personality.
Story_ID: 26189
Speaker 1: Did you try to join a fraternity or anything?
Speaker 2: I did, Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi].  And cause my cousin [Charles Underwood] was a Kappa.  My father [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] is Alpha, he was an Alpha Phi Alpha.  My mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] is AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha].  And so there was family, you know, family's Greek.  You know and so, and so my cousin wanted me to join Kappas, but, but I couldn't go through the, the challenge of the, of this--
Speaker 1: Hazing.
Speaker 2: The hazing business.  And so I actually--one of the, one of the older members of the Kappas, you know he used to push me around.  And one day I couldn't take it anymore and I pushed him back.  Said you don't push me around.  And that was the end of my Kappa career.  So they wouldn't let me come back, and that was fine with me, it was fine with me.  So, so, so anyway it was, it was--so I went out my junior year and didn't unpack my bags, and just walked away and said I'm not, I'm not staying, so left.  I had some--met some good friends there.  Berverly Mack, a guy named Berverly and I think--I forgot how you spell that, B-E-R-B, B-E-R-V-E-R-L-Y, Berverly, he was from Kansas City, Missouri, KCMO.  And, and I had several people from, from the east coast that were, that were there and four, four or five people.  And you know, Hale Stock, Hale Stock was one name, Boyce, Boyce Smith was another.  Hail Stock was from D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia], and Boyce was from DC.  And Boyce Smith actually turned into a D.C. policeman and then ran their athletic program.  He was a basketball player.  There was Tommy Tucker who--Thomas Tucker from Penns--from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], from--
Speaker 1: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Petersburg, Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Petersburg, Virginia, okay.
Speaker 2: He was there and so we--and Tommy is still around.  I haven't seen him in decades but he's, I've heard he's around in, in the Virginia area and working at, at MCV, Medical College of Virginia.  And a couple of other folks that were there, which, which--but I think it kept, kept you know in high school I had, you know I had, I had Sunny McQueen was my best friend in high school and we--he never went to, he went to the war.  He went to Vietnam.  So when I went to college, my friends were going to Vietnam.  You know, Bill Lindsay who, who started the Fox Trot Restaurants here in D.C., nightclubs.  He was a good friend of mine.  And--but in college--and so I kept track of these guys in college.  But I, I didn't have--I didn't feel I had any hooks to stay at Lincoln.  And I would--I really prefer, have always preferred if I, if I really like a place, then I stay there.  But if I don't like a place, I don't stay there and be miserable.  I'd rather go on, move on, move on to other--and I don't know, at the time I didn't know where I was going to go.  I just knew I didn't want to stay there.
Story_ID: 26190
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came back home [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Came back here [after Buck left Lincoln University right after his sophomore year of college].  Parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] were very disappointed.  They said why and I couldn't explain it, I just said I can't do it, but they were supportive.  And so, so I worked.  You know so I went to work and did all sorts of things.
Speaker 1: So this, this is 1965 by now, right?
Speaker 2: '64 [1964] or '60 [1960], '60 [1960], let's see now.  So, yeah so I, I--
Speaker 1: You did two years, right?
Speaker 2: '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], yeah so it was '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was fall of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now where did you work?
Speaker 2: Lots of places.  I went to--I tried selling pots, you know door-to-door pot salesman.
Speaker 1: You mean pots and pans?
Speaker 2: Pots and pans, pots and pans.  That didn't work.  I had to buy, I had to buy them first, right.  I had to buy them first then took all my money to buy them and then I was a lousy salesperson.  I just, you know just--that was not my thing, so I gave that up and took the loss and walked away.  And then I was, I was doing some waiting, waitering at the Washington Golf and Country Club.  And waiting was terrible too, I didn't--wasn't a very good waiter.  I just wasn't good at that, but I could wash dishes.  So, so they put me in the kitchen and I was washing--using machine, you know the machine.  It was a great machine.  It was like the old lathe on the table.  Give me the lathe, I know how to work it.  I'll, I'll work it for you.  So I could work the machine.  So that was, that was pretty straightforward.  But I didn't take that long.  And I, and I was a houseman for cleaning floors and things like that for Bolling Air Force Base PX [Post Exchange].  And I was, and I was a stockman there too.  So I would stock the, stock the shelves.  But that didn't last long either.  And--but ended up going to a place that was interesting that I liked.  And this was a company in Odington, Maryland that refurbished World War I rifles.  So they, they had these World War I 22 caliber rifles with long barrels and the [U.S.] Army of course packed them up.  You know they, they greased them, grease them down and pack them up.  And then they'd sell them for surplus and this, this guy was buying, buying the rifles for surplus after some period of time and then the Army realized that they wouldn't use them again.  And he'd buy them and he had a degreaser and he put them in a degreaser which is awful smelling stuff.  I don't know what the chemical was, but it was terrible.  You don't want to get your--get near it, but you know people inhaled that stuff and I stayed away from it as much as I could.  And--but you degrease them, we break down the rifles, cut the barrels down to-- we were making hunting rifles out of them.  Cut the barrels down, take off the stocks, take out the trigger housings, refurbish everything.  And my job was then to put the, put new sights on the barrel.  So there was a, there was a machine that was a press.  It was like a--it was a press.  You'd line up the sight, pull the handle and press it down.  And so I did that for a long time.  I kind of enjoyed it and I enjoyed the people there and it was, and the guy who did the stocks was good handiwork with wood.  He made the, made those stocks look beautiful.  He'd sand them down and, and he taught me some things and I helped do that for a while.
Story_ID: 26191
Speaker 1: But then I got drafted [for the Vietnam War].  And I got drafted, I guess it was in December [1965], I think it was December.  And got my letter of, of induction.  And didn't want to, I didn't want to go.  So I wanted--also at that time I had gotten re-entered into school.  I found Dr. [Walter] Talbot [Buck's parents' math professor while they were students at Lincoln University].  He was at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland], at that time Morgan State College.  So he was the math professor who could write with both hands simultaneously.  So he was there.  And so I wanted to go and still see if this guy could write with both hands simultaneously.  So I wanted to go to Morgan.  And so my mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] knew him, of course, and so she helped me--introduced me to him and so I did get into Morgan [State College].  So I got drafted and got the okay, the approval to go to Morgan at the same, roughly the same time.  So I wanted to go to Morgan as opposed to going to the service.  And my friends in the neighborhood were all getting their draft letters at the same time, around the same time.  So I, I tried all different things.  I thought about doing all kinds of things, but you know it was the time of thinking about going to Canada and all that and I didn't want to do that.  I wasn't a conscientious objector, I wasn't, I didn't object with it.  I just didn't want to go.  I thought, I thought I could help this country more by going to college.  And even though I was a marksman and, and had some ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] experience, all my [paternal] uncles were--except for my dad [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior], my uncles were all military folks, my grandparents were military folks.  It was in, it was in the, it was in the cards but I wanted to go to college.  So, so my dad told me--so I told my dad and he, he says we go see the director, we'll go see the Director of Selective Service.  So it was only then that I realized why my dad didn't go to, didn't go into the [U.S.] Army in World War II or service in World War II.  He, he again wanted to make these, these--he got, he got called to be a draftsman here at the Weather Bureau and he wanted to make sure his brothers stayed alive in the war.  And now he felt that was his, his contribution to the war was to make great drawings, better anybody could ever make; that was his goal.  So we talked about that on the way to sit outside this guy's office, the Director of Service office.  And every day, nothing, nothing.  So my dad had to go back to work, so I would--I would do it day after day for, I don't know, a week or so.  Finally on a Friday, the secretary said he'll see you on Monday.  So my dad and I got all ready to go on Monday.  And then it was a big snowstorm that closed down all the government house, and I had to be--government, government offices in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. I had to be at the bus stop for the Army on a Wednesday morning.  And go to register for classes on a Thursday morning, the same week, that next week.  So Monday they were closed.  So that means I had one day left to make my pitch.  So my dad and I went to the office and he saw us.  And I made my pitch and I told him that I thought that the best way I could help this country was to go to college, go to school.  And yes, I could handle a gun, I could break down an M1, no problem.  You know, I can carry a rifle.  I know some, some, some military things, but I thought I'd go to school.  So right there he signed off on it.  He says okay.  He signed my deferment right there on the spot.  And, and then about two months later--so that man died.  And every degree, every degree that I've ever had--I'm about to get another one coming up here in May, an honorary degree.  I think about that man.  He gave me a chance to do something great, and I will never, ever take that for granted.  It was a big part of my life.  That was a big step.
Speaker 2: Someone you didn't even know who, okay.
Speaker 1: But he believed in me.  He believed I could do it.
Story_ID: 26192
Speaker 1: All right, so Morgan State [College, now, University] in Baltimore [Maryland], right?  You meet Dr. [Walter] Talbot [Buck's parents' math professor while they were students at Lincoln University; he could write with both hands simultaneously]?  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: So I went to Morgan State and this is my mother [Mildred George Buck Talford, who Buck describes as being very emotional] coming out.  So I went to Morgan State and I had to take physics over again because of my, my physics grades at Lincoln were, were Ds.  And I was still a math major.  And so I took physics the first year and got an A and a B in physics.  So I thought oh, it's because I already took it before and you know it was the second time around so I, I knew a little bit more than the other students.  And the next year, actually the next semester I had a, a differential equations, ordinary differential equations course from Dr. Talbot.  That was the course he taught me; first one he taught me.  So we're doing--in the middle of the semester I raised my hand and I said, "Dr. Talbot can you write with both hands simultaneously?"  And everybody was like in the room were like what's that question about?  And, and Dr. Talbot being the showman that he was, would say, he says, "Who told you that?"  He knew all along and he just played along.  And I said, "Well my parents."  And he says, "Oh, yeah, Millie and, Millie and Warren."  And I said, "Yes sir."  He turned right around to the board, his back to the, to the class and wrote this way, with equal sign in the middle.  I was impressed, so I thought okay, ever since I was knee high to an oyster, I heard about Dr. Talbot.  Finally I'm in the class with this guy and he, he actually does it right in front of me.  So I believe now, I'm a believer and I tell the story all the time.  That's something that is--and of course there are people who can write with two hands too, it's not unique but it's rare.  And so, so yes I had--and so he became my advisor. And then I, then I started loving physics.  So at Morgan State, then I found a, a teacher, a mentor who really, who really helped me a great deal.  His name is Robert Dixon.  And we still are friends today.  He's still in aca--in the university system today.  But he was a young physicist and he had us--and it was--there was a guy named Charlie Fields, a student with me, who was a straight A student.  You know he was a straight A student.  But he always seemed to have a good time.  And I knew how to have a good time, but I didn't know how to make straight As.  I didn't know, I didn't, I never had that situation.  But I used to hang out with Charlie and he taught me his techniques.  And I started learning from him.  And suddenly I was doing very well, As and Bs in physics so I almost was a double major in math and physics.  I think I was one course short of, of physics when I, when I graduated.  And in fact when I graduated that year I was taking something like twenty hours of physics.  I was in love with it so much.  Give me all the physics that you can give me was, was my attitude and I'll take it.  And I, and I took so many hours that I had to drop a course because I was commuting back and forth between [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] and Baltimore.  I was working at night part time to put myself through school, and I had a little fellowship, a little scholarship, an Equal Opportunity Grant they called it.  And that paid for some of the tuition, but I had to, I funded myself.  And then I got--had gotten married in my, between my junior and senior years, in the summer, junior and senior years.
Story_ID: 26193
Speaker 1: So this would be 1967?
Speaker 2: So I, so in '67 [1967] I got married in '67 [1967], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: At a party, so my friend Sunny McQueen you know we, we would, we would--we had a--we were just good buddies and we'd go to different parties together and in fact my, my--I had a, had a girlfriend then; Joy Ballard is her name, but her last name is Peters now, Joy Ballard Peters.  She was, she was sort of a girlfriend I guess.  We were really close friends.  And one of her buddies, her good buddies was [HistoryMaker] Shirley [Ann] Jackson, who--so I knew, I met Shirley early on in, in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  So it was like when I was nineteen years old we were all together.  So it was int--very interesting collective of people around that time.
Speaker 1: Now Shirley Jackson becomes a big time--
Speaker 2: Shirley Jackson was, she's big.  The first woman to get a Ph.D. from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and really just a fabulous person.  I have many--I have several Shirley Jackson stories, but, but let me, let me not talk about that yet.
Story_ID: 26194
Speaker 1: So, so at Morgan [State College, Baltimore, Maryland] I began to eat physics, you know morning, morning, noon and, and night.  And, and I was commuting back and forth between [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] and, and Baltimore.  And as I say working full--part time in this, in the Recreation Department over at Highland, Highland Park Recreation Center in--near Ballou High School [Washington, D.C.].  And I couldn't--I was, I was so tired.  You know I was working like crazy and studying and, and commuting and all that and, and doing the physics.  So I walked into Professor [Robert] Dixon's office one day.  He was teaching me a course and I think it was mechanics.  And I said I got to withdraw from the course, got to drop the course.  And he looks at me and says, "Why?"  I said I just can't do it.  I mean I, I don't know anything.  I don't feel like I'm getting anything out of it, I'm taking too many courses.  It's really too many and I'd rather do well in some of them than, than do poorly in, in most of them.  He says, "Well you have the highest grade in the class."  And I said well goodness, I feel sorry for the other people.  Cause I don't, I don't know anything.  I'm not--I just don't know much and if they know less than I do, that's, that's not good for them.  I mean I, I wish them well.  If I drop, I drop the course anyway cause it saved my, it saved my energy.  So I had a great time at Morgan State.  Morgan State was a, was a place where I really started to blossom.  It was a place that, you know, Willie Lanier was a good friend of mine then too.  Willie, Willie--he, he you know all pro for, for the Kansas City Chiefs [football team, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he played in the Super Bowl.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Will Lanier, yeah.  So Morgan was a great place.  It was a great place for me.
Story_ID: 26195
Speaker 1: Now as you're approaching graduation [1968] at Morgan State [College, Baltimore, Maryland], what are you thinking about doing next?  Are you thinking about grad school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, so my wife at the time, her name was Francine, my first wife, and she, she wanted me to go working.  She thought it was--that was the, that was the thing that would do, her family was just to go work after, certainly after, after high school.  But, but college was a, was plenty you know, that's as far as you want to go.  But I was in love with physics.  I was really in love with physics.  So, so I wasn't about to, to something different from that.  So I did apply for a couple of jobs.  In fact, Sylvania Electronics wanted to hire me out of high--out of college.  And that was doing some applied physics.  They wanted me to work on some anti-radar devices actually.  So it was, it was--probably led to some of the stealth technology that, that we have today.  But that's what they wanted me to work on.  And but I also, also applied to--here, here's another part of this aspect of my life which I think is really important to know.  When I, when I was in high school, I applied to actually two places.  One was Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] and the other was Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri].  Howard [University] was in town, Lincoln [University] was a place that, that my parents [Mildred George Buck Talford and Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] went to.  Howard turned me down, so I couldn't get into Howard, but I did go to Lincoln.  So when I got out of, out of college, I applied to Howard, Brandies University [Waltham, Massachusetts], [College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia], and I think those are the three.  And didn't, I didn't do, you know twenty, like many people do.  We didn't have--I didn't have the money to pay for all the, the fees for each one.  So Brandeis accept, accepted me.  William and Mary accepted me, Howard rejected me.  And so I didn't know why, but they rejected me.  And, and then I thought about Brandeis, but then William and Mary gave me a nice scholarship.  And I thought about William and Mary because it was small, it had an accelerator of international statute, and, and I could learn a lot of physics there.  So I thought it would be a good place for me to learn physics.  I didn't want to go to a, a big place like Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or--to me it was kind of intimidating and just wasn't ready for that kind of culture.  And so when I graduated from Morgan State, I had, I had a offer to Brandeis and to William and Mary.
Story_ID: 26196
Speaker 1: Okay, now you graduated for Morgan [State College, Baltimore, Maryland] in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: '68, 1960--I graduated from Morgan in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: And now just before you graduated, Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was--that night that Dr. King was, was, was killed, I was working at the Recreation Department at Highland Park.  And--
Speaker 1: This is here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: In D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that night after he was shot, the place was quiet as I'd ever heard it.  It was, it was definitely silent.  I went--we were going outside and couldn't hear, I couldn't hear any birds or anything and it seemed like it was a, it, it was just ghostly quiet.  And then suddenly everybody came out of their apartments and there was rioting.  There was just rioting, rioting, they were burning cars and tires and it was really a, a frantic.  And I remember leaving, closing down the, the rec center and at the time I lived on Massachusetts Avenue right by Union Station on the, on the I guess the south side of Union Station in an apartment complex which is still there.  And that's--cause I would, I would walk to the station to go to, to get the train to go over to Baltimore every day.  And I took the bus home and, and when I got to my stop, I got off the, the National Guard was all over the place.  And in my neighborhood, a liquor store window had been broken into and people were stealing and the guard was out in the jeeps, the jeeps there were--it was a jeep parked right in front of my apartment complex.  And I couldn't get in, so then I convinced them that I lived there.  So they, they were actually quite nice.  I didn't feel like I was harassed.  I never was pushed and, and, and you know, handcuffed or anything like that.  I never, never felt like I was in that level of danger or, or suspicion.  But I just talked my way in and got into the apartment and never came out, but that was a night where, you know, half the city was being burned.  And it was a, it was a miserable, it was a miserable night, just a miserable night that this man who literally put his life out there to change our lives.  To, put, put us in a much better place was killed.  And my--I think about that because I think certainly in the black community, leaders get their heads knocked off.  Every, you know every time you stick up and try to do something really well, and make something happen, the white society will kill you, move you out, you disappear, you know something happens.  And this was one more of those things and I think what led to those riots was this was the last straw.  You know this was like, this is it.  And so people, you know people were burning not their own stuff because of, of not liking their own stuff, but there was nothing left to do.  You know, despair at its, at its worse.  Just pure despair.  And so yeah, so that was the year--I graduated that year.
Story_ID: 26197
Speaker 1: And, and also that year [1968] Abernathy, Ralph Abernathy [a leader of the American Civil Rights Movement, a minister, and a close associate of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--they were, they were putting the March on Washington, they had planned that, planned that march, Poor People's Campaign.  And so Ralph Abernathy took over that, that part of it and leadership on that.  And it was rainy, it was literally raining.  My mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] and her younger sister Audrey, ran a daycare center for the Poor People's Campaign.  That was an aspect of my mother's life which I haven't said anything much about, but they were into--my mother was very much focused on early childhood education and ran a lot of daycare centers in the city.  She was--she and Aunt Audrey were two of the first Head Start [child development program for preschool children and their families who earn incomes at or below the Federal poverty line] teachers in the, in the country.  So there was--that, that's something that ran deep in my family.  And so my brother [Lawrence Buck] and I would help build the, the daycare center at the Poor People's Campaign out of, out of plywood and it was muddy, it was really muddy and wet and right on the, right on the [National] Mall there.  So that was the year I graduated.  It was a pretty tumultuous year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think right after graduation Robert Kennedy was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Robert Kennedy was assassinated and, and it was, it was just a, a time which led, led to some things in, in, in graduate school which I'll, I'll get to that I started doing.  And, and fighting back, politically fighting back.
Story_ID: 26198
Speaker 1: So you decided to go to William and--College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] and when did you start your, your graduate school experience?
Speaker 2: So I, I went to William and Mary in the fall of 1968 and Francine [Buck's first wife] and I had, had one son, Eric, Eric Wesley Buck.  And he was born September 6th [1968].  So I was due at William and Mary at I think the end of September.  So he was less than a month old and we went down there.  My mother [Mildred George Buck Talford] was very concerned about me, actually.  She--for her it was the South, going you know just, just below [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] was, you know is, is the South.  And Richmond [Virginia] being the former capitol of the Confederacy and all that.  So she was really concerned about me and I, I was so in love with physics.  Physics, you know I think it blinded me to everything else.  I, I didn't care about anything else.  I wanted to learn some physics and I thought this was the place to do it.  And so I arrived there. We, we all--the three of us arrived and right away I ran into discrimination.  So the, they had, they had found a house for us to live in and when they found out we were black, they said no, you can't--we're not going to rent the house to you.  So the physics department found another house for me, for us and which we moved into and Francine was--didn't like it so much.  She was a city girl and of course that's, you know it's not--it's Williamsburg, Williamsburg is not a big city, it's a small place.  Much smaller then, then that it is now.  And she didn't like the house.  It was dingy, she, you know she was not happy there.  So I remember going into the department one day and, and sharing--they asked how, you know how was the new place cause they were worried that--they wanted me to have the right, have, have a good place to live.  And there was a genuine, genuine desire for them to do that, which I felt right away.  So I told them well, she's not very happy with the house and they said why?  And I said well she thinks it's dingy and it's old and so a few weeks later, I don't know how long, many weeks it was but it was a few weeks later, one of the professors, Bob Welsh came and said, and it's spelled W-E-L-S-H, we're going to come and paint your house.  So they organized, a couple of professors, he and Lynn Doverspike [ph.], professors, had organized some of the graduate students and on one Saturday a group of people came to the house and I was, I was there too, painting.  So we painted the inside of the house.  They just volunteered to do that for us.  And so I felt very welcome.  It was a, it was a welcoming gesture and it was genuine from their hearts and I thought my goodness, this is a good place for me.  And they, and I was learning physics.  The, the first--I think, I think all the physics I knew was, was, was covered in the first, first, maybe the first month of the semester.  So oh my god.  So I was, I was--had a lot, lot more to learn, but I was hung--so hungry for it and so ready to learn, I, I dove in, I just dove into it.  So I, I became--my first year there I hooked onto an experimentalist.
Story_ID: 26199
Speaker 1: Actually before, before I went to [College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virgnia], that summer before, I, I worked at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Between, between Morgan State [College, Baltimore] and William and Mary I worked for Johns Hopkins' mechanics department with some very famous fluid mechanics, mechanics, professors.  And, and Stanley Corrsin [physicist] was one of them that--I worked for a guy named O.M. [Owen Marin] Phillips [renowned oceanographer].  But Stanley Corrsin took me on the side and we--he said, he said what do you want to do?  And I said oh, I love relativity and, and waves and I kind of really liked that so I was happy to be in this wave mechanics' place.  And he gave me one of the first editions of [Albert] Einstein's book on relativity.  It was his copy, his personal copy he gave it to me that--during that summer.  Again, I was like my goodness, these people are really helping me.  I mean here's somebody trying to help me achieve my goals.  And they, and they make an environment for me to achieve it.  Every, every day during that summer we'd have coffee at ten o'clock in the morning.  And there would be a toy that we'd all look at and figure out how it worked.  And if we couldn't figure out how it worked, we'd take it apart and figure out how it worked.  It was just a wonderful place.  And there was this guy named Professor--Professor Bell who used to hang out in the hallway.  And he was, he was the only one that people called Professor Bell.  And so I wondered why did they call him Professor Bell?  Well it turns out he never had a Ph.D., but he was the guy who invented the iron lung.  It was called the Bell Lung and he named it--it was named the Bell Lung after him.  So here, here was people like that hanging around in the hallway and here was I fresh out of Morgan State, and I was more of a theorist than an experimentalist.  They gave me, they gave my only [unclear] scope to play with that whole summer.  It was, it was really just a very rich, rich experience for me.
Story_ID: 26200
Speaker 1: So then I go into [College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] with this experience [summer research experience at Johns Hopkins University's mechanics department] behind me and they're just as welcoming and just as instructive.  And I'm thinking wow, this is, this is what I really want to do.  This is, this is lining up with me.  So, so I was on a roll at William and Mary and I had, I had a, a lab and I worked in plasma physics, I did, I built an experiment to measure plasma oscillations and plasma for those of you who, who may not know what it is, it's not blood plasma, but it's, it's--you separate electrons from the, from the nuclei and it's called ionization.  So you ionize the, the atoms and so you separate electrons from the protons for example.  And, and so, so the plasma is its fluid.  So you, you, you think of each--the electrons is a, is a, is a collectible, a fluid collection and the protons are another type of fluid.  And so they oscillate, they can vibrate so you can--you, you vibrate them with electromagnetic waves.  So I built this, this device to measure these oscillations, which was all very interesting how putting, putting pieces together from Safeway [store].  I had to go to Safeway and buy a mayonnaise jar off the, off the shelf because it was cylinder, the right, right size cylinder.  I could cut the ends off and perfect.  I tried to, I tried to blow glass to make that cylinder but I could never, never do it.  I was never good at blowing gas.  And so, so I decided to buy something.  And I couldn't get the right diameter on, on--from the catalogs.  So I went, took my calipers and went around to the Safeway and measured jars and I remember the store manager coming by and saying what are you doing?  And this was in the--, this was '68 [1968], '69 [1969].  I said well I'm, I'm, you know I'm measuring.  I want to get the right size jar for my experiment.  And he said okay, all right.  So anyway I got my jar.
Story_ID: 26201
Speaker 1: One of the, the, the things that, that was required for graduate school [at the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] is you have to teach for a year.  So you have a, a year requirement to teach.  So I was teaching a freshman introductory, introductory physics class laboratory.  And there were students in this class and one night I was in my lab, the research lab.  And these two women came into the lab who were from my section on my lab section.  And one white, one black.  And the white, white student said my roommate would like to talk to you.  So her roommate was the black student and was standing right there.  I thought well why doesn't the student speak up?  You know what--it was, it was--something was happening cause she was introducing the idea that, that it was something further that--anyway it was all mysterious.  And so the black student told me that she would like for me to go with her to a social, a dance.  And I thought oh, I can't do that.  I told her, I said I'm married.  I'm, I can't do it.  Very beautiful woman.  I mean any, any guy would be, you know more than happy to have such an invitation.  But I said no, I can't do that, I, I'm married.  And I remember her crying and running out.  And I thought why is that?  Why does such a, a beautiful woman have this kind of reaction?  So the next day I remember going out on the campus and looking around and I didn't see any black faces.  Now when I went to do for physics, I didn't, I didn't go to see other black faces.  I went, I went to do physics.  I didn't care who was there, I just wanted go into some physics.  Saw hardly any black face, and the ones I saw didn't speak.  And I'd say hello and nobody was speaking and I thought how odd.  This was very odd to me.  College is supposed to be a place where you, you have a good time, at least my experience has been that way and--but also a place to learn.  And so this started me investigating why it was.  And so it turns out that there was only about thirty students, maybe thirty-two black students on the campus at that time.  And they were very unhappy.  They felt very discriminated against and so I met with them, so we organized ourselves.  And the physics department was very supportive of me.  All, almost--I can't think of a professor there that who, who was not.  There may have been but they haven't surfaced.  I can think of a couple who on the border, but, but it was generally very, very supportive of what I was doing, trying to do.  And so anyway we, we started organizing ourselves and so I started doing politics there and organizing into a black student organization.  So we, we petitioned the university to, to set up a, a student club called the 'Black Student Organization'.  And it met with a lot of resistance.  So, so for the next year, year and a half, I did a lot of politics and the end result was that we got the student organization called the Black Student Organization.  It's still, still going today.  I think we got it chartered in, in, in '69 [1969] I believe.  And I became the first president of the, of the organization.  And it was--I had my life threatened a couple of times.  It was--let me, let me tell you about that in a little bit.  This was all in the midst of trying to learn some physics, more physics.  And I even got to the point where I was starting to get radical.  I was so radicalized that, that I threatened--it was a, there was a--William and Mary would play The Citadel [The Military College of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina] in football games and they--William and Mary always played 'Dixie', 'Wish I Was in Dixie' [song].  It was, it was a, it was a tradition for the, for the, for the university.  And this particular time they're going to play The Citadel.  And it was also another southern tradition.  And so I, I threatened, I led a group of people who threatened to burn Confederate flags every time they played 'Dixie', we were going to burn them.  In fact I used to use Confederate flags as snot, as a snot rag.  It really got people pissed off on that campus.  They were just not happy with that.  But there were a lot of people who were very, very amused and, and they were supporters and I still have those friends today.  Those are still very good, honored friends.  But it turns out that they didn't play Dixie at that game.  Every state trooper in the state was there I'm sure, it looked like it.  And they didn't play.  We didn't burn any flags, it was peaceful.  And but we got a lot of change happening there.  So, so that was a, a big part, another part of my life when I was--my first two years at, at William and Mary.
Story_ID: 26202
Speaker 1: So even with your family [Buck's wife and son] there [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] and all that, you were involved in the organizing of a, the organization of a black student organization, group.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, I was, I was, I was helping the, to, to found a, a new organization and the Black Student Organization was it.  And I was exhausted after that.  I got a master's degree and a--I did get a master's degree [M.S. degree on experimental and theoretical plasma physics]  One course while I was doing all the politics, was a course in quantum mechanics and I had, I got an incomplete in that because I, I was off doing my politics.  And I made up the incomplete one summer by doing every problem in the back of the book.  The book called Schiff [book on quantum muchanics by Leonard I. Schiff].  So I did every problem and the professor says okay, you're going to make--do every problem in the back of this book.  So I'd see him, you know every few days, come in with new problems; I would work them out.  I learned a lot of quantum mechanics that summer.  And so I ended up getting a master's degree in summer, in the spring of 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was burned out and I was--you know there was, there was also that spring the Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] shootings and the Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] shootings.  And the Jackson State shootings didn't get enough attention at William and Mary than I thought it should have.  So I was very, very insistent that something be done for those, for the, for the memory of those students cause we worked really hard for the Kent State students.  But people were tired in some ways.  But also was, it was black kids that got killed.  You know not white kids who got killed.  These were black kids at Jackson State.  And I had given up when the William and Mary people were helping with Jackson State.  I remember going to Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] listening to a Black Panther [Black Panther Party, a black revolutionary socialist organization active in the United States from 1966 until 1982] meeting there at Ogden Hall.  And coming back and to my delight there was candles, a candlelight service organized in front of the Student Union at William and Mary for the Jackson State kids.  I thought my goodness, this place is something.  I mean this place, I, I can learn physics here, they give me a lot of freedom, I'm doing some positive things for people.  What more could a body want, you know?  And but I, I did leave, dropped out after the master's and I applied to go to--I thought I'd go to graduate school with a black, a black, a black students, so I applied to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] again.  And this time they accepted me, right.  So I got a letter saying okay you come, you can finish your Ph.D. here.
Story_ID: 26203
Speaker 1: I got to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and turns out that they didn't have anything for me.  So the letter I got [accepting Buck into the Ph.D. program in physics] was, was I don't know, it was fake or whatever it was, but it wasn't real.  I didn't have a fellowship.  There was no office for me.  There was no support for me at all.  And I, I walked away.  I just, I just said this is--last time I'm gone apply to you guys.  You guys--I'm never going to see you guys again, forget it.  I don't care what you do, I'm not going to Howard.  And I was just up to, up to my, up to my neck in, in just rejections from Howard and I thought that's, that's just not right.  So went to my high school.  Went to my high school coach at Spingarn [High School, Washington, D.C.], talked to my, my track and he says you should go to Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland].  They've got a, they've got some, some jobs there, go over there.  So I went over there and, and got a teaching job there teaching mathematics.  And while I was there, I met an old high school friend who was a Black Panther [Black Panther Party, a black revolutionary socialist organization active in the United States from 1966 until 1982].  And he wanted me to join the Panther party and I was very close in joining the Black Panther Party.  I was going to go to a meeting one night, it was planned.  He drove Huey Newton [co-founder of the Black Panther Party]. When Huey Newton came to town, Bernard used to drive him, drive, drive, drive Huey around.  And--but I didn't like the guns.  I liked the, the free lunch programs, I liked helping people, but I didn't like all the guns and so I didn't go that night.  I decided I'm not going to go, I'm not going to join the party.  And the D.C. police raided the headquarters that night.  Some shots were fired but nobody was hurt.  And it just sort of said to me I'm not doing that.  That's, that's not the way to go to.  I mean it sobered me up quite a bit now so I, I wasn't as radicalized as I had been.  So what did I do?  I went and bought a sailboat.  So I bought, bought a little sailboat, fifteen-foot sailboat.  I, I, I had been watching these boats at Hains Point out here on the Potomac River for all my life.  And I thought you know I'm going to go down to the water and just see what happens at the water cause I always feel better when I get around water and, and ran into some people there at the Washington Sailing Marina and they, they'd take me out for a sail.  And I enjoyed it and so I ended up buying a boat.  Nine hundred dollars later I had a, had a boat.  My own boat and I had to learn how to sail it.  And that happened in the fall of 1970.  And, and so in the meantime, so I was teaching my mathematics and staying somewhat in tune with that.  But I wasn't doing any physics and I was kind of missing physics.  So--but I had sailing to learn, so I was learning sailing.  And so I was racing boats.  I was racing I thought how--how, how best to learn than to race cause the tension is there and I can learn some, some tricks, how to go fast.  And that's where I ran into my, my good buddy Bob Toler who helped me a lot.  And so I was in B Fleet, there's A Fleet and B Fleet.  A Fleet was the best fleet, best racers and B was the beginners.  So I was in B Fleet.  And was racing that fall.  I was in the water every day.  As long as the temperature was above 40 [degrees, Fahrenheit], I was on my boat.  So every day I was there.  Not a week went by where I wasn't on my boat sailing.  1970, winter 1970, '71 [1971].  And--
Speaker 2: So, so now are you still married at this time, or--
Speaker 1: No.  So my--the marriage broke up.  So when I, when I, when I left master's degree [in experimental and theoretical plasma physics at the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], the marriage broke up.  And so it just, just wasn't working.  And I knew it didn't work, you know a year earlier, but we had this son and, Eric, and I could tell you more about that in just, just a little bit.
Story_ID: 26204
Speaker 1: So you're teaching math and sailing at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was doing math, teaching math at Bowie State and, and at the same time I was learning how to sail and I had this, this Albacore, fifteen-foot open day sailor that I learned to sail.  And this club was a very good club.  The sailing club was one of the best in the country.  And, and so we went to the nationals.  I, I was asked to crew for--I wasn't good enough to sail in the nationals, actually it was the world championship in Toronto, Canada.  And--but I crewed for another guy and it was eighty boats, it was eighty boats in this, this tournament, this regatta.  And our guys got the--we were--there were three, the top ten in the world of the top there was four of us, four of our, our, our club members placed.  So the highest was second.  Maybe it was first or second, it was in there.  So it was a good club.  And, but that was the first time I had gone, left the country was to go to Canada on the--sailing at Toronto, at Toronto, the Royal, the Royal, it was the--what do you call it?  The Toronto Yacht Club.  It was on an island off Toronto with a launch and everything, the whole nine yards, which was really interesting for me.  But that spring we have--we have a spring regatta in Tampa, Florida.  And so we, we had it--at that point trailer our boats from, from here in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] down to Tampa.  And so Bob Toler, my friend Bob Toler called me up one night and said that the Tampa Bay people said I couldn't, I couldn't sail out of there because I was black.  And he asked me did I want to go sailing there.  And I said yeah, I want to go with the club.  He says okay, I'll call you back.  So a couple of hours later he calls me back and he says Warren, I've talked to the club members and they, they tell me that if you can't sail, they're not sailing.  And these are some of the best in the world.  And I--he says do you still want to go?  I said well I'm with the club.  So, so Bob negotiated with the Tampa people, said well if he doesn't sail, we don't sail.  They said okay, we'll let him sail.  So I went to Tampa Bay and I was the first black sailor out of Tampa Bay.  And Arthur Ashe had just been there, the tennis player.  He was the first black athlete out of Tampa, to, to play at Tampa Yacht Club.  And so I was the first sailor there.  And so that was a, that was a, a interesting thing.
Speaker 1: So this is 1970--
Speaker 2: That was 1971.
Speaker 1: '71 [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1971.
Speaker 1: So you integrated the Tampa Yacht Club.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, so that was, that was a fun thing.
Story_ID: 26205
Speaker 1: But in the meantime I wanted to go back to physics and so I--
Speaker 2: You were trying to get into graduate school at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  You said you were rejected there.
Speaker 1: I was rejected at Howard, so--but [The College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] had held my fellowship for me.  And so I went back to William and Mary, they welcomed me with open arms.  So I said well this is, this must be home, this got to be home.  So I stayed there and, and--
Speaker 2: Now who was--let me ask you.  I didn't ask the first time, who is Professor Frederick Rudolph Crownfield?
Speaker 1: He was, he was my advisor in my plasma physics experiment.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he was--my first two years there he was, he was my advisor.  So Fred, Fred Crownfield.  And I can tell many, many, many, many stories about those days.  But I, I have a, I have a strong will and, and, and I, I, and I'm pretty competent in a lot of different things and so it's--and I try to wear it well.  I try not to overuse it, but I--Fred was a, he was a micromanager and a good guy.  But he used to look over my shoulder every day, every, every--seemed like every hour he'd come in and say what you doing, what you doing, what you doing?  And you know, and I just felt bugged all the time.  So he--I had my first talk I'd ever given in physics at there and some faculty and students were there and I was talking about my, my, my research.  And it seemed like every five minutes he was interrupting me.  You know, but you didn't remember this, or you didn't--so I said Fred, you know this better than I do.  I folded my book up.  I said--gave it to him, you give the talk.  I can't make mistakes.  I mean if I'm going to talk, let me make my own mistakes and learn from them, you know.  But he was interrupting me, and I walked out of the room.  The students said Warren, you're, you're done.  You know he was a big professor, you're, you're finished.  You, you can't take the qual--when you take the qualifying exam, you're going to fail.  They're not going to let you go any further than this.  And I thought I could only get a master's degree.  I was lucky to get a master's degree [in experimental and theoretical plasma physics].  So I went back to my office, to my lab office and started packing, packing up my stuff, saying you know he's going to kick me out.  He walks in the door and he says Warren, I didn't, I didn't know I affected you so.  And he sat down and we started talking, and we became really good friends.  I never worked for him again, but we became very good friends and he helped me a lot throughout my career.  It was Fred Crownfield, so--and he was, he actually got arrested when he went to Russia, he was one of the inventors, early inventors of, of radar.  And so he got, he was--his wife ran away with a Russian physicist, this was a Soviet physicist.  And he was in Russian--in Soviet jail for some months.  Anyway long stories.  I have a lot, I have a lot of stories about a lot of things.  But Fred, that was Fred Crownfield.
Story_ID: 26206
Speaker 1: So I went back after sailing at Tampa Yacht Club [Tampa, Florida], went back to [The College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] in the fall and started working with Franz Gross, Professor Gross.  It was really exciting.  He did a lot of relativity, he did--he, he mixed relativity with, with quantum mechanics.  And those are two of my favorite subjects so we, we, we got along very well and he, he and I are still good friends to, to, to this day we've stayed in touch over the, over the decades.  So that, that work was on relativistic deuteron wave functions, so--
Speaker 2: Now explain that.  Now what, what is a deuteron wave function?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: Relativistic interactions.  That's the title of your--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's the title of the dissertation ['Deuteron Wave Functions with Relativistic Interactions'].  The--a deuteron is, is the smallest nucleus that we have is a proton, nuclear, nucleus, we think of nuclei, is a proton.  And if you add a neutron, that's also another nucleus.  And so a deuteron is proton/neutron pair.  So they, they're together.  And if you look at the periodic table, the nuclei are a bunch of protons and neutrons.  And the radioactive nuclei have always more neutrons than protons.  Cause neutrons by themselves are unstable when they're, when they're free, they decay.  It's called beta decay.  They, they--it's a very famous decay process.  And neutrons decay into a proton and, and a, and a, a, a electron and something called an anti-neutrino.  But the deuteron itself is a proton-neutron pair, and the neutron pair with a proton is very stable.  So the lifetime of a proton, of a deuteron is the same as the lifetime of a proton.  So they stick together.  So when, so when you think about a atom, electrons and protons, they stick together because opposite charges, so you have this Coulomb interaction [electrostatic interaction between electrically charged particles], which is, which we know.  And they stick together because they attract each other.  You know we learn this early on that opposite charges attract and like charges repel.  And so this is why they stick together.  But with neutron has no electrical charge, how does it stick to something that has an electrical charge?  So this is a source of the neu-the nuclear force.  So understanding the deuteron gives you a window into the nuclear force.  So, so, so there what you have is--so, so to understand this nuclear force, you, you, you want to understand the probability of finding the deuteron in certain spots, certain areas of, of momentum distribution.  So the momentum meaning that they rotate around each other and they move around each other in all sorts of ways.  They don't just sit there static, but they have a movement.  So it's a momentum distribution.  So these wave functions really are--were a, a--is a way of describing this momentum distribution.  And the relativity part of it is that they not only moving around each other, but they're moving really, really fast.  So it's, it's really like a, a--they're moving at near the speed of light.  So it's relativistic, but it's, it's so, so you combine these two things and to see if there's any effect, relativistic effect.  And we found, found that there was a relativistic effect.
Speaker 2: So you need special equipment to detect this.  I mean the reason why you know this cause you have like equipment that can de--detect this movement, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, to, to detect these things, so what I did was theory.  So what I did--ended up being a theorist and left the experimental plasma experiment and went to nuclear theory.  But the, the, the laboratories that test these things are accelerators.  This is what, this is why accelerators get built to, to test these things.  And so you can find--so you want to take these wave functions, these, these momentum distributions, and put them into interactions where you can break them apart, you break the proton away from the neutron, or you have another particle striking the deuteron and another proton for example, striking the deuteron and see what the scattering process may be.  Look, look for that in laboratory.  That help--wave functions are, are integral parts of, of that kind of process as well.
Story_ID: 26207
Speaker 1: So the beauty of physics--the real beauty of physics is that you have theory and you have experiment.  Now some people would argue that, that, that you don't need that to do physics.  But I claim that you, you do physics that way.  I mean you might do mathematics with just theory, that's fine.  But you always want to test something, you know.  It's, it's not good enough to see the boats out there sailing.  You have to get in the boat and move the boat and see how it works.  Then you say ah, now I know how it sails.  You can see it, you can see it from a distance and you say it's moving, I know--I can, I can do that.  But when you actually get in there, you get challenged in different ways.
Speaker 2: It's like knowing about something.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, and actually experiencing it.
Speaker 1: Yes, or knowing the words, but not knowing the meaning.  So, so we have to have both of them together and that's what this is all, that's what physics, that's what physics is for me is a, is a--is combining those things.  You know, understanding the language, the words, the theory, the, the forces that are in play, but also seeing how they, how they measure out.  You know how does it measure out in the lab?  You know how does it, how does it work?  How does it, how does it realize itself in a, in a laboratory?
Story_ID: 26208
Speaker 1: Now who--where was the first accelerator, you know, fabricated?
Speaker 2: That was Lawrence [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California], Lawrence made that in, and gosh I don't know the year.  This is something I should know I think, but I don't remember the year.  It had to be in the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s] maybe, '40s [1940's], '50s [1950s], something like that.
Speaker 1: Before the atom was split.
Speaker 2: Well the atom was split--so splitting the atom was easier to view it in cathode ray tubes, actually.  So this was, this was done back in 1800s, 1880, 1880, 1898.  When the electron was discovered in 1898, you could, you could separate the electrons from the protons.  They didn't, they, they, they--that's when they called them electrons, but that was being done even before that, that discovery.  To split the, to split the, the beams.  So these, these cathode ray tubes were you know, in different sizes of them and they--the old, the old TV sets.  They had this--the, the tube--that's a cathode ray tube.  So the old TV sets are--that's all they are.
Speaker 1: The actual screen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the screen is just the, just the, just the front part of the, of the bulb.  So there's this kind of round bulb and it's sort of flat.  It's not, it's not spherical, but it's oval.  And it is a, it is a, a kind of cylindrical thing behind it.  So this, the globe part is where you split the, split the electrons and put them in different angles with respect to the, respect to the, the horizontal.  So you put them in different angles and different positions there.  So that's, that's the technology to direct the electrons.  So--and the electrons carry current and when they, and when they--when you move them, they give off light.  And that light has different wavelengths and so you can get color and different intensities depending on how many electrons you can do for that particular wavelength.  So it's really kind of--it's kind of fun to understand that stuff and this is what I, I feel physics is all about.
Story_ID: 26209
Speaker 1: So I was doing this, doing this work with deuterons, and then I, I--when I finished my [Ph.D.] dissertation [titled, 'Deuteron Wave Functions with Relativistic Interactions', at The College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] , I went to Stony Brook [The State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook, New York] for a post-doc.  And--
Speaker 2: Now when did you--what were your findings when you, when you, you know--what were the findings of your dissertation?
Speaker 1: So I found that--so, so up to that point, the, the world knowledge was that the wave functions--there's something called a hard core for the nuclear force.  That is to say that, that the neutron and proton will get attracted to each other through this nuclear force.  And when they get close, they would, they would bounce, they would stay there.  They wouldn't, they wouldn't go through each other; they wouldn't be able to move through.  There was a hard core that they were solid like, like billiard balls.  And so the wave function could never go to zero.  So that means that they couldn't overlap completely.  So the, the world knowledge was that the wave function stopped about half of a Fermi--one Fermi is ten to the minus fifteen meters--and they would stop.  So the wave function had a, a note in it.  So it was like, you know, that was, that was it.  But what we discovered, what I discovered was that the wave function could go to zero if you think about the relativity.  So it was a smooth curve, it went right to zero.  So the, so the actual neutron and proton really do overlap.  They don't, they don't just sit there and, and, and do nothing; they overlap.  And so nowadays we know that very well there's quarks, and the quarks live inside there, and the quarks make up the proton and neutron.  So they're--they overlap too.  So they are, they are bags of quarks that overlap and that's, that's where we see it.  So there's, there's this result I had gotten was really heralding in this business of the neutron and proton are not, are not solid.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right and be--before then, that wasn't really--it wasn't--
Speaker 1: Before that point there was nobody doing that.  Nobody was taking that stand.  So it was really kind of cool.
Story_ID: 26210
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and, and so, so I gave my first talk for this, for the deuteron stuff [Buck's doctoral dissertation titled 'Deuteron Wave Functions with Relativistic Interactions'] at American Physical Society [APS] meeting, a ten minute talk.  And so my dad [Warren Wesley Buck, Junior] went, you know he came.  He came, he left work and came and, and he had, he had a habit of doing things like that.  He shows up at these things you know and he told me he, he says look, I'll, I'll come but I may have to leave early because I got to go back to work.  So I said okay.  So I gave my little talk, and there was a few questions afterwards and then I saw him get up just before the questions.  You know he got up.  And so I thought you know, and I had a couple of questions that didn't last long.  So I ran out to try to catch him, you know before he got in the car.  And when I opened the door, and the lights were out there.  He had his cameras set up.  He was taking, taking movies of me.  I was totally shocked, you know I thought, you know I thought he was gone from the building.  But he had--he went out and set up his camera.  And so, so afterwards my, my other colleague says, "Are you going to be in Ebony magazine, you know?"  And I said, "No, no, it's just my dad, it's just my dad taking pictures."
Story_ID: 26211
Speaker 1: So, so that job got me, that job got me a, a, a--that work [Ph.D. dissertation titled 'Deuteron Wave Functions with Relativistic Interactions'] got me a job at Stony Brook.
Speaker 2: This is State University of New York at Stony Brook [New York].
Speaker 1: Stony Brook, now, now called Stony Brook University.
Speaker 2: This is a post-doctoral--
Speaker 1: This is post-doctoral work.  And, and before this so I had applied for, for jobs when I got my Ph.D. [degree] I applied for jobs.  And nobody--there was no jobs.  Nobody hired me.  So I went to, what did I do?  I went to the Bahamas to go sailing.  So I went sailing.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute now, are we skipping over the post-doc?
Speaker 1: No, not yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not yet we're--I'm not at the post-doc yet.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: We're gone get back to the post-doc.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was, this was, this was just after I got my Ph.D.
Speaker 2: So this is 1970--
Speaker 1: This is 1976.
Speaker 2: '76 [1976], okay.
Speaker 1: So the spring of 1976 I went to the Bahamas.  And, and went for--I think a couple of weeks, took a break and went to the Bahamas.  And stayed with my friends Ron and Jean Chapman.  There's a big stories with those guys, they were just influential in my life in so many different ways.  I had so many mentors of all sorts of, all sorts of areas, and they were big for life experiencing.  So when I came back from, from, from there, they were actually building a house on an island in the Bahamas, right with no electricity, no running water.  Anyway it was very, very, very pioneering work.  Came back and there was offers--those were the days of telegraphs, telegraphs.  So I had this telegraph.  And I was the first, I was the first black Ph.D. in physics at [The College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia], and the second black Ph, Ph.D. over in their whole career--in their whole lives.  And, and the first one--I, I got the second degree like I think a year after the first one.  I didn't even know I was running for a first, first or second, but anyway it turned out that way.  So this telegraph was from Stony Brook.  I had applied to Stony Brook but they rejected me.  And they said an opening has happened.  We'd like for you to come up, you know as soon as possible.  So great, so I had a job.
Story_ID: 26212
Speaker 1: So went to Stony Brook [University, Stony Brook, New York] and I think it was 11,000 dollars a year job, post-doc.  And with a, with a girlfriend.  And we got married the next year at Stony Brook, Linda Horn.  And had an amazing time at Stony Brook.  So right away I got put on a project that was on antimatter, matter-antimatter interactions.  And basically you do these wave functions again, these nuclear wave functions in a special way.  And so it was really quite nice to make a, have a--it's a transformation that you make, a mathematical transformation that you make on the, on the theoretical construct of the, of the potential.  And, and voila! You have matter/antimatter interaction going.  So did these calculations with a fellow from Paris [France] and a fellow from Brookhaven National Lab [Upton, New York], Carl Dover at Brookhaven who became a big mentor for me.  And (unclear) at Paris and so we had the world's best nuclear potentials at our, at our call.  Of course the people from, from Bonn, Germany thought theirs was the best, but we, we thought we had the best ones.  And, and we could look at all the different ways of theory would predict these nuclear antinuclear interactions and come with--come up with a, an average.  Kind of like a, a model independent study they'd call it so that we'd find out what things are--what characteristics are common to all of them.  And then, and then we couldn't get the paper published.  And we tried and tried and tried.  And finally got it published, and the moment we got it published, everybody wanted a copy.  It was a, it was a blockbuster hit.  It was really quite, quite nice.
Speaker 2: Something that really stretched what people thought, thought they knew at that time?
Speaker 1: They thought they knew what they were doing.  I always seem to get caught up in things where nobody knows what they're--haven't done before.  I seem to find these things, these areas where nobody's been before and I love that, actually love that kind of--
Speaker 2: Let's kind of slow this down a minute and tell us like what did you, what did, did you all find that other people didn't know?
Speaker 1: So we were the, we were the only ones, we were the first and only ones who could, could give a good description of what the bound states would be.  So for example with the deuteron, there's only one bound state.  With the, with the atoms, with the, the hydrogen atom for example, there's a lot of bound states.  That is to say that the electron and the proton in the atom stay together no matter what the excitation is.  Well it's not no matter what the excitation is, but this is a large range of excitations you can give to the hydrogen atom, and it still stays bound.  For a deuteron, you can only have one excitation and it will break apart.  So this is--it's very delicate.  With the, with the nucleon, antinuclear atomic state or nuclear states, there was many, many, many states.  Not quite as many as the, as the, as the elect--as they hydrogen atom, but a lot of states.  And they're deeply bound.  So instead of being repulsive when they get close, they're attractive when they get close.  So it's really very strong, very powerful forces.  And of course there's also annihilation part of it.  It can annihilate, there's a huge annihilation cross-section which means it--the--once they get to a certain point and slow down, then become at rest, they just blow up.  And they break up into a bunch of proton, excuse me, pions and photons, so it's a lot of, a lot of energy coming out.  And basically it, it has, it has about 100 to 1,000 times more energy in the interactions than the regular nuclear force.  So it's very powerful, a very powerful interaction.  And here I was working on this, so, so we worked on it and published a nice paper on it.
Story_ID: 26213
Speaker 1: And so when it was published [Buck's post-doctoral research on matter and anti-matter interactions, at Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], the scientific community was excited about it.
Speaker 2: They're excited and, and just as we were publishing the quarks were coming into play, the corks were coming in, so there was the MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] bag model that came in and they were working at it from a different angle.  And came up some with some of the similar states, but some different, different states with quarks.  So this, this--so the quark model started to explain.  But then we went to the laboratory and they can't find these states, couldn't find them.  And I remember my mother [Mildred George Buck Talford], my mother finally got to Europe.  She had never been out of the country and she went to Europe when I was living in Paris [France], actually after Stony Brook.  And I was at the University of Paris and at the lab called--there was Orsay [University of Paris' Division de Physique Theorique, Institut de Physique Nucleaire, Orsay, France], Orsay which is south of south of France, south of Paris.  She came over and went to CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research] in Switzerland , in Geneva.  And we were taking a tour, one of my friends whose running the, running the experimental coordinator for CERN, Kirk Killian, met us and took us around and gave us a, a tour of the experimental facilities.  And so we got to this group and who I didn't recognize the folks.  And my mother says and what are you doing?  My mother always spoke very good diction, you know.  And they said well we're working, we're, we're trying to prove the theories of your son.  And I was floored.  I thought oh my goodness, they're--these guys are using CERN to try to find my states.  And I thought this is big.  So, so I was a little happy, you know but we--nobody found anything.  So searching for years, nothing, so--but I think it's a good theory.  I think it's a good theory, just we have to find better ways to, to make these measurements.  So, but we'll see what happens in the next decade.
Speaker 1: Theoretically as a calculation it works, but it didn't work as a--
Speaker 2: Didn't work, didn't work as a--
Speaker 1: In the lab.
Speaker 2: Right, so therefore it's, it's on the shelf.  You know it's like it's, it's, it's not quite--it's physics, but it's not quite physics yet.  I mean it hasn't been realized in the laboratory.  So it's right now it's theory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a, that was a big project I worked on their which was really--that was exciting, that was a very exciting project.  At Stony Brook, it was at Stony Brook and at Orsay.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so this is--we're, we're at now we're at 1980?
Speaker 2: That was 1976 to '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1976 to '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually Orsay, I was at Orsay from '79 to '80 [1980].  So I went, I went from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay.
