Story_ID: 3181
Speaker 1: My name is Jodi Merriday, and I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  The videographer today is Scott Searns--Scott Stearns.  Present and observing today are no one other than the three people mentioned.  Could you state your name and the spelling of your name at birth?
Speaker 2: Michael Anthony Battle, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, B-A-T-T-L-E, Battle.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any other names, nicknames or otherwise that you're known by?
Speaker 2: Well, in the military I was known by Lieutenant Colonel Battle.  Here [on the job at Interdenominational Theological Center] I'm known as President Battle.  The only nickname is Mike, Mike Battle.
Speaker 1: And when is your birthday?
Speaker 2: My birthday is July the 28, born in 1950 in the great city of St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And your current age?
Speaker 2: Current age is 53, pushing 54 extremely hard, yeah.
Speaker 1: And country of birth?
Speaker 2: Country of birth, U.S.A.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently President of the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, Georgia, commonly known as ITC, which is one of the most unique theological centers in the country.  There are six different denominational seminaries that make up ITC.  There is Gammon Theological Seminary which is United Methodist, Phillips Graduate School of Religion [Phillips School of Theology] which is Christian Methodist [Episcopal], CME, Turner Theological Seminary, which is African Methodist Episcopal, Johnson C. Smith Theological Seminary, which is Presbyterian and Charles H. Mason [Theological Seminary], which is the only Church of God in Christ accredited theological seminary in the world, and then you have Morehouse Graduate School of Religion [Morehouse School of Religion] which is Baptist.  And in addition to those six denominations, we have a Lutheran Center [The Lutheran Theological Center in Atlanta, LTCA] that caters to Lutheran students.  At ITC, they function as a consortia, and as President of ITC, my responsibility is to make sure that the academic program of all of the theological seminaries are functioning in a consortia arrangement.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 22, 2004.
Speaker 1: Precisely.  And the location of the interview?
Speaker 2: The location of this interview is at ITC in the President's office, 700 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 3182
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Good Lord, I, I love food, salmon is my favorite fish.  Fricassee chicken is my favorite chicken.  So--and, Key lime pie is the best dessert in the world for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn, when the weather is brisk and the leaves are turning and the academic year is in process.  That's my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.  I've never thought about a favorite color before.  So probably blue, yeah, I think.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation location?
Speaker 2: Gambia, in, in Africa.  Senegal and Gambia, swimming on the Pink Lake [Lac Rose, or Retba Lake, Senegal] is a favorite spot for me.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: "Such is life" is my favorite saying.
Story_ID: 3183
Speaker 1: Could you begin by stating the name of your parents?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Jesse Battle and my mother is Mary Ann Battle.  Her maiden name was Evans.  And my father was born in a little town in Mississippi.  I don't even know if the town still exists.  It was called Bothwell [Greene County] Mississippi.  And my mother was born in a place called Minter City [LeFlore County], Mississippi.  And they met in Grenada [Grenada County], Mississippi where my grandfather pastored a church.  And my mother was member of my grandfather's church.  And that's how my mother and father met.
Speaker 1: Could you state the name of your siblings in birth order?
Speaker 2: Okay, Bobbie Jean Battle [Alexander], Betty Louise Battle, Jesse Battle, Jr., Michael Anthony Battle, myself, and the fourth in, in the group, Carol Jane Battle [Barnes], David Leroy Battle, Deborah Lenore Battle [Bland], Regina Diane Battle [Fowler], Brenda Ann Battle, Philip Battle and Angela Marie Battle.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I can trace my ancestors probably for at least four generations.  And the reason for the ease of that is that in the four generations there has been at least two sons in the family who have become minister.  Many more have become but minimally two sons in the family have become ministers.  My father pastored in St. Louis and was a bishop in the Midwestern District Council of the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World.  My grandfather [Nathaniel Battle] pastored a Church of God in Christ church in Grenada, Mississippi, which now bears his name.  It's called Battle Temple Church of God in Christ.  And his father pastored a Baptist church in Mississippi and his father was a Baptist minister in Mississippi.  And beyond that, I'm not sure, but there have--I, I do know the, the lineage of, of the ministers in the family.
Speaker 1: Do you know what the origin of the family members that you mentioned was?
Speaker 2: Origin in, in terms of?
Speaker 1: Ethnicity, culture?
Speaker 2: Well, the--
Speaker 1: Mixtures?
Speaker 2: Obviously, if you look at my pigmentation, at some point there was something other than full African involved in the process.  And there, there are several rumors about what happened four or five generations ago during the time of slavery.  But there were the times when slave masters visited without permission, African women and had children thereby.  So there is some Irish way back in the background, but my family has always maintained its African American, a hundred percent solidness, in spite of the fact that there is a lessening of pigmentation in, in skin tonation.
Speaker 1: And in your recollection, do you know which of the family members that you mentioned were enslaved or free?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--in fact, I have a, a picture of one of my great uncles who was my grandfather's older brother.  He was not a slave, but his, their father was a slave.  And then they became sharecroppers.  But my great uncle had been the longest living relative of my grandfather.  And he recently died the last, several years ago.  There were horrible stories that, that he would articulate about what it was like, one generation out of slavery.
Speaker 1: Could you share perhaps, one of those stories that he shared with you that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it--it was not a pleasant thing.  And that, that's the tragedy of it all.  But it had to do with, with wives of, of, of family members who were forced to have relationship with, with slave owners and the owners of the plantations on which the sharecropping took place.  And that was--and I wouldn't talk about that had he not been deceased now.  And, and so was, his wife back then, she's also deceased.  But it, it, it's, it was that kind of trauma which would always bring tremendous anger.  And another interesting thing, with my father, in terms of why he had to leave Mississippi.  A white man had called my mother a liar.  And my father was about nineteen at the time.  They, they got married young.  And he went to the man's house that night and called him out and said, I don't care who you are, nobody calls my wife a liar.  And so what happened was, they let him go.  He left the porch, you know, but that same night, the [Ku Klux] Klan was gonna hang my father.  And since my grandfather pastored a church, the members of his church found out that the plan was to lynch my father for having challenged this white man who called my mother a liar.  And so they developed an underground railroad, and my father and mother were taken from one house to another house until they crossed the line of Mississippi and left Mississippi, and went to St. Louis [Missouri].  And that's how my father ended up going to St. Louis.  My father, my mother and my older sister [Bobbie Jean Battle] had to leave Mississippi because my father refused to allow someone to insult his young wife.  So those are the kind of horrifying stories that were created in that context.
Speaker 1: Are there any legends or songs or additional stories that have been passed down in your family?
Speaker 2: There are no songs that I know of that have been passed down, but there are stories about my father's youth and the kinds of things that he engaged in, in the process of growing up.  And my uncle [Rev. Walter L. Battle], who was my father's older brother, was the first one in the family to make it up North.  And he left Mississippi and went to Minnesota and became a pastor in Minnesota and also operated a, a barber shop.  He was somewhat of a major folk legend in the sense that he developed extremely excellent relationships that bridged some of the racial divides in, in Mississippi.  And we always have and always will continue to revere him even though he's, he's now deceased [since 1995].
Story_ID: 3184
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories are when I was, oh, about four years old, I remember playing excessively, and I was born with what was called a ventricular septic deviation, which is a hole between the left ventricle and the right ventricle of the heart.  And back then--when I was born in 1950, you know, being a poor black kid growing up in St. Louis [Missouri], there was no serious expectation that I would survive the ventricular septic deviation.  So the surgery which normally happens when you're very young didn't happen, which then sews up the hole because they just figured well, you know, he's gonna die any way, so don't worry about.  And so I had my first heart attack at about four years old.  And, and I remember laying in the bed and everybody being all sad, figuring that that was the end of, of life for me.  And one of my aunts came down from Chicago [Illinois].  And what signaled that I had recovered was--now, I wasn't a bad kid, but what signaled that I had recovered, she asked me how did I feel?  And I said, I feel like punching you in the nose (laughter).  But the point was I, I was getting up.  And, and the strange thing happened, and, you know, I, I have a strong belief in the capacity of God and, and the capacity of God to do miraculous things.  So there was this, a radio preacher--because you didn't have T.V. preachers back then, there was this radio preacher by the name of A. A. Allen.  And he was doing this big old revival thing, and he was on the radio.  And I was four years old.  And he said something like, you know, if you believe, if you really believe that God can help you out, touch the radio.  So here I am four years old, everybody preparing that I was gonna, be the end of my life and all that stuff.  And so I reached over--and they wouldn't put me in the bed because I wasn't to be elevated, having had a heart condition at that time, having had a heart attack at the young--so I was laying on what was called a pallet, which was nothing but a blanket on the floor.  So I reached over and touched the radio.  And then instantly, I jumped up and ran to the next room.  And that's when my aunt went, (imitating raised voice shock) "Oh, how do you feel?"  I said, "I feel like punching you in the nose."  The point was I wanted to get back out and, and start playing again.  And that was an early memory.  I also remember my father [Jesse Battle] had a grocery store in St. Louis.  It was called Battle's Confectionary, right across the street from Lincoln Elementary School.  And I was active in the Drama Guild at Lincoln Elementary School.  And we would have these outside plays.  And my father would provide the sodas and the snacks for all of the outside activity at Lincoln Elementary School.  And that was a wonderful time, and they referred to him as 'Mr. Jesse' and some called him 'Uncle Jesse', but it was 'Mr. Jesse with the store'.  Now, one of the experiences growing out of that, in about 1957, urban renewal--and to this day, the reason, one of the reasons I have a negative opinion about some of the preliminary planning in urban renewal was that in that neighborhood, there was my father's store, which was black owned.  And he had a little, small restaurant adjacent to that store on another corner, black owned.  There was another grocery store around the corner from my father's store which was white owned.  But somehow when urban renewal came, it took my father's property, the store, the house and the restaurant and tore them down.  But the last store in that neighborhood left standing was the white-owned grocery store, right around the corner.  So it was allowed to remain until all of the other houses had been torn down.  But my father's store, which was a black-owned store was "renewed" out of existence through the urban renewal process.  And so I have accepted what some sociologists have, have claimed that urban renewal was actually "urban removal"of a lot of key black-owned business.  And, and that was a devastating blow, fiscally, to my father and, and the family.  And we moved then to another part of St. Louis, and he operated a shoe store that he didn't own.  But he operated a shoe store for a number of years after that.
Story_ID: 3185
Speaker 1: Can you describe your mother [Mary Ann Evans Battle] and your father [Jesse Battle] individually?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother is, again, from Mississippi, they met in Mississippi, and my mother is still alive; a very active, energetic, 78-year old; very calm disposition; never worked in her life.  My father always worked.  My mother drove a car one day in her life, and my father was teaching her how to drive.  And he would give these, things like turn here, turn there.  But what he would always mean was at the next corner.  So my mother interpreting his turn here in a very literal sense got annoyed because she--he would always say turn here, and she would get ready to turn, and say, no, I mean at the corner or at the next light.  So she said to him, "The next time you tell me to turn, I'm gonna turn."  So he said, Turn here," and she turned and hit a tree.  And so, she never attempted to drive anymore in her life.  She's a very warm person, very nurturing, stabilizing person and who wears hats.  Good Lord, you, you hear the stories of African American church women and the hats they wear.  In fact, there was a recent play about hats.  And my mother was one of the most, wore some of the most decorative hats in the world.  And all the time when I was growing up, I always knew what to get her for birthday or Christmas.  It was always a hat.  So when I was in college in Connecticut, a lady at the church that I served as an assistant when I was in, in undergraduate school, made hats.  And so every year, I would have this lady make a hat of odd design, and my mother would wear those hats with, with grace and skill.  And she still does to this day.
Speaker 1: Where were your parents from and who were their parents?
Speaker 2: My mother [born 1925] is from Mississippi.  As I indicated, she's from Minter City, I think it is, Mississippi, but she grew up in Grenada and Greenwood, Mississippi.  Her father was William Evans.  And he was born in 1890-something.  And her mother was Mary Ann Trotter Evans.  And my father's--my grandmother's nickname was 'Grandma Pinto.'  And there was a story that there was Indian blood in her, significant Indian blood in her, which accounts for my--the texture of my mother's hair and the texture of my grandmother's hair.  And, and my father's father was Nathanial Battle, who had pastored in Grenada, and his wife was Bessie Battle.  And they had eight children.  All of my grandfather's children, except my father moved to Minnesota.  So everybody went to Minnesota, and my father went only to St. Louis.  Those who went to Minnesota, went to Minnesota, they were able to plan their leaving Mississippi.  But since my father left Mississippi with some degree of haste, he could not plan his exit from this great State of Mississippi.  And he ended up settling in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Did they tell you any stories that have been passed on in the generations of your family?
Speaker 2: Stories of, of death, stories of hope, stories of joy.  I had one--well, one of my father's brothers drowned.  And--when he was young, and the, the story is that he did not actually drown, but he was, he was--he did not drown on his own.  He was at one of the lakes and had offended someone.  And back then, the death of another black person wasn't a major thing.  And, and he died in that regard.  My father was a rascal in some instances, very rebellious and became a--now, he's dead too, so it's okay to talk about it.  At one time, he was bootlegger, during the time of the probat--the Prohibition era and sold liquor and ran liquor.  And he ended up becoming a preacher, but he had days in his life when the Lord was not the major thing on his mind.  And so those, so those kind of stories emerged out of, out of family tradition.
Story_ID: 3186
Speaker 1: Are there any sights, sounds or smells that you recall from growing up?
Speaker 2: Yep, the dirt, and the red clay dirt in Mississippi.  Actually, people used to eat that red clay dirt, and I had from time to time growing up.  There, that was the old story that it was medicinal, that people would eat that red clay dirt and it would cure everything under the sun.  Whether it cured anything or not, is, is subject to question, but one of the interesting things about it was it was very--it, it created a quietly powerful aroma.  And people would use that red clay dirt and put it in, in cars and closets, and it would keep a, a reasonably fresh smell.  They, the law for education grew out of the constant badgering of my father on the necessity of education.  He had to leave school in third grade because, as a sharecropper, when the season for planting came and the season for harvest came, he always had to leave school.  And the farm at which he worked was right next door to the black school in that part of Mississippi.  And as a second grader and a third grader, when he was forced to come out of school to work the farm, he just never went back to school.  And he would always talk about the fact that had opportunity been afforded him, the things he would have done.  He, he wanted to do phenomenal things.  So we were forced in a wonderful way, I think, to cherish the power of a good, solid education.  So of the eleven children who remained alive with the youngest one having died, all have done exceedingly well.  Four, all four of the sons are minister, and in addition to, to being a minister, I'm now president of, of a major theological seminary [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and having taught at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] and at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] and having served as a vice president at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois].  One sister is a judge now in St. Louis [Missouri].  There's a CPA in the family, one of the sisters.  There are two other nurses who have Masters degrees, one of the Masters in Finance and she's in hospital administration.  The other with a Masters in Hospital Administration.  She's doing hospital administration.  Two others are nurses, practicing nurses and a school principal.  And it's an, it's an interesting process of, of hearing the stories of the denial of education, and how the stories of the denial of education then forced a commitment to education.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Who do you think you take after in your family?
Speaker 2: I was a, a bad child in the sense of being always engaged.  I remember the, the image of me growing up.  I was, it was real--it was sort of a tough image.  You know, when you grow up in St. Louis trying to love education and then going to large public schools.  And so there was this thing of having to be tough.  So I, I would, you know, in the early '50s [1950s] wear the leather jackets, you know, and the big collar up and all that kind of stuff, and was the kind of guy who would, would hang around.  But that was a persona.  That was done more for protection than anything else.  But deep down within, I would, I would study a lot, but then my schoolyard persona was a persona of being tough and cool and laid back and, and got in more fights than was reasonable for anybody to get in.  But part of that process was too that it also protected my younger sisters because it created this image that, you know, Mike is tough, so people don't mess with his sisters and all that kind of nonsense.  But it was part of, of the gamesmanship, I think.
Speaker 1: What were your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: My biggest dream was to live beyond the age of forty because I was always, you know, told that with ventricular septic deviation, that having survived the young age, that I would probably not make it beyond, by age forty.  So that was a great aspiration within itself, and then it was the process of trying to do as much as I could academically.  I initially wanted to do law, in part because I figured that was a good thing for an African American male to do.  It was an escape from, from the neighborhood.  It was an opportunity to contribute tremendously to society, and God had other plans.
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up in your hometown?
Speaker 2: In, in St. Louis, it--you know, interesting thing was that most of black sociologists have said about the black neighborhood being a ghetto.  In the 50s [1950s], it was not the case.  I think we bought into this illusion that the black neighborhood was a bad place.  In the mid-60s [1960s], when some African Americans began to earn an income and then left the black neighborhood, but in my early growing up, growing up in an all-black neighborhood in St. Louis was one of the most wonderful experiences you could ever find.  And I'll, I'll be more than happy to talk about that in more detail if you want.
Story_ID: 3187
Speaker 1: So you were discussing what it was like growing up in your hometown.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I was starting a context that, in light of the moving away from the black community that happened in the mid-60s [1960s] and beyond.  But when I grew up in St. Louis [Missouri] in the 1950s, I remember the experiences of a community that was extremely supportive where there was this notion of the "fictive kin."  Everybody was related to you, whether it was a biological connection or not.  The, the neighbors, if they were your age, were your cousins, and the older people were all your parents.  And people who were younger than you, you took a sense of responsibility for them.  We could go, in St. Louis, up and down 23rd Street, all hours of the day and all hours of the night.  There was no danger, there was no threat, there was no worry about safety.  People were outside playing.  Adults were outside moving up and down.  And the interesting thing is, you had all of the socio-economic levels of African American life in the same communities.  And I remember when we moved to Julian Street in St. Louis, my father was a minister.  Next door to us was a minister.  Across the street was a school teacher, two doors up from my father's house was a doctor.  There were laborers on, in the neighborhood, people who worked construction jobs.  Every level was in that neighborhood, so you could then grow up saying, you know, I could be a doctor because there's a doctor a couple of doors from me.  I could be a school teacher.  There's somebody across the street who's a school teacher, or I could do anything I want to do.  And then all of a sudden, African American people bought into the lie that a lot of non-black sociologists were telling us.  A couple of lies.  One lie was that our neighborhoods were dangerous places, that they were the kind of ghettos that everybody knew that you escaped from.  That was not the reality.  A second lie was that schools that were predominantly black were inherently inferior in terms of the kind of compassion that was given and the kind of education that was presented.  The only way they were inferior was that we did not have the more advanced scientific equipment in the science lab.  We did not have the, the more recent textbooks.  But in terms of developing the quality of the soul and the quality of spirit, the quality of the mind, those schools provided a solid foundational education.  And then the third lie was that they told us that African American people spent too much time in churches.  So we then moved from the neighborhood, left the predominantly black schools, stopped going to church and then start doing things like washing our boats on Sunday or washing our cars on Sunday because that's what you saw on T.V.  The people who had money didn't go to church on Sunday.  They did other kinds of things.  And then you had a denigration of the inner fabric of our communities.  You had the en, en, encroachment of the disintegration of families.  You had, where families became more and more dysfunctional, where the males then start leaving the home, and you had this whole scenario that church wasn't important, that somehow this self-hatred started developing, that if our neighborhoods are not good, if our schools are not good, then the best thing in life is to escape away from who we are.  But prior to that, there was this absolute commitment to making better our lives.  I remember growing up where the, the lead part in the plays, you had the lead parts in the plays.  You were forced in churches to recite with regularity, to articulate well, to read well, to get up and be able to, to do a speech with, without warning, without notice because some older person would come up to you and say, "Boy, what did you learn in school today?  Tell me about it."  And you learned how to talk with confidence, how to articulate well and how to be respectful of persons who were your seniors.  Integration, while a wonderful thing in many instances, also took away a phenomenal amount of the soul of African American life.  James Cone, for example, who in his works on black power and black theology, Cone said that whenever integration forces a subordination of one culture under another culture, under the pretext that the subordinated culture is less valued than the other culture, then it's the death of a culture.  And that is true.  Integration then meant--for example, when I grew up, there were black principals all over the place.  It had to be because there were black schools.  And then when integration came about, the black principal, they became the assistant, second Assistant and sometimes third assistant principal at the white school.  The, the teachers who were the chairs of the departments became the assistant, but you didn't have the white principals coming to a predominantly black--for instance, becoming the assistant principal to the black principal.  I remember in Hampton [Virginia] when I was [branch] president of  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I got in a lot of trouble in the City of Hampton because I argued before the school board that if there is going to be integration and busing, that I supported the notion of busing, but that there had to be busing of white kids into predominantly black neighborhoods, if there's gonna be busing of black kids into predominantly white neighborhoods.  And one neighborhood in, in Hampton got--was so annoyed with me that for months and months, I would not even drive through that particular area because my name was as good as mud.  But Hampton, the City of Hampton adopted a ten-year plan and a big--out of my leadership at NAACP--and that ten-year plan involved cross-bussing of black kids to predominantly white schools and white kids to predominantly black schools.  And I think to this day one of the reasons the school system is doing so well in Hampton is because you have that balance.  And it's, it's an interesting process.
Story_ID: 3188
Speaker 1: What was it like to attend church with your family?
Speaker 2: Boring in some instances, forced in other instances, and, and then there was a joy.  Now, let me tell you the, the time that was most frustrating was--I was a boxing fan.  Cassius Clay before he became Muhammad Ali, I loved him after he became Muhammad Ali as well.  But I remember when the fight with Sonny Liston, that real short fight where Cassius Clay, where Muhammad Ali knocked him out in like the first, less than a minute in the first round.  My father [Jesse Battle] made us go to church that night.  I was so angry because I knew that the fight was gonna be on the radio.  And so he drove slowly, you know, going to church, but, you know, all of the preliminary parts in the fight, and by the time the fight started, we had gotten to church and had to go in church.  And, and so, you know, I, I was sitting in church, you know, and, oh, God, let these people sing these songs and do these prayers real quick and let us get out of here.  Fortunately, though, my dad preached a real quick sermon cause he was also interested in the fight.  But he was thinking it was gonna go the whole fifteen yard--rounds.  So my brother and I left church early, went out to the car, turned the radio on, fight was over.  And then my dad comes out of church, "What happened? What happened? Here, how's the fight going?"  And I said, "Dad, it's over.  It was over in the first minute or so of the first round."  And so that day I hated church.  I hated church that day.  But other than that, it was, it was fun.  We stayed in church though.
Speaker 1: What were some of the churches that you recall attending--
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: --from your childhood into your young adulthood.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my father started pastoring when I was about nine.  So it was there.  Prior to then, it was this church in St. Louis [Missouri] called Lively Stone Church [of God].  It was a, a Phillip [Lee] Scott [founder of Lively Stone], Bishop Scott, probably--and not probably, but is, in fact, the most impression, impression-making minister in my life when I was growing up.  He was a person of great stature, phenomenal intellect and was a community activist who was concerned about the development of the lives of people and preached with a, a sense of power, but he wasn't overly emotional.  And you could hear well what he said, and he articulated extremely well.  And he had a great affinity for making sure that the young people in that congregation would pursue education, would pursue involvement in clubs and organizations and become meaningful contributors to society.  And I sang--no, no, no.  I was in the choir.  I never sang, I lip sang in the choir.  It was called the Midwestern District Choir.  At first it was called the Inner-City Choir, where we took kids from St. Louis and kids from East St. Louis, Illinois.  You know, East St. Louis had a bad reputation, but that choir was the, the, the hub of integrating the life of kids from East St. Louis, Illinois and the kids from St. Louis.  And we traveled a lot; we sang a lot, and we participated in all kind of events.  And as a teenager, you know, if, as long as we went with the choir, we could stay out late, didn't have to come in early.  And so we all joined the choir because the choir was our cover for staying out late.  And my dad was assigned as a senior pastor who had responsibility for over monitoring the choir's activities.  So that's how I got in the choir.  I could not sing a lick.  My sister was President of the choir.  My dad was the senior minister assigned with choir responsibilities for the District.  I met my wife through that choir.  My sister, older sister, met her husband through that choir.  My older brother [Jesse Battle, Jr.] met the--well, his first wife, before she deceased, through the activities of the choir and, and the young people's district.  So that, that was a wonderful experience in terms of church and how we could go out, have choir rehearsal, got out at 9:00 o'clock, go to the Howard Johnson's.  We could stay up, over midnight, you know.  And we'd go back to school the next Monday, and the other kids would talk about how, you know, they were out to past 1:00 o'clock, you know, and going to this club and this (unclear).  And I'm, "Oh, yeah, and we were out to, and I didn't home until 1:30," you know, we went to the Ho Jo's after, you know, the activities and all that.  It was all choir-related though, but they didn't know it was choir-related, and it wasn't their business.  But it gave us that sense of, of being independent.  So those were, those were really good experiences.  As they, another experience of mine in church, this lady by the name of, they called her Mother Tides [ph.] And she was not educated at all, but you would never know that because she would require you to articulate for her what was going on in your life.  And she would pull you aside and just drill on what you were learning in school, who your friends were, what kind of activities you were engaged in, and you would stand there and talk to her and, and whether she understood everything you were saying or not, it wasn't relevant.  What was relevant was that she had this compassionate, compassion about her, that if you said something that looked like you were doing something wrong, she would stare at you, and you would read in that stare, oh, my God, I'd better straighten up because God is inside of this woman's eyeballs.  And so there this compelling sense of urgency to do well because so many people expected us to do well.  And they had that great expectation that, that you were destined to do something significant in life.
Story_ID: 3189
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Lincoln Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri] at first when we grew up, and my dad [Jesse Battle] had the store across the street from the school.  And that was a wonderful, I mean an absolutely wonderful place to be.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, I was a decent student.  I think I probably started turning the curve in the seventh and eighth grade when it became necessary to focus on, on what I was going to eventually be in life.  So in, in kindergarten, I didn't really know what kind of grades I got in kindergarten.  I remember one bad year in school and that was in the fifth grade.  And it was bad for an interesting reason.  I told you the restaurant my dad had across the street from his store.  I had a fifth grade teacher.  Now, up until then, I was getting--you used to get like E's, G's and M's.  E is for Excellent, G for Good, M for Medium and then the P for Poor and F for Fail and all that.  I was an E, G student, third, fourth grade; hit the fifth grade, and I got all D's and F's, no, U's and P's.  All--P is for Poor and U is for Unsatisfactory, all P's and U's, except for in handwriting.  I got a good grade in handwriting.  That was an irony.  I never wrote well.  I had horrible penmanship.  I failed the fifth grade.  I was doing the work.  I did well.  I was flunked in fifth grade though.  And after the first semester, I got angry because I knew I was doing well, but I was always getting failing grades.  I ended up repeating the fifth grade.  And I remember going home to my father saying, you know, it is not that I'm not doing the work in this class.  This instructor is giving me failing grade, in spite of how well I'm doing.  But back then, black families would not believe that teachers would do anything wrong.  It wasn't until I was out of college that I found out what was going on.  This teacher--and it makes me somewhat angry, went to my father because the teacher at that point had gotten old and was reconciling his life or whatever it was before he went to see his make; went to my father and confessed to my father that the reason he did--and treated me that way in the fifth grade was that my father's restaurant had put his mother's sandwich shop, the teacher's mother's sandwich shop out of business.  Well, my dad did not know that his restaurant had a direct negative impact on this man's mother's sandwich--she had her little sandwich shop in the community, and when my dad opened up the restaurant, people would come into the restaurant and wouldn't go to the sandwich shop.  So this teacher then, seeing me in his fifth grade class, decided in his ignorance and arrogance to take it out on me.  Now, the interesting thing was that I could have ended up being completed crushed at that stage in life, feeling that okay, oh, my, God, I've lost it.  I'm no longer doing academically well.  And so I ended up repeating the fifth grade, not because of academic incapacity, but because of the grudge that a school teacher had in the public school system in St. Louis over something that had to do with, with a business relationship.  But then after that, you know, that, that year, then I went back up to making the E's and G's.  And then in high school, I did extremely well.  In fact, I did the, the student speech at my high school, did extremely.  I went to undergrad in, at Trinity [College] in Hartford, Connecticut and got the highest scholarship, academic scholarship award of anybody in my high school that year.  And the reason I went to Trinity which is a New England, private, white school, in '68 [1968] they started accepting a large number of African American students.  And so we were in that first class with a large number of African American students.  But I had a counselor who told me, "Don't apply to any New England school.  You'll never get in a New England school."  And so I said, "You know, I'm gonna look at a New England school.  How dare you tell me not to try to apply to a New England school?"  So Wesleyan [University] in Middletown, Connecticut and Trinity in Hartford, Connecticut came to my undergrad--to my high school to recruit.  And the guy from Trinity thought I was interested in Wesleyan, and the guy from Wesleyan thought I was interested in Trinity.  I hadn't heard of either one of them before that day.  And so, they went into this whole thing about, "Nah, you don't want to go to Trinity."  The other one would say, "Nah, you don't want to go to Wesleyan".  And so a friend of mine, Worth Hayes, who was pre-med, went to Wesleyan, and I went to Trinity.  And it (unclear), did reasonably well, and then ended up going to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina].  I had a Rockefeller Scholarship, Rockefeller Foundation Scholarship and went through Duke and did reasonably well there as well, and then did the Doctorate at, at Howard University because I wanted to have a historically black college or university in my portfolio of schools.  That's why I went to Howard.  So I was a good student, you know.
Speaker 1: The teacher that you were mentioning that flunked you in the fifth grade, was that an African American?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was, he was an African American.
Speaker 1: And the counselor as well who discouraged you?
Speaker 2: He was African American as well, yeah.  He was African American as well.  And then I find out (unclear) that he had a little group--and this is, this is the irony of it, of it all.  I ended up having one of the highest GPA's in my high school, won the highest academic scholarship, ended up making the, the--I forget--the student speech.  I wasn't Valedictorian because I was, I was like sixth in graduation class of 300 and some students.  And, but the person who would have been Valedictorian--what had happened was, my school was a academic school.  It merged with a technical school, and so there were some students from the technical school who I felt had taken technical classes and had not taken--I mean I had done Algebra I, II and III, you know, Latin I, II, III and IV, Chemistry and all those hard academic courses.  And then they had students who transferred from a school where they'd done woodwork and metal work and all that kind of stuff.  So there were a couple of students who had higher GPA's than I did, but the person who had the higher GPA, who transferred from the other school, something happened and he couldn't make the speech.  And so they asked me to go on and make the speech, which I would have ended up making anyway, had the transfer not taken place.  And so I made the speech, and--but during the whole time in high school, the prin--this counselor, who dissuaded me from trying to go to a New England school, had a little group.  And I never fit into his group because I would--I had a lot of extra curricula activity away from school and all that, a very aggressive, very engaged in, in things.  But I didn't go to his office all the time and sit down and chit chat and do other kinds of things that were expected to have been done to be a part of that group.  And so then he told me, he said, don't even try to go to a New England school and did--cause he knew that the New England schools were coming down to recruit.  I didn't know.  Had he not opened his mouth, I never would have known the New England schools were coming that day.  But when he went through his rampage about how I shouldn't show up for the New England schools when they came and all that kind of stuff, that said, you know, that's exactly where I'm going.  And that's exactly what I'm going to do.  I'm going to apply.  I will get accepted, and when I get accepted, I'll let you know that I got accepted.  And so anyway, sometimes, sometimes discouragement, if channeled properly can become a stepping stone.  It doesn't have to be a stumbling block.  It, it only is a stumbling block if you let the person who discourages you define you.  And if you continue to define yourself out of the context of your background--Mother Tides [ph., a lady from church who always showed an interest in the young people and their education] was too positive an influence for me to let any principal or any teacher or any counselor discourage me.  And Mother Tides wasn't educated, but Mother Tides loved me to no end, loved all of the kids who grew up in that church.  And you knew it.  And there was this other lady--a guy, George Watson, Brother George, Reverend George Watson [ph.], not educated, but George Watson who had fought in the Korean War was so much a presence that you wouldn't do--you couldn't, didn't go out and let somebody else discourage you, not when you knew that come Sunday morning, these were the people you had to answer to.  So I had more to do in terms of answering to George Watson and to Mother Tides than I did to my high school counselor or to my fifth grade teacher.  So, so that sense of encouragement counteracted anything that could have been potentially negative.
Story_ID: 3190
Speaker 1: Where did you go to secondary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Soledad High School, Soledad High School.
Speaker 1: Where is that located?
Speaker 2: In St. Louis [Missouri] on Union Boulevard.  It was the home of the Tigers.  I played Trumpet in the Soledad High School Band.  In fact, in my freshman year in high school, the first semester of the freshman year, I was in the senior band.  I played first trumpet for a while, but the odd thing happened, junior year in high school, and I remember--and, and this was an interesting occurrence.  We had one of the best bands in St. Louis.  We also had some extremely excellent players.  I was decent, but I was nowhere near competitive with the other people who by junior year had, you know, just, just surpassed me with phenomenal skill.  So junior year in high school, band director, Mr. Vernon Nashfield, wonderful guy, played in the Oliver Sain Review, jazz musician par excellence, came to band practice, sat on the band stool and said, "You know, this year, during football season, we're gonna practice every day till 6:00 o'clock.  We're gonna get everything together in this band.  We're gonna do everything right.  We're gonna be the best band." He said, "Now, if you can't devote the kind of time you need to be in the band, put your horn down and walk out the band room."  Well, he wasn't saying that in a negative way.  He was saying it in a very positive way.  But then I sat there, and I started thinking, I said, okay, Mike, you know you got Latin III and IV; you know you want to take geometry this year--no, no, I had taken geometry in sophomore year.  So that was Algebra and Trigonometry.  And you know you want to take Chemistry I and II.  Now, if you're gonna do the Latin I--III and IV, Algebra III and Trigonometry and you're gonna do chemistry--and I was taking an honors course in psychology, you're not gonna have the time to be in the band room till 6:00 o'clock every day because then you're not gonna study.  So I laid my trumpet down, and left the band room because most of the kids in my band wanted to go to Lincoln University in Jefferson City [Missouri], best college band around.  And so I said, now, Mike, if you were to compete for a trumpet scholarship, you're not gonna get into Lincoln.  You may get somewhere else, but not Lincoln.  So then I said, well, you know, if I did the academic stuff, I can get anywhere I want to go.  So then I, I stopped playing, but not only was I in the band, I was the president of the Junior Classical League, which was the, with the Latin and classical languages and all that kind of stuff.  I was the president of the Latin Club, and that was an odd irony.  I was in the Model United Nations and the Allied Youth at the same time.  Now, Allied Youth is very conservative, right wing, anti-United Nations--would be, would make the conservative right wing today look moderate.  And then the [Model] United Nations, on the other hand, was far left wing, liberal, way out there politically, and the, the director of Allied Youth and director of Model United Nations were two teachers in my high school who couldn't stand each other because they were on the different poles of philosophical and political philosophy.  But I was in both organizations at the same time and had a lot of fun.  So I did a lot of stuff in high school.  It was, it--it was, it was so much fun being in high school.  It was absolute fun being in high school.
Story_ID: 3191
Speaker 1: So who were some of your teachers that you remember from secondary school [Soledad High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Okay, Mrs. Smith [ph.] was one of my history teachers.  And she taught me U.S. history.  She was a phenomenal person.  She was absolutely mind bogglingly gorgeous as well.  And she was a stunning academician.  And she encouraged me so much to do extremely well.  And there was Mrs. Stoinski (ph.) who was an English teacher as well, German background, who, who was one of the challenging people who gave me a lot of encouragement.  Mr. Lipscom (ph.) who was the Model United Nations Director, was--and then Mrs. Bodenheimer whose family was the heir to the Bodenheimer Wine Company, and she taught me biology in high school.  And I enjoyed her so much, and she knew that I had academic capacity so she encouraged me tremendously.  I remember one time I had broken my eye glasses, and so she wouldn't even schedule exams while my glasses were broken.  And so one student was encouraging me to break my eye glasses with quite a bit of regularity.  And, and, and then there was--I forget his name now, but who was very encourage in high school, Mr. Evans [ph.], who was one of the counselors.  He was, he was just a phenomenal person.  If, if I had any capacity to go back and award those person, and Mrs.--Mrs. Synore [ph.] who started me reading "Plunkitt of Tammany Hall" [by William L. Riordan] which is one of the political science books that most people didn't read until they were in, in college.  And I had done a book report cause my oldest sister was in college at the time, and she had read "Plunkitt of Tammany Hall", and I was looking for a book report.  So I pulled one of her college books and read the book and gave an analysis of it.  And Mrs. Synore at that moment, "Oh, my God, I've got a student here who's reading college-level books."  And she just took me under her wings.  And I could do no wrong with Mrs. Synore.  So those, those were some very favorite and wonderful, wonderful people in my high school age.
Speaker 1: Are there any others who really influenced you that you'd like to discuss at this time?
Speaker 2: In, in, now in undergraduate school, Dr. John Gettier who recently retired from Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut].  And I went for his retirement.  And Trinity gave a reception for me last year when I became President of ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], and John Gettier came for that.  When I was in high school, getting ready to go to Trinity, I mentioned that I selected Trinity part because of the response to a negative advice from a counselor.  But then there was--what allowed me to go was, there was a young man by the name of Michael P. Getlin, who was a Second Lieutenant in the U.S. Army [sic, a Captain in the U.S. Marines] from St. Louis, got killed in Vietnam.  And his family set up a special scholarship for a kid from St. Louis who wanted to go to Trinity because Michael had graduated from Trinity College, and he was from St. Louis.  And what I--I did not know at the time that that was the scholarship until I, when I went to Trinity, in my first year, there was this annual Scholars' Awards Day for Michael P. Getlin, and Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel who was one of the most noted Jewish scholars in the twentieth century, who died in '72 [1972], I believe it was, Heschel was the speaker for the Michael P. Getlin Scholars Day and so I went to the, the speech.  And then I found the story of, of this man.  And so when I finished seminary, I decided to go to the Army as a Chaplain, and I went into the U.S. Army Reserve and spent twenty years in the Reserve, retired as Lieutenant Colonel.  But part of what motivated me to do military service was the fact that this young man had died giving his life in the Vietnam War, and his family, in honor of him, opened up an opportunity for me to go to a school that I never in a thousand years would have been able to afford to go to.  And so that's a person that I have phenomenal respect for.
Story_ID: 3192
Speaker 1: How did you spend your personal time?
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you do?
Speaker 2: In, in high school, in college?
Speaker 1: In high school.
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was a backstroker on the worst swimming team in the city of St. Louis [Missouri].  Our swimming team, swim team wasn't--we knew we weren't gonna win any meets.  That was not the issue.  We didn't have swimming in our high school [Soledad High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  We had to go to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to practice swimming, but I was a backstroker.  And I enjoyed swimming, and to this day, I, I still enjoy swimming tremendously.  And I used to do high dives.  I was quite good at one point, you know, when I had more flexibility and agility, and I did high dives.  I spent a lot of time working with church activities.  I spent time working in just clubs and organization galore.  I was very, very active.  If you look at my senior year, yearbook, I must be in that yearbook almost twenty different times for different clubs, different organization, awards days and all that.  So there was not a whole lot of downtime, and one year, out of discipline, just sheer discipline, I decided that I wasn't gonna watch any T.V. for a whole year and that I was going to concentrate on doing the grade, getting real involved and all that kind of stuff.  And, and the, and I intentionally did that.  I made it through the whole year, and didn't watch any T.V. at all, not the news, no anything, just--so that was fun as well because then I would select the time that I would go out and play.  And then with church, with school work, and--and I always worked.  I've worked since I was twelve.  I think every, every stitch of clothes I ever owned since I was twelve, I bought myself.  Every pair of eyeglasses I owned since I was twelve, I bought.  And so I worked.  I had a business.  I did yards, and I had my own set of clients.  And I did shoveling snow in the wintertime, and I did yards and driveways and garages and the odd jobs, painting.  And one house I (laughter)--this lady who lived across the street from us, the school teacher had this huge house with hardwood floors throughout.  I waxed her floors on, on Saturdays.  That's how I earned money.  And so I had, I had my little business and all that stuff so I was very active.
Story_ID: 3193
Speaker 1: Were you developing career goals or political aspirations or inclinations at that time?
Speaker 2: No political aspirations, no.  My, my first encounter with love for political life happened with [President] Jimmy Carter's election [1976].  I was in seminary at the time at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina].  And I was working at St. Joseph's African Methodist Episcopal Church.  And the pastor of that church is--well, he's now Bishop Philip Robert Cousin.  Then he was Reverend Philip Robert Cousin.  Bishop Cousin was, now, in my latter life, Bishop Cousin and A.C.D. Vaughn had the most influence on the development of my ministry.  And early life was Bishop Philip [Lee] Scott and my father [  ]  and grandfather [  ], of course, but Bishop Cousin was on the School Board.  He had been a President of a college prior to his forties.  He was active and aggressive, leading one of the largest churches and active churches in Durham, but he was a political animal.  And since I was working at the church while I was attending seminary at Duke, he, his thing was, if you're gonna work with me, you're gonna get your feet wet in politics.  So I was assigned by him to work for the Jimmy Carter campaign.  And I worked for the Jimmy Carter campaign.  And I fell in love with, with political engagement at that time.  And then when I was in Hampton [Virginia], I chaired the election campaign for John Mallory Phillips, who was the first African American to become vice mayor of the city of Hampton.  And the year I chaired his campaign, he won by the largest number of votes of anybody in the history of the city council races in the city of, of Hampton.  And I got involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And for a while, I was on the Board of Directors for Rainbow PUSH [People United to Save Humanity].  And when Jesse ran, I was very active in working with Jesse Jackson's campaign because of my involvement at the Hampton University Ministers' Conference.  But when I was younger, politics didn't interest me, with the exception that in the '60's [1960s]--well, 1960, I was too young to vote.  I was only ten years old.  I was excited about  [President] John [F.] Kennedy, and if I had been able to vote, I would have probably been engaged in his campaign.
Story_ID: 3194
Speaker 1: Were there any particular books or--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  My dad [Jesse Battle]  brought home one day a stack of books.  They were used books that he had gotten from, somebody had donated.  You know, he was a pastor.  People would give him all kinds of things.  And Ernest Hemingway's book, "The Old Man and the Sea", and that book was the first book I read from cover to cover.  Now, I was very young.  I wasn't even in high school, but I, I read that book, and I discovered something about reading, that if you read properly, you become engaged in the life of what you're reading as it unfolded.  So I was there mentally.  I could, I was enjoying the, the warmth of, of the beaches and the, the drama of challenging and a fishing scenario.  I was, I was there, and even though I didn't drink, I was there in the drunken stupor of Ernest Hemingway, and all of the challenges and engagements.  And, and, and I would read books, and I still do that now.  Just last year, I finished the "Emperor of Ocean Park", brilliant, brilliant, very long book written by an African American author.  But I, now, I usually would read a novel or something away from theology and philosophy, I would always say to myself, I'm gonna invite myself to go into this story and see how much a part of the story I could become.  It then becomes for me like being present at, at a, at a play, watching it unfold before my eyes.  And so, so that book was, was phenomenal for me.  In fact, I had done my senior thesis in high school on Ernest Hemingway, having read that book.  And then there was a book on astrology--astronomy, not astrology (laughter), on astronomy that my dad brought home that day as well.  And that's what perked my interest in the sciences.  And I would always say, you know, "One of these days I would like to be an astronomer and I'd like to not only study what it was like in outer space--" 'Cause, you know, people weren't going to the moon back then either, and how fascinating it would be.  So reading was fundamental for my up-, upbringing.
Story_ID: 3195
Speaker 1: What other types of extra-curricular or social activities were you participating in at this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I played Little League baseball and was never good, but it didn't matter because it was the enjoyment of, of doing it all.  And I remember how that then assisted me--cause every experience assists you later on.  When I was in Hartford, Connecticut in undergrad [at Trinity College], there was a church in the community that I worked at.  And they didn't have a lot of activities.  I started four softball teams in that church.  Neither was good, but we had fun playing.  When I was at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], I coached a little softball team for, as a part of my summer job.  When my son was in junior high school at Spratly Middle School, I coached the basketball team.  I had absolutely no knowledge of what I was doing, at all.  I had no idea, but what had happened was--now, he's twenty-six years old now.  So he doesn't, he doesn't mind me telling the story, but there were, there was a group of young men in his middle school who were not good enough for either the first, second or the third team.  And so my son wanted to play basketball desperately and so did some of his friends, want to play basketball.  So I went to the school, and I was talking to the people about basketball.  They said, well, if you would coach a team, we'll start a fourth team.  And so I said, okay, well, fine.  So I started working with the team and all that.  And to tell you how, how, how much I didn't know about basketball, was the very first game, and it was at, at, in Hampton [Virginia], a Hampton University graduate was the referee for the game.  I did a technical foul first five minutes of the game.  I didn't know that you couldn't, you know, bring players in and exchange players in the middle of a play (unclear), and I'm thinking, well, I want this guy to go out there.  So I got a technical foul, but the point was, it didn't matter that the kids were not good.  That was not relevant at all.  The only thing that was relevant that a bunch of kids got an opportunity to go out there and play.  And then I ended up going to South Africa that year for the election, it was in '94 [1994], for Nelson Mandela's election.  And so I then had to stop my activities with coaching, and then they found a guy who actually knew what he was doing, and coached the kids and did a great job with them.  They didn't win much, but the point was, they had such a horrible coach to begin with, that by the time they got a good coach who knew what he was doing, it took a lot of retraining for the kids.  But it, those were fun things.  I would rather engage and trying to do something without waiting till I become expert in it because if you wait till you become expert first, so much stuff you would never, ever think about attempting to do.  And so that's, that's been a philosophy of mine, you know, engage, get in the process because a lot unfolds while you're in the process.  Talent is skill.  Michael Jordan was not a great basketball player when he first started playing.  He was a horrible basketball player.  And Michael Jordan became excellent because he practiced all the time.  He put more time in practice than anybody else on his teams.  That's what made him good, and so I encourage young people and everybody else to just, you know, try it.  If you're, if you're not successful, who cares at the end of the day.  You tried.
Story_ID: 3196
Speaker 1: So you went to college in Hartford, Connecticut?
Speaker 2: I went to [Trinity] College in Hartford, Connecticut, cold Hartford, Connecticut.  And I was determined when I went to college, I said to my dad, you know, my dad--cause I wasn't interested in the ministry.  My father [Jesse Battle] was, you know, a pastor.  Everybody knew him in St. Louis [Missouri].  So I said, you know, "I'm going as far away from St. Louis as I can to go to school cause I don't want people saying, you know, that's Reverend Battle's kid, and all that kind of stuff."  And I said, "I'm gonna join the Black Panther Party too when I get to Connecticut.  I'm gonna be really radical and all."  And what my father did is, one of his little tricks on me.  So I went to, to--got off the plane in, in Hartford.  This old guy comes up to me, "Are you Reverend Battle's boy?"  " Yeah."  He said, "Well, I'm--" --he was Bishop Clarence App--Allen, pastor and was a Bishop up there.  And he said, "Your father called me and told me what time your plane was coming in, and described you to me and told me to pick you up from the airport."  So I said, "Okay."  And he said, "Well, I know the campus.  I'm gonna take you to your campus."  He said, "But before you go to campus--say I'm gonna take you by one of the churches in my district."  So I said, "Okay."  So he made me get out the car, go to--in the church.  You know, and you know, I'm a freshman in college, you know, make me--but hey, I didn't know how to get to Trinity College campus.  I was riding in his car, so I was gonna do what he told me to.  So I had to walk up and go through the, the sanctuary of the church, he made go downstairs to where the Sunday school rooms were, to where they, they had the recreational hall and all that kind of stuff, made me walk around the church and all that stuff.  And then he said, "Now, you know where the church is, and you know that there are people here who will be supportive of you.  If you ever have a difficulty, you know where the church is.  This is my phone number," and he drove me by his house, said, "This is where my wife and I live; the home phone number.  This is the church, and the church number.  If you ever need anything, you give us a call."  And I still went to Black Panther Party meetings though during that time cause they would come to Trinity campus a lot.  And then I found that I got politically engaged because there was a group of older minister in Hartford who were very politically active.  And I started working with them in some of their political struggles where they were marching on the Governor's mansion and all that.  And then I discovered that there are ways to change society without necessitating that you change society from a position that was ultimately terminal because African Americans had never been in a position in this country that a revolution by way of violence would ever be successful.  It was a non-sequiter (unclear).  It would not follow.  It was illogical.  It was never going to happen and probably never should have happened.  But there were ways to change society by working in the context of social structures and change in society from within.  And so a lot of positive things have happened with that kind of engagement.  Now, I honestly thought when I was in college, I said, you know, that if I'm politically engaged and I'm participating in the marches and I'm doing all this kind of stuff, that by the time my kids get grown, racism won't exist.  Well, my kids are grown and racism still exists, but it was--and it continues to be a valuable thing to do to engage in the process of trying to change our society.  So there, that's how I got to Connecticut.  And I enjoyed Trinity.  I enjoyed--I, I probably, I thought that I had more money as an undergraduate student at Trinity than I'd ever had in all the days of my life because I had a good scholarship, good academic scholarship.  I always found jobs.  I taught school for--I taught night school, a GED [General Educational Development high school degree equivalency test] program four nights a week, when I was an undergraduate student.  And I taught in what was the north end of Hartford, where Project Matthew, that was a, it was a street academy run by the Urban League.  And they had a GED program.  And I went there one day, just as an observer because I was taking an education class, and I was assigned to go.  And the way these--it was basically Hispanic and African American students.  They were being taught against an information-oriented structure.  I wanted to teach a test-taking structure, how to take tests and how to do well, how to logically sequence things that you read and interpret what you read.  So there was a, a little struggle between the methodology at that time.  And then I got engaged in playing chess with the director of the School.  And I started to talking to him about structure and methodology.  And he said, okay, well, see what you could do.  So then I, I stopped teaching, and, and I taught sociology.  I taught math, I taught English, and I taught science, four nights a week.  And what happened was, I stopped people trying to learn who the twelfth, what would the heck, what difference does it make who was the twelfth President of the U.S., because if there's a question on the exam about who the twelfth President was, it was gonna come out of the context of a narrative you had read.  And then the question was gonna be raised at the end of the narrative.  And so I said, let's stop trying to teach people sequences of, of presidents and, and sequences of capitals of states and sequences of all this kind of stuff.  That's not relevant.  That's not the way the exam is given.  So we then started people reading tough data, data not in the books they were assigned and interpreting the data and then inferring from the data what was the principle theme in this data, what are the subordinating themes in this data, how did the themes connect with other, what can you now sit down and talk about having read the data.  And so we changed the methodology.  Interesting thing, we went from people taking about nine months to prepare for the GED, with a failure rate that was greater than sixty percent, reduced it to a three-month sequence, and had a pass rate over eighty-five percent because we were teaching differently.  And that was, that was fun for me.  That was enjoyment.  And then some of the members of the church that I was working in, in Connecticut started going to take their GED because I was teaching there.  And, and Hartford had this interesting thing that certain jobs in, in labor in the city, you couldn't get promoted if you didn't have a high school equivalency.  So there were Hispanic and black people who had worked for the City of Hartford years and years who had as much knowledge and skills as other--but they could never get promoted.  So they were the ones who took the GED course.  So I taught GED when I was at Trinity in Hartford, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 3197
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any academic organizations or fraternities, student organizations or athletic organizations.
Speaker 2: Well, at Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut], I did nothing athletic at all.  I didn't even do band at Trinity.  There were fifty black people on Trinity's campus.  So we all determined that we would be active in what was called the Trinity Coalition for Blacks.  We did not join any--in fact, there were no black fraternities, except for Omega Psi Phi, and that was sort of off campus.  And we didn't know it.  It was sort of, of a quiet thing.  But we didn't, the--most of the black students did not join fraternities.  We determined intentionally that we were gonna be active in the Trinity Coalition for Blacks.  So I was active in the Trinity Coalition for Blacks.  I was a mentor in a--I forget the name of the program now, but I was assigned as a Big Brother to some kids on the North side of, of Hartford, Connecticut, and I worked with that organization.  I was the sponsor of a youth activities group, and I was the sponsor of a youth team group, off campus.  I did a lot of the off campus stuff.  I felt guilty being at Trinity in this sense.  It was a school where a lot of very wealthy people were, and I wasn't wealthy, but I had the opportunity to go there.  And I felt that if I didn't then work in the local African American community, where people were struggling and wouldn't even think about going to Trinity, if I didn't get engaged in that community, that somehow I wasn't true to who I was.  So, I, I did that.  And then in my junior and senior year, I became the student assistant in the Department of Religion at Trinity, which was good for me because it taught me how to do research methodology.  I would have to go and, and, and collect the books from the library that the professors needed for their research.  And so it put me in a, in a relationship with having good academic relationships.  And then in my sophomore year, I went to Switzerland on an open semester.  Trinity had a program with the L'Abri, which was an international scholars retreat in L'Abri, [sic, in Humoz, Canton de Vaud] Switzerland, and I was there for three months.  And I took academic hours that year, that semester.  I had eighteen academic hours at L'Abri and twelve hours in directive study from Trinity.  So when students at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] used to come to me and complain about taking eighteen hours and how bad it was, I said, yeah, I had thirty hours in a single semester so don't tell me about how bad eighteen hours is.  But, it was fun.
Story_ID: 3198
Speaker 1: Can you describe your post-graduate experience, including the schools that you attended?
Speaker 2: Okay, Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] for my Masters; Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for my Doctorate, and then there were several things that I attended after finishing Howard that furthered my education in management and I could talk to you about that, oh, Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], at, at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and at the Millennia Leadership Institute.  And I could detail those things for you if you like.
Story_ID: 3199
Speaker 1: Can you describe your adult life professionally, the, your career, your family?
Speaker 2: I've, I've had a wonderful adult life, and I, I will turn fifty-four in July of this year.  My first professional job after finishing seminary [at Duke University] was to go to Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] as the university chaplain and to serve as pastor at Memorial Church on, on Hampton's campus.  And that was an interesting position for me because I went to Hampton to preach the Sunday before Thanksgiving in 1975.  And Hampton had been searching for a university chaplain for about six years.  And I went there to just do a service and to come back home to Durham, North Carolina.  And I chose as a subject for that day, "Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace".  I did not know, prior to coming to Hampton for that service, that Dr. Roy Hudson, who was the then President of Hampton, had used that same topic as his annual address at Hampton University.  So I did the sermon, and Dr. Hudson got up and left chapel before the benediction.  So I said, oh, wow, this is a horrible thing.  And then after which, I found out that he had left because he wanted to talk to students and other people when they were leaving about how they thought things went.  And they asked me to stay over for an interview, which I had no intention of doing.  I mean I had hair out to here, big ol' Afro.  I had sideburns down to here and way--it looked like a football helmet on my head, but it was all the wild Afro and all that kind of stuff.  And so I interviewed with Hampton, and they offered me an opportunity to come there as university chaplain.  I was twenty-five years old, and I was the first African American, full-time chaplain in the history of this African American institution, which shocked me to no end.  So I stayed at Hampton for twenty, almost twenty-one years.  And I also was in the Army Reserve during that same time, and went from first lieutenant on through the ranks and retired as a lieutenant colonel.  And I left Hampton in '96 [1996] to--I knew I wanted to eventually become [college] president.  And I knew I wasn't gonna do it from chaplaincy to presidency.  That wasn't gonna happen because that, that's too big a switch to go from a university chaplaincy to a college presidency.  So I learned a very conscious decision that I needed to do something outside of my academic background.  My academic background is theology and philosophy.  So I said, now, I, I need to do something to build this career track.  So I took a job at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] as an Associate Vice President for Student Affairs, which was a complete new field for me.  I had worked in student affairs, with student affairs at Hampton, so I had a real good experience.  But at, what Virginia State was looking for at that time was somebody who had good experience working with self studies, a good strategic planner who knew how to do planning well.  And so I went to Virginia State and served as an Associate VP, helped to develop the self study for the Division of Student Affairs at Virginia State, and stayed there for eighteen months.  And then I was invited by Dr. Elnora [D.] Daniel to become a part of her administrative team to go to Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois].  And I became Vice President for Student Affairs at Chicago State.  I didn't teach at Chicago State, even though I taught philosophy, one class a year at Virginia State.  So then becoming a Vice President for Student Affairs allowed the progression from a university chaplaincy position, which was Dean of the Chapel to an associate vice presidency to a vice presidency, and then it became a natural kind of thing to move on to a presidency.  And the interesting thing was, Dr. Daniel, who was president at Chicago State, said to me in my last year at Chicago State, she said, "Mike, you need to start publishing again in your academic field because everybody needs to publish in their academic field."  And that was good for me because I, I published two major works, two major articles on Hampton University and, interestingly enough, "The Hampton Contribution to Ecumenism",  that whole notion of interdenominational cooperation, and the history of the Hampton University Ministers' Conference which was a section from my dissertation project.  And Dr. Henry Young, who was a systematic theology professor at Garrett Theological Seminary in Evanston, Illinois, read the two articles, called me and said, "Mike, let's go to lunch.  I need to talk to you."  Now, Henry had taught me in undergraduate school at Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut].  And he was now teaching at Garrett in Illinois.  He read the articles, and I did not--I had forgotten that he had also taught at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] years and years ago.  So he asked me, he said, "Can I nominate you for the presidency of ITC?"  I said, "Well, you know, why not?  It'd be a good thing to do." and so he nominated me, and that started that process.  And then concurrent with that, I had [in 2002] attended the Millennia Leadership Institute [sic, Millennium Leadership Initiative], which was sponsored by the Association of State Colleges and Universities, and the person who was in charge of the search firm [committee] at ITC was one of the mentors at MLI.  And so then the connection happened, and then I ended up here as a president of ITC, which is a wonderful, wonderful experience.  It does a couple of things.  It puts me back in theological circles, that I had been out of at Virginia State and Chicago State.  And it, it accomplishes the presidency, but the presidency never would have happened had I not done the Virginia State and the Chicago State thing, nor would it have happened had I not then started publishing again in, in theological areas.  So it's an interesting--God has a wonderful way of doing stuff.
Story_ID: 3200
Speaker 1: Can you describe any memorable events from your professional life, as you were going through these various transitions?
Speaker 2: One of the most memorable events was the discovery that what I learned at Duke [Divinity School, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] did not work with African American students in counseling.  And, you know, I, I was a good student at Duke, no question, excellent student at Duke, Rockefeller Foundation Scholar at Duke.  But I learned a non-directive, Wagnerian style of counseling that you set up, and you listen to what a person says, and you sort of parrot back what they've said, and, so you can force them to get more deeper, more deep and more detailed in what they were saying.  So at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] first experience, you know, I go [in 1975] to Hampton as the chaplain, students come to my office, and one student said something to me that shocked the daylights out of me.  She was talking about difficulties she had had.  Now, this is nothing confidential so I can--so she was talking about the difficulties she had had.  And so I said, "Oh, so you're feeling a little stressed," typical Duke style.  Yeah.  And then she went on.  And I said, "So, the stress is causing some reactions that you're uncomfortable with."  She said, "Look, Reverend, I knew I was stressed before I came here.  If all I wanted you to do is tell me what I just told you, I'm wasting my time.  I can't--you are the college minister.  I expect you to say something to me."  (laughter).  And I said, "Oh, my God."  I had no academic tools to deal with that.  So I immediately enrolled in a course at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in pastoral care and counseling to learn how to be a counselor for black folk.  And, and it also liberated me in a sense, that, you know, African American people expect a minister to, to be engaged and engaging in conversation with them.  So that was a wonderful, wonderfully memorable experience, and I learned a lot.  I, I've had some won--the, the opportunity to become the Vice Chairman of the American Committee on Africa [from 1994-1998] was I think one of the most phenomenal things that ever happened with me.  And that was because of my connection with Wyatt T. Walker who had been Martin Luther King, Jr.'s chief of staff.  And if you read Taylor Branch's work on "Parting the Waters", which is the major academic piece on the Civil Rights Movement, Taylor Branch talks about how critical Wyatt T. Walker was to the development of everything that King did.  And I was fortunate, while [1996-1997] at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia], to be the interim pastor at Gillfield Baptist Church [Petersburg, Virginia] where Wyatt T. Walker had pastored before he left to join the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  So working with Wyatt and going to Africa with Wyatt was a phenomenal thing.  We were present for Nelson Mandela's election [1994], and there were seventeen of us.  We, we had African Americans.  We had black Southern Africans, a colored South African and a white South African in our group.  The black South African had never voted in his life.  The colored South African had never voted in his life, and the white South African had left South Africa, and his family had determined that they wouldn't return until everybody could vote.  So the three of them went back to South Africa with us during the time of the election.  And most memorable for me about the election was that the day of the, one of--cause they elected over a couple of days, the first day of the election, I got to interview F.W. [Frederik Willem] de Klerk [president of South Africa before Mandela].  And that was an interesting experience.  And I asked him if he expected to win.  Of course, he knew he wasn't gonna win.  He knew Nelson Mandela was gonna win.  But he said to me, he said, "You know, this is what I want people to remember, that I said--" and de Klerk, "I said, that there will free elections on my watch.  And there are free elections on my watch.  And no matter whatever happens, I want it to be known that free elections happened on my watch."  So that was a wonderful experience in adulthood.  I've had just, I've--I--when, when, and when I served in the Army, I was able to arrange one of my two-week annual trainings, see, I was a lieutenant colonel, at the same time that my daughter was doing ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] summer camp at Fort Bragg [North Carolina]  And she's now a captain in the, in active-duty, stationed in South Korea, and to be able to spend that period of time when she was going through her training.  And then when my youngest brother was going through his basic training at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, I was stationed at Fort Jackson, South Carolina.  At that time, I was like a first lieutenant, and he was going through basic training, so I was able to be present with him during his time.  So I've had some wonderfully exciting experiences in life.
Story_ID: 3201
Speaker 1: Have you encountered any challenges or traumas that you'd like to share, in your professional or career life?
Speaker 2: Challenges, yeah, well, a phenomenal number of challenges, but at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], the, the challenge of trying to work with men and women who were in the process of, of changing direction in, in their lives and, and watching the growth.  I, I don't interpret anything that I've gone through to be traumatic, only because I don't let trauma define any moment that I experience.  I've had difficult issues that I've faced, but I've never allowed any of the issues to become a trauma for me.  So, so, I would say, no to the traumatic side as long as we understand that that does not mean that I have not had moments that others would define as being moments of trauma.  I just don't define them as being moments of trauma.  One of the experiences coming to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta Georgia], discovering that ITC had wrestled with some accreditation issues, and I made a commitment that by the end of my first year here, and that first year would be over in, in August, that I would have gotten ITC through its accreditation issues.  And we are rapidly moving in that direction, and we should have culminated all these accreditation concerns by June of this year.  And so that could be traumatic in some instances, but for me it was just another opportunity to do some interesting things.  Working with soldiers who had gone to the war in Grenada, and who had come back traumatized was a challenging experience, but I wouldn't, I would not accept trauma as the definition for it.
Story_ID: 3202
Speaker 1: What messages do you have for your children or your children's children?
Speaker 2: To always understand that there is inherent value in just being who you are.  My across-the-street neighbor, Mrs. Taylor, was a school teacher.  And she said to me when I was very young something that I have said to my children.  And she said to me one day, she said, "Michael," and, you know, actually made me stand up and listen to her.  She said, "You are no better inherently than anybody else on the face of this earth."  And then she paused to let it sink in.  She said, "And also, at the same time, there is nobody on the face of this earth inherently better than you are.  So your responsibility in life is to be the best you can at all times.  Nobody's better than you and you're not better than anybody else.  So work hard."  And that's the message that I carried to students at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] when I was doing the chapel services and, and, and in much of my preaching, and I constantly tell people that there is nobody, there's nothing and on earth, under earth, or anyplace else that has the inherent capacity to overpower you.  You are greater than any of the issues that you face.  All you have to do is face your issues with the knowledge that God sees in you more capacity than you will ever see in yourself.  And if you allow yourself to tune into what God sees in you, nobody, under any circumstances will ever be able to walk on your back.  And I believe that seriously, that I'm no better than anybody inherently, and there's nobody inherently better than I am.
Story_ID: 3203
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: I, I think I've--that's a difficult, complex only in the sense that there are so many avenues to, to respond to that.  I feel good about the way I've lived my life.  I, I'm comfortable--I would not want to go back in time and change anything that I have done in life, for two reasons. A, because I know that it is irrational to want to do that.  So it becomes a waste of time to want to do it, and secondly, because I'm reasonable comfortable with who I am and, and what I have become in life.
Speaker 1: And your greatest contribution has been?
Speaker 2: It hasn't been yet.  My greatest contribution is still out there.  I've made some great contributions, but every day I get up, there's an opportunity to outshine anything I've done in previous days.  So my greatest contribution hasn't been made.  My greatest sermon hasn't been preached yet.  The greatest class hasn't been taught yet.  And my greatest administrative experience hasn't happened yet.  It is always in process.  I would be bored to death if at 53, going on 54, I'd already done what becomes the greatest thing that I'm gonna do in life.  It hasn't happened yet.
Story_ID: 3204
Speaker 1: Can you describe your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I will start with the, my family at home, where I--with my wife and kids first.  Interesting thing, I met my wife.  She was fourteen.  I had just turned sixteen.  And we met in Chicago, where I had gone to sing with the Midwestern District Choir.  We never lived in the same state until we got married.  We got married, I was twenty--going on twenty-two.  So we dated through high school and dated through college, but we were never in the same state other than when I would go and visit in, in Chicago.  If her travels with her church conference and my travel with church conference ended up in the same state.  So we had a distant, a long-distance relationship the whole time.  We've been married going on thirty-three years now.  And she is not only my best friend, the mother of our three children--Michael is thirty-one.  He's in Roanoke, Virginia, married.  Lisa is twenty-eight.  She's a Captain in the Army, stationed in South Korea.  And Martin is twenty-six, and married and living in Blue Island, Illinois.  So one of the children is in Virginia, one in South Korea and one in Illinois.  And over the Christmas break, Linda and I went to South Korea.  We spent fifteen days in South Korea visiting with Lisa.  So I think that I have a very good, enjoyable family life.  My daughter I think is the toughest of the children because she had an older brother and a younger brother, and she had to fight them both.  And so she, she, she's the toughest of the three.  And Linda, after--Linda had gone to Olive Harvey Community College in Illinois, and was pursuing nursing and decided she didn't want to do nursing, and then went back to school, and was one of the first persons to graduate from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] with an MBA.  She was in the MBA class at Hampton University.  And growing up in a family with eight sisters and three brothers was an interesting occurrence.  There were so many of us, which, which taught a couple of lessons.  It taught you that no matter how many you're mad at, there's always somebody that you're not mad at, and how many people are mad at you, there's always somebody that's not mad at you.  So it was a good wholesome family to, to grow up as a part of.  And, and as a good wholesome family, we've had challenges in the process of, of the kids growing up, but every family has challenges in the process of growing up.
Speaker 1: What are your fondest memories of parenting your children?
Speaker 2: Being involved in PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  I--from the, when, when all of our children went to the Hampton University Laboratory School [Hampton, Virginia] So Linda was, at that time, the--active in the PTA.  She was the president of the PTA, and I was just going.  But then when they went to public school, then I became the PTA person.  In fact, I was president of the PTA at Jane H. Bryan [Elementary] School [Hampton, Virginia] .  I was President of the PTA Robert [Russa] Moten Middle  [sic, Elementary] School. I was President of PTA at Phoebus High School [Hampton, Virginia]  And so that, those, those were fun memories, and watching each of the kids become totally different people, completely different personalities, complete different sets of talents and skills.  And the, that's been fun.
Speaker 1: What has been your greatest challenge parenting?
Speaker 2: The greatest challenge parenting has been trying to make sure that my kids kept a sense of balance in life, and in many instances, in most instances, we've been successful in that.  And there have been some instances that balance has not been present, but then what you learn from yoga is balance is not about being still all the time.  It's about recovery.  So there have been instances that we have worked with them through experiences that have been difficult, and then watched them bounce.  Those experiences, I think.  I remember when--Lisa probably, who is most like me, went out for softball when she was in Elizabeth City State [University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], one of the worse softball players under the sun.  But she had fun in the process.  Then she went out for RO--she was excellent in ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], became Ms. ROTC.  But she didn't stop trying to be engaged.  And Michael and Martin, both of them did an interesting thing.  They didn't want to go to college right away, and that was frustrating to me because I kept pushing the college thing.  And they both went, enlisted military before going to college.  And so Michael is now thirty-one, and will finally graduate from Hampton, May of this year with his undergraduate degree.  Martin is twenty-six and just finished Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois] last year, and now he's taking a course in--he's taking a certificate program in drug and alcohol counseling, which is what he wants to do.  So, but, you know, but then Lisa went straight to college from, from high school.  And then I tell them, I say, "That's why she became the officer, and you guys were, were privates."  But they wanted to go in as enlisted persons.  Almost--because I pushed education almost too hard for them.  My father pushed education on us.  He didn't have an education.  So he pushed it, and then we went to pursue higher education.  I was educated, and pushed education very hard on my sons, and they rebelled against it.  And, but, you know, they're, they're doing well now.  So we will finally get to watch Michael march at Hampton at--he'll be thirty-two by the time he graduates, you know.
Speaker 1: And how do you feel about becoming a grandfather?  You mentioned earlier that you were about to witness the birth of your first grandbaby.
Speaker 2: My first granddaughter.  Michael and his wife have my first grandson.  And so, we, we have adjusted, but you know, it's something about daughters and granddaughters that's just, just different.  But, so we made that adjustment and, and quite well.  And, there was a divorce there, and so then there was--we had gone through this period of, of uncomfortable disconnect.  So hopefully, that will work its way back around.  But the first granddaughter will be born, in fact, in April of this year, where Martin and Melissa are having a daughter, and her name has already been selected.  It's gonna be Monee Aisha [ph.] Battle.  Now, I've already told them, they'd better raise her to go to Hampton because if they don't, we're gonna come and kid, kidnap her, right.
Story_ID: 3205
Speaker 1: And what are some of your fondest memories of being at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]?  You spent a large part of your family and professional life there.  What, if you could say, is your favorite thing, what would it be?
Speaker 2: Interesting, one year the young men of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, and this was before I pledged [Grada?] [Champa?] (unclear) dropped themselves from the line.  And that, that was really amazing to me.  And, and so I raised the question to them.  I said, why did you all do that?  They said because we were being pledged incorrectly, and we know that fraternities and sororities are not to engage in hazing, and we were being hazed.  So all of them collectively dropped themselves from line.  And I looked at that, and I said, you know, this is profound amount of courage, watching these young men.  And then beyond that it was watching the Groove Phi Grooves.  I don't know if Grooves were active on your--when you were there.  You remember, chapel was almost packed every Sunday.  But when I first went to Hampton, that wasn't the case.  A lot of people did not come to church.  I took the Groove, now Grooves had, not the best reputation in the world.  But I had the Grooves serve as ushers three Sundays in a row. They had never recognized like that in chapel before.  I had them stand up, and I talked about them, and you know, all kinds of wonderful things that I could think about to say about them.  And after that, all of the other organizations that were organizations that had reputations that were less exciting as the Grooves' reputation was, started saying, wait a minute, you know, if the Grooves can usher in chapel at, then we can too.  And after that, it got to a point that I had ushers, pulpit assistants a year in advance at Hampton because all of the clubs and organizations would sign up for three or four Sundays for the next year.  But it started with the Grooves.  So the Grooves helped me transition from a chapel that had very few people coming to the point that if you didn't get there on time--and the chapel seated a thousand people--you couldn't get in that place.  But it was working with that group of young men that the rest of the campus was willing to throw away.  Alexander Strong was the Vice President of Student Affairs at the time.  And Strong said to me something, if you could work with these young men, you could do anything.  And I worked with those young men, and it proved that the rest of my experience at Hampton was valuable because Groove Phi Groove excited positiveness in the rest of that campus.  And that was amazing for me.
