Story_ID: 168398
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Sterns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Robert Woods Bogle, R-O-B-E-R-T, W-double-O-D-S, B-O-G-L-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't normally talk about that now.  I rather not talk about that.  I'm a little touchy about my, my birth date.  Can we avoid that one?
Speaker 1: Well this is going into the Library of Congress.  It's not going to be publicized in the paper.
Speaker 2: I still don't want to talk about it.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: But go ahead.
Speaker 1: But historians have their ways--they'll, they'll probably figure it out any way.
Speaker 2: Well, let them go figure it out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you know, since this is an oral history, a chronology, it does kinda makes sense--
Speaker 2: Well I go back a little while and you'll be able to discern that after a while, so--like you said, they'll be able to figure something out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well can you give your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I was born the--University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the presi--well, probably have too many titles now.  I'm the Chairman, President and CEO.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of The Philadelphia Tribune.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June the 13th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in the offices of The Philadelphia Tribune Company, 520 South 16th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 168399
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food.  I have a few favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You care to--
Speaker 2: I enjoy oxtail stew.  I love pig feet with chitlins' man too.  But then on the other hand I enjoy a good roast.  So I've probably five of my favorites, turkey would be in there too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?  Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  I enjoy the seasons very much.  My favorites are spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  I like to travel.  I do have a place in St. Maarten.  But I--my work keeps me so busy, I don't get an opportunity, I don't have too much opportunities for vacations.  But I try to get a week or two a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I like St. Maarten a lot.  But I like, I like traveling.  I like Jamaica.  I mean--so I don't have any favorite place that I would say I have, but I like to travel.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now the last question of this set is, do you have a favorite phase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a few, all given to me by my mother.  Probably too many to go into.  But I do like, "Never count another man's money".
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: "Never to your friends your secrets tell, for one day your friend may be your foe and out into the world your secrets will go".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are a couple of 'em.  I have quite a few--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that my mother taught me.  When I reflect on childhood growing up from time to time one of them will come up based upon something I'm experiencing at the time, but my mother had quite a few, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168400
Speaker 1: Now in fact I want to ask about your family history now, your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side and do her family separately and then your father's and then we'll put them together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Roslyn, R-O-S-L-Y-N, Roslyn Woods Bogle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth would have been September the 1st, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories related to them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my grandfather, her father.  I didn't know anyone on my mother's side beyond my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, that's not true.  I knew his mother, my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Well we--you know-- we are also asking for stories about them, so if you have stories about other ancestors and--
Speaker 2: Well the story is that my [great] grandmother, Betty, was sort of raped by a non-African American.
Speaker 1: By white people?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that--my grandfather was the result of that.
Speaker 1: So you--great--
Speaker 2: And he very much looked not like an African American.  None of his features remotely resembled an African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he married a woman named Octavia Hunter and that was my mother's mother.  There were eight children all together, but my mother's mother died near at birth of my mother.  And there were five children as a result of that marriage.  My grandfather, Robert Pleasant Woods, was an academician and a minister and he became the president of Virginia Seminary [later Virginia University of Lynchburg] in Lynchburg, Virginia, which was a very, very well-populated Baptist institution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he remained at Virginia Seminary for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is, of course, a black seminary, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--right.
Speaker 2: That's where my father [John Dudley Bogle] met my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, in Lynchburg.
Story_ID: 168401
Speaker 1: Was she [Bogle's mother, Roslyn Woods Bogle] a student there [Virginia Seminary, later Virginia University of Lynchburg, Lynchburg, Virginia] or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Family--
Speaker 1: Family, okay.
Speaker 2: --family lived there, he [Bogle's maternal grandfather, Robert Woods] was the president.  My father [John Dudley Bogle] was a student and my mother had just, I guess, just graduated from high school and as things go, people fall in love.  My mother was an academic herself and was valedictorian of her class in Lynchburg [Virginia].
Speaker 1: And what did she go onto do?
Speaker 2: She went on to raise ten children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughing)
Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't teach or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or pursue a profession?
Speaker 2: Not in the beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nah.  After my father passed, she sort of guessed, "It's time for me, I just don't wanna sit at home."
Speaker 1: Now, now did she graduate from college?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm convinced that she was the brighter of the two.  She, she excelled academically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she talk about growing up in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did she say about it?
Speaker 2: They lived well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father was well-known, well respected and did well financially.  He was entrepreneurial to the extent that he had meaningful investments.  They had people working for them, meaning my mother talks about having had a cook, a driver and other help in the home.
Story_ID: 168402
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your grandfather [Robert Woods] was able to finish school and establish himself?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he graduated from school.  I don't, I don't recall ever that coming up in family discussions.  You know this oral history that we have, what I know about him was growing up in Lynchburg, Virginia and having gone on to [Virginia] Seminary [later Virginia University of Lynchburg, Lynchburg, Virginia] and becoming the president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the best of my recollection.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about him being supported at all by his white father?
Speaker 2: No, but I--the story was he was given a choice to either live with his white father or to go and live with his African American or black mother.  He chose to live with his mother.  The story goes his father was the child of a medical doctor in the town and they were well-off.  And he grew up very much like, I guess, a little white boy, but he chose to live with his mother who was of dark skin, but very loving and giving mother.  He made that choice himself.
Speaker 1: So do you think, meaning from what you understand, was he someone who could have passed for white?
Speaker 2: Without any question, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not, not because he wanted to.  My mother [Roslyn Woods Bogle] used to tell the story of traveling and particular in the South, but also in the North, but you saw it and felt more of it in the South.  You couldn't go, go inside and sit down and eat.  You had to take whatever you got and take it out and eat it, eat it.  And as an African American or Negro at that time, you had to go in the Negro entrance, which frequently was not the same as provided for by whites.  My grandfather would go and get the food himself in any door he wanted to go in and they would get it and eat and travel.  But yes, those are some of the stories that were told growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 168403
Speaker 1: So your mother [Roslyn Woods Bogle] had a good education and--
Speaker 2: Very well-educated.
Speaker 1: --was around people that were educated.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And her parents were, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No doubt about it.
Speaker 1: And she, she stored a rich bank of sayings as you (laughter) alluded to before.
Speaker 2: Well my mother was a very learned person and while she wasn't a degreed person from an academic perspective, she certainly was degreed by her sense of reading and knowledge that she obtained.  She, not just her sayings, she was good--I remember as a kid coming home, my mother could help you with anything you had for homework.  My father [John Dudley Bogle] would tell you,  "Go see your mother."  (Laughing)  She, she was an academic, as I said.  She--there wasn't anything, on the academic side, my mother couldn't help you with.  Any subject, math, biology, it didn't matter--English, stickler for English.  Her whole family was, as a matter of fact.  Using good English was insisted upon it.  And her whole family were all educated.  Her oldest--she was the youngest of the first five children, all of them went on to post-high school in some kind of way.  So education was a very important and meaningful purpose in life that was instilled by her parents as they grew up.  So that was an expected outcome for my family.  I'm one of ten children, all ten of these children matriculated at an institution of higher learning.
Story_ID: 168404
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna ask you about all your brothers and sisters in a moment, but let's go to your father's side and can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: John Dudley, D-U-D-L-E-Y, Dudley Bogle.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 23rd, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In--
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now once again, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not as a much as I can on my mother's [Roslyn Woods Bogle] side because my grandfather, his father, was in construction.  But he had died by the time I knew anything about recalling parents or grandparents rather.  He had died by the time I was born.  And there were two other children in his family.  He had, he had a brother, Robert, and a sister; I believe her name was Florence.  But they--he grew up in Washington, D.C. and his parents were dedicated to the  proposition of education being an important part of your ability to be successful, in spite of, segregation and discrimination.  The notion that you needed to expand your learning base, your knowledge base was instilled equally probably between my mother and father.  He graduated from Virginia Seminary [later Virginia University of Lynchburg, Lynchburg, Virginia].  But that's--I can't tell you a whole lot on his side other than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he--was he the first minister in his family or--
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My father wasn't a minister, he went to Virginia Seminary.
Speaker 1: Oh he went to Virginia Seminary.  All right.
Speaker 2: But they offered other academic disciplines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do believe he matriculated with some area of accomplishment in the ministry, but he chose business after he left school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--what did he say about growing up?  What did he talk about?
Speaker 2: Well he was a strict disciplinarian.  Both of my parents were well-read, very giving parents, believed that education was the road of opportunity, but felt that strong character was important, a strong sense of integrity.  There were certain principles stressed almost on a daily basis.  Again, integrity was the foundation of anything that my parents would talk about.
Speaker 1: But I was asking if there were any stories that he told about growing up, about any difficulties he had or any--
Speaker 2: Oh they had--
Speaker 1: --help he had.
Speaker 2: I apologize, yes.  He would talk about the blatant discrimination and segregation, the disregard for Negroes, their ability to participate in this society or that society was extremely limited.  Bear in mind that the African American community or the Negro community had its own community and economic infrastructure.  We owned our own hotels, restaurants, insurance companies, newspapers.  So we, we were forced by the very world we lived in, dominated by whites, that we had our own.  And so my father had a strong entrepreneurial sense, but a very strong sense of, you had to work hard to be a participant in this society.  Truth and integrity were fundamentals to that.  But he would frequently talk about the blatant discrimination and segregation that existed in America at that time.  And yet he had no hate for white people.  Neither did my mother, neither did.  They didn't--as a matter of fact we weren't even able to distinguish friendship, relationships by color--"that white boy or that black boy," or etc.
Speaker 1: Growing up?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so if you--you mean you couldn't refer to--
Speaker 2: Oh if you had too.  He would use the term "was he was a club member or non-club member." (Laughing)  But, but trying to make good or bad, right or wrong based upon color was a no-no, that character and who you are was more important than race.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That you had to be responsible and you had to be work hard to be successful in the way--consistent with working hard was a good education.  But to distinguish and to have blatant disregard for people because of race was a no-no.  Neither one of my parents subscribed to that as a means of who we were, or who we are as human beings.
Story_ID: 168405
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now you said that your parents [Roslyn Woods Bogle and John Dudley Bogle] met at Virginia Seminary [later Virginia University of Lynchburg, Lynchburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: In Lynchburg.
Speaker 2: He was at Virginia Seminary, my father was.  And my grandfather [Robert Woods] was the president of Virginia Seminary.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the introduction--
Speaker 2: But they met in Lynchburg.
Speaker 1: Lynchburg.
Speaker 2: Now I don't know--
Speaker 1: --you don't know the particulars--
Speaker 2: No, they never told me--I don't remember any stories about how they met, but they certainly did and they fell in love and got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now well when you think about their personalities, their sense of humor, the way they walked, the way they talked, what they looked like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother would have said I took after my father.  I don't know, I think I have a little bit of both of my parents in terms of a strong sense of character.  Again, repeating myself, this whole business about truth and integrity, trust were tenets of living.  And both of my parents promulgated that kind of thought with a variety of lessons along the way that were identified with some of those very important characteristics.  They were both teachers in, in this whole business of growing up.  You, you got different lessons at different times, given different issues at the time or experiences.  I'll never forget one time I must have been twelve, fourteen years old, I had this little girlfriend--I don' even know who--I couldn't even tell you who it was, and I came home one day so distraught about this and my mother was ironing at the time and I said, I was talking to her, "Oh, mom, what I'm gonna do?"  My mother said, "Be she fairer than the day than the flowery meads of May, if she not be for me, what care I how fair she be." [sic, George Wither]  And so that was a--that was a means or way of giving a lesson that it'll be okay, you--move on to something else, there's, there's another flower out there.  But this is the way lessons were given to us as children.  My mother was an excellent cook, so I'd go into the kitchen sometimes and she'd give me a lesson in cooking, and we all had to have a sense of, of taking care of ourselves.  I learned how to cook, how to sew, how to iron, these were things that you learned.  This was part of growing up.  You wake up in the morning and you--and your shirt was still in the laundry basket.  You better go down to that laundry basket, get that shirt and go, and go up there and iron it.  Yes, those were things we did growing up, yes.  Like I said, there was ten of us.
Story_ID: 168406
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is a good time to name your siblings.  Can you name them from the eldest to the youngest, putting yourself in the order and tell us a little bit about each one.
Speaker 2: The oldest was John, then my sister Jacqueline, I was the third, my sister Roslyn, my brother [HM] Donald [Bogle], my sister Jean, my sister Janet, my brother Roger, my brother Gerald and my brother Jay.  Those were the ten.  My oldest brother growing up was a role model for me.  Between he and my sister, they also taught lessons of life.  And because of them, I went on to college myself in spite of the encouragement of my parents.  My brother, my brother and sister became role models in that regard.  And I would visit my sister more than my brother.  My brother, my brother had gone to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  My sister had gone to Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], and Cheyney being right here in the Philadelphia region, visit, visited with her more frequently.  Well my brother John was entrepreneurial.  He was a Business Major at Morgan, but he was--he was a role model for me.  He too, was overwhelmed with character and a sense of responsibility.
Speaker 1: What kind of business did he go into?
Speaker 2: He and I went into business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we started an employment service, for the most part, for African Americans.  And we had that business for ten years.  My sister went on and was degreed in education, teaching.  I started out to be a teacher and graduated in sociology with, in urban studies.  And all of, all of my brothers and sisters, without exception, furthered their education and matriculated in a college setting, university or college.  But my sister became the mayor of the town I live in, for an example.
Speaker 1: And that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The first African American.
Speaker 1: That's the town of--
Speaker 2: Yeadon.
Speaker 1: Yeadon, okay.
Speaker 2: Which is where--between Darby, Pennsylvania and Yeadon, Pennsylvania, that's where I grew up.  And she ultimately became the mayor.  She was the first African American mayor of our town.  My sister, Roslyn, went on to work in pharmacy at Merck, I believe it was.  No, I'm sorry Rohm and Haas, Rohm and Haas.  And of course my brother, Donald, the writer, his first book was 'Toms, Coons, Mulattoes, Mammies and Bucks.'  And he be--and is an internationally recognized critic on African Americans in the theater, and has done well.  He's written several books.  'Brown Sugar,' he did a compendium on the African Americans in the theater.  His last book was on Ethel Waters.  I would guess he has six or seven books.  I just--I mean I don't recall all them by name right now, but like I said he did one--I'm sorry he did one on Dorothy Dandridge, Ethel Waters; those come to mind right now.  But his first was a reflection on the role that African Americans had made in the theater and movies.
Story_ID: 168407
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, we're just talking, talking about your brother [HM] Donald [Bogle] who's achieved kind of international celebrity as a black film critic and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --author.
Speaker 2: He is recognized as you said internationally as, not only as an author, but a critic.  And has the very best understanding of the role that the African Americans have played and continue to play in the theater, in the movies.  He used to dress us up as children, children to be in his plays.  Can you imagine, even then he had proclivity, a bent on that whole area of the theater and movies.  He--as a kid I remember him being truly dedicated to that industry.
Speaker 1: Were movies a big part of growing up for the whole family, or, or did he--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or did he just kind of focus on that himself?
Speaker 2: He--right.  That was, that was Donald.  We went to movies, but no one ever dedicated the time to movies that Donald did.  I mean he could tell you the characters, he could tell you their names, the role they played.  (Laughing)  He, he, and of course he would tell you if he thought they were good or bad.  No, he absolutely--you knew very early on that that was an interest he had, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was just wondering--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: As a child--
Speaker 1: --was, was there a film critic for The Philadelphia Tribune then at all?  A black--
Speaker 2: A film critic?
Speaker 1: Black film critic or entertainment (unclear) (simultaneously) --
Speaker 2: I'm certain there was, but I don't remember who it was because they did have a Lifestyles Leisure Department.  Ora Brinkley, Ora Brinkley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who lived in Yeadon [Pennsylvania] by the way.  Pretty much did that kind of writing, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  I don't--now, we, we've interviewed him.  I didn't conduct the interview. Julieanna Richardson, the founder of this organization, did.
Speaker 2: Oh she did?
Speaker 1: Yes she did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I don't know what--you know, I never heard, you know, outside of his appearances on television, you know, like what his--what inspired him, you know, so yeah, so Ora Brinkley.
Speaker 2: He always had this love and keen and unique understanding of the business.  But he had an interest in it.  As I said, when we were children, and he would dress us up in costumes and, "You, you gonna play this role and so-and-so is gonna play that role."  Yes, I guess I should have known then, but, so his sense of dedication and commitment as a child, a child was in that area.  I bet cha, yeah, very, very early on, very early on.
Speaker 1: Right.  He, he maintains a strong place in history of black films.
Speaker 2: Oh even now when we get together as a family, every holiday and he certainly, frequently is center stage because of, of events, the conversation will evolve in many ways frequently around something he is doing and I'm certain that at some point everybody has, has some discussion about what they're engaged in, but since he is so involved and dedicated to this whole business of the movies and the theater he becomes center stage because people wanna know what about so-in-so and what's so-in-so.  Or what did you find out about Ethel Waters and he, and he would go on and say certain things or Dorothy Dandridge.  And people like Otto Preminger and oh he, he himself is well-read.  And he's a story-teller himself.  Yes, he's a story-teller himself.  And he, he has all of the characteristics to be a good story-maker and teller.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he is fit well, positioned well for what he does.
Story_ID: 168408
Speaker 1: --almost everybody's interested in penetrating popular culture--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --on some level and finding out what's going on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Today, you know, this, we found out yesterday that [HM] Ruby Dee passed away.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness yes.
Speaker 1: So I'm sure he's [HM Donald Bogle] going to be consulted and, and appear on radio shows and talk shows and you know, for a couple of weeks probably.  Just in regards to her.
Speaker 2: I can't imagine that there's any--and I just don't want to say major, but he probably knows most of the African Americans and many non-African Americans in the film industry, the Hollywood scene so to speak and he can tell you the stories about them.  Stories doesn't mean gossip or that kind of business.  He, he tends to spend more time on who they are as people.  What, what shows they've been involved in, movies, how well they did and he'll speaks sometimes frankly about that and because we're always very eager to hear his, his perspective or point of view about some of these figures that you see that are popular at a given time.  But Ruby Dee, you can bet without any question--because he knew Ruby and [HM] Ossie Davis because I remember when Ossie Davis died he talked about the two of them.  And Cicely Tyson, I mean, Sidney Poitier--I mean he know, knows and certainly would talk about, about them and their careers.  Not necessarily some gossip or junk, but their acting careers.
Speaker 1: So he was, he was entertaining to be around as a youth.
Speaker 2: Oh, he's an entertainer right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And like I said, he orchestrates it in a way that makes it a good story.  And so you're sitting there waiting to hear more.  Oh yeah, he, he's well prepared.  He's well trained in that regard.
Story_ID: 168409
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let's talk about the other brothers and sisters on some level.  You, you got to him and now--
Speaker 2: My other sister--
Speaker 1: --who's next, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Roslyn worked for Rohm and Haas [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and she retired from Rohm and Haas.  After her was the brother Donald, we just talked about.  And then Jean, my sister, one of four sisters that I have, lives in Baltimore [Maryland] and she manages a program for Johns Hopkins [Baltimore, Maryland], in the healthcare field.  She does a lot of work on high blood pressure, diabetes, those two in particular.  But a comprehensive look on health issues.  And she manages, like I said, a program for Johns Hopkins.  The next sister, Janet, is an Inhalation Therapist and a manager at Lincoln Hall Hospital here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] which is right outside of Philadelphia, that's what she does.  My brother, Roger, works here at the, Tribune.  He's in our Promotions and Special Projects Department.  I have another brother, Gerald, who works for our water company outside of Philadelphia County [Pennsylvania], but he manages a crew for the water company.  And my last brother, Jay, works for our electric company and he handles emergency service for that company, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, that's, that's,
Speaker 2: That's all of them, yes.
Speaker 1: --that's the whole group?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't need to make any more --
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughing)
Speaker 2: -- but that's all nine of 'em, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is a large household?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you all are basically just separated by a few months a piece or is there a big gap?
Speaker 2: Oh, years, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, over about a twenty-five year period.
Story_ID: 168410
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  First thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: First thing I remember?  The first thing I remember was being on a porch in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I guess that's where my parents [Roslyn Woods Bogle and John Dudley Bogle] lived, and watching the traffic go by.  I have no idea how old I was, none whatsoever.  But there are other very important memories.  My grandfather [Robert Woods] coming to visit my mother or the family, my Aunt Octavia, my mother's oldest sister was a crown jewel.  My mother and my Aunt Octavia would talk every single Sunday around the same time.  I believe it was around 10:30 in the morning.  Mom would be fixing breakfast and that was an event itself having breakfast with my brothers and sisters and parents.  But every morning, every Sunday morning my Aunt Octavia and my mother would talk on the phone.  They were very close, extremely close.  She was the oldest and my mother was the youngest, but, those were very fond and sensitive, touching moments and periods in my life in growing up.
Story_ID: 168411
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in.  Did you--you grew, you grew up in Yeadon [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, the first years were in Darby, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Darby, okay.
Speaker 2: My father [John Dudley Bogle] had worked for the Afro American newspapers and was transferred to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and began work here at The Philadelphia Tribune in 1940.  And so we lived on 10th Street in Darby, 332 North Tenth Street.  And we, we were there, I guess until I was about twelve years old.  I did overlooked, overlook the fact that my brother, my oldest brother John, very soon, not long after birth developed polio, and he didn't really walk until he was about eight years old.  But I don't remember any of that.  But in growing up, I, I know why he was so important in my life.  Beyond just a role model he, he had strong character, a strong sense of who he was.  He refused support and help when people would, would wanna--I guess call him handicap, he rejected all of that, he, he was not acceptant of that.  As a matter of fact he even tried to run, be on a racing team, yes.  But those, those were experiences growing up.  Those are little things that I cherished, cherished memories.
Speaker 1: What was the racial dynamic of Darby, is it--
Speaker 2: Darby, D-A-R-B-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Darby, Pennsylvania, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The racial makeup at that time was probably fifty-fifty black and white.  The school--well maybe the school was predominately white.  I went to an elementary school that was integrated.  All of my educational experience--no, most of my educational experiences were an integrated experience.  High--elementary school, junior high school.  [Yeadon] High School [Yeadon, Pennsylvania] was predominantly non-African American.  African Americans made up about 10 percent of my class in graduating.  And I went on to a predominantly--I went on to an HBCU [Historically Black College or University], predominantly African American school.
Story_ID: 168412
Speaker 1: I don't want to jump you there yet, but let me--we always ask this question about growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Strong family, I mean family was everything.  Relationships with brothers and sisters, treating--how you treat people.  Every person was important, none were good and none were bad.  Birds of a feather flocked together.  I mean these were the little things again, you know.  There was always a strong sense, unquestionably about integrity, honesty.  They, they, those were mandatory.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about, about how your parents instilled those values?
Speaker 2: Oh there's one, there were several, but there's one that comes to mind right now.  Being, being in control of who you are, being responsible for what you do.  I believe my brother had gone on to college and he had gone down--downtown is little town, but he had gone not far from home and he probably had more than he should have drank.  But I'm not--by no way am I trying to say he was drunk, but he hit a meter and so the police called my father [John Dudley Bogle] and said we, we--I don't know, but "I was lead to believe, like we have your boy here, John, he hit the meter, but he's okay and it's okay.  What you want us to do with him?"  My father said, "Leave him right there, let him spend the night there."  (Laughing)  And this is a little town, you know, we had a little cell, you know.  (Laughing)  And so the next day he took me, he took me with them and we went down to get my brother John and he--as I recall he told the sergeant, whoever was in charge to take me in the back and let me see this cell.  Of course the police officer closed the door, let me be on the inside of the cell and that was a lesson, you know, that this is a place you never wanna be.  And, of course, my brother never, ever went back to that either (laughter).  But those were little lessons that, that were given growing up, that's an example of one.  But truth was very important.  My father would frequently talk about a liar or a thief.  If you ever had to have one of them, always take the thief, never deal with a liar.  A thief go and hide all of your, all the things you don't want stolen, but a liar you could never trust.  Those, those were tenets, those were some of the tenets in growing up.  And my father would strongly tell you that even if he thought you were wrong, if you were truthful, he would stand with you.  He wouldn't condone wrong, but he would, he would be there with you.  He had--he would be there to support you, help you.
Story_ID: 168413
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Where did you go and--
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church of Darby [Pennsylvania], first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where we first started going.  And then my parents [Roslyn Woods Bogle and John Dudley Bogle] moved to Union Memorial Methodist Church.  And every Sunday we went to church, brother.  I remembered one day growing--one Sunday growing up, I decided, you know, I was too grown, I didn't have to go to church.  And my father said, "Okay."  So he drove down to Darby and dropped my brothers and sisters off, he came back, and said, "Okay so you don't wanna go to church today?"  "Nah, I don't have to go to church."  He said, "Well come on with me."  He took me to the garage, took a rake out and said, "Now when you're done here I want all these leaves raked.  I don't wanna see any here and then when you've done that, come inside, I got a little something else for you."  Of course, next Sunday I went to church, but, (laughing) yeah, it was another little lesson.  But every Sunday we went--oh we went to Bible School and then church.
Speaker 1: Um-mmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even today my sisters still deeply engage in the church.  I don't go as often as I should, but all of us, without exception, go to some kind of church at some time, and have a strong sense of who we are and the Bible, but we were also always taught it didn't matter who you were, whether you were a Christian or a Jew or today, a Muslim, again, just so you went somewhere.  My father and mother strongly believed that there was something bigger out there than any of us.  And so you had a strong sense that--spiritually, you had a strong sense and it didn't matter if you, again, were Christian, a Jew, Muslim, it didn't matter.
Story_ID: 168414
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well tell us about--now, now you started school in, in Darby [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Bridge Avenue Elementary School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said this is a integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: Did you have any--was it integrated just in terms of the students or where there any black teachers?
Speaker 2: No black teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From first to twelfth grade, I had no black teachers at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where there any special teachers or mentors there any way, you know, at that school?
Speaker 2: They were--yes.
Speaker 1: They really--
Speaker 2: They were, there were those in all, all walks of my life in growing up.  My fourth grade teacher, Ms. Coffee [ph.], Ms. Walton [ph.].  I used to sing in those days.  The principal, Mr. Fairier [ph.] I mean, there were, there were always, at some point in life, men and women who reached out and supported, gave support, educationally as well as in character building, yes.
Story_ID: 168415
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now all the while--your, your father's [John Dudley Bogle] working for the Afro [American newspaper], right?
Speaker 2: No, he started working--
Speaker 1: He started work there, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And he was transferred here to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and left the Afro and came to work at The Philadelphia Tribune.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was his role at the Tribune?
Speaker 2: He was--he ultimately became vice president and advertising director.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there any perks to your father being on the inner circle of the Tribune?  Did you get  any--
Speaker 2: Perks?
Speaker 1: Yeah, any perks.
Speaker 2: What does perks mean to you?
Speaker 1: Well perks means like you might get tickets to the ballgame or something because your dad's a part of the staff--
Speaker 2: I'm certain there were, there were, but we--
Speaker 1: Where you might meet a celebrity or something, you know or--
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: You might meet a celebrity in the office like Jackie Robinson or somebody like that.
Speaker 2: I, I remember Thurgood Marshall--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --coming here to the Tribune.  They were local well-known men and women who helped direct and influence what the African American community was in that experience.  Yes, I did have an opportunity to meet many--to know many of them.  But remember I was young.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I was young, the man who ran this newspaper, E. Washington Rhodes, who ultimately brought me here was a person, a mentor, a person I looked up.  And I used to come here frequently, in growing up, with my father.  In those days they worked five and half days a week and so on Saturdays I would be here with them.  And sometimes he would drop me off at the YMCA, which was the only black Y we had and the only place where they had a swimming pool, he would drop me there.  But in most cases I would come right here and spend time here at the Tribune running around as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So many prominent people from Philadelphia and, and in this community in those days, I'm assuming that, that over--would, would come, through, through here that, I mean (unclear)(simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: In our archives you would certainly see [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], like I said Thurgood Marshall--
Speaker 1: Marian Anderson was from this--
Speaker 2: Marian, she lived right-- not far from here.  Yes, but remember I was a kid so my father may say, "Bobby, meet Thurgood Marshall or Marian Anderson."  I mean you didn't know until later on in life, I met some of the most important people in this town, in this entire town one way, one way or another, but didn't realize the importance of that until later on in life.  But, yes, I did have that opportunity to meet many of those people.  They were more local people than--I mean Major R.R. Wright who started the local banks, Citizen, Citizen [Bank] and Southern Bank was right around the corner and his family.  There were different people, [J.] Austin Norris, A. Leon Higginbotham, I mean, Herb Hutton [Herbert J. Hutton]--I mean sure, I mean, but again you did not--I didn't understand the importance or the role they actual paid--played until later on in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I certainly saw them probably one--Robert N.C. Nix, the first African American congressman from Philadelphia was--Pennsylvania, was a friend of Mr. Rhodes who ran the Tribune.  But I--as a kid I'd see him come here and see Mr. Rhodes.
Story_ID: 168416
Speaker 1: So, so what were you interested in growing up?  I mean did you manifest an interest in a certain thing in school?  What were you like?
Speaker 2: What was I like or what was it like?
Speaker 1: What were you like and what were you interested in, in school, and, and when you were a school age kid in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I was interested in anything, by the way, except that no matter what I did I was gonna have to go to school.  Another lesson that was ingrained was you had three options: you could go in the service, you could go to college or you could go get a job.  But you were going to exercise one of those three.  And growing up that was--you knew that you were gonna have to make that choice the day you graduated from high school, you were gonna have to, you, you're gonna have to have an idea what you were gonna do because you just weren't gonna sit around.  My father [John Dudley Bogle] would never tolerate you just laying in bed.  And every morning you had, you had to get up and do something.  And if you didn't have something to do, he did.  He had something for you to do.  But, no all of us, without exception, without exception knew that you were gonna have to make a decision about what you were gonna do in life.  You were going to do something.
Story_ID: 168417
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking and we've had these discussions in Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York] and other places with people who grew up in the black community, but what was South Street like in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  You, you were telling us off camera.
Speaker 2: Remember I was an observer, I wasn't a participant--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and all I, all I would do would be to see the Budweiser up the street or Dell's [ph.] Restaurant, The Postal Card [ph.], Parisian Tailors and there were businesses all up and down South Street.
Speaker 1: These are black business--
Speaker 2: Many were black.
Speaker 1: Many--
Speaker 2: Many were not.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Many were not.  But the one I just named, were Dell's, Postal Card, the Budweiser, they were, they were African American.  But it was an integrated street in terms of who ran what businesses.  The local barber across the street was a barber, around the corner was a barber.  There were two local--there were two stores right here, but this was a jumping hot area.  Across the street was a, not a bar, but it was more of a, of a--
Speaker 1: A club or--
Speaker 2: Club.
Speaker 1: --show lounge or, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, called Collins's and you would see entertainers and men and women who appeared to be well-off, well-dressed, well-spoken, and you would see 'em going in and out of these businesses all the time.  So I knew that South Street was a hot street.  At, at holidays, Easter in particular, my father [John Dudley Bogle] would take me down South Street and I'd pick out a suit for Easter.  My mother [Roslyn Woods Bogle] would make Easter clothes for my sisters.  They enjoyed that and so did she.  But I used to ask her why--I said you don't make any suits.  I don't know if I ever got a real answer, but South Street was a, was a jumping hot street, yes, for entertainment and business in general.
Speaker 1: Did, did--were there any African American theaters or hotels--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or business?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Royal Theater right here between 15th and 16th on South was a big theater where they had talent shows, movies, and it's, and it's--the building is still there, but it doesn't operate as a place of--for entertainment anymore.  I believe that's supposed to be still in the works, but yes.
Speaker 1: Well at least it hasn't been knocked down or, or--
Speaker 2: No, it's still right around the corner.
Speaker 1: Right.  The Regal Theater, theater in Chicago is gone.
Speaker 2: Is it?
Speaker 1: You know, but the Howard [Theatre] in [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 2: Howard--
Speaker 1: --has been rehabbed.
Speaker 2: It is?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Apollo is still there.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say--that's right.  You still have that.  That's right, absolutely.  There's one more too.  The Apollo [Theatre] in New York, the Howard in D.C., we had the Royal Theater here.  There was one more, just went through my mind real quick.  I forgot it that quick too.
Speaker 1: There are many in Detroit [Michigan].  In my hometown [Dayton, Ohio] had two theaters on the street, two black-owned theaters.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Down, they're both gone, Palace [Theater, Dayton, Ohio] and the Classic [Theater, Dayton, Ohio].  But, you know, they--a lot of places had, you know, things are not what they used to be.
Speaker 2: Well growing up in the little town I lived in, we had two movie theaters, The Darby Theater and The Parker Theater, but remember Philadelphia was the big city, was the big town.  They had Peps, Show Boat, Billie Holiday, and she would come here, but this was--remember the birth of the African American community was in South Philadelphia.  It's, it's no quirk that the oldest African American church, Mother Bethel [A.M.E. Church], in Philadelphia is right here.  It's at 6th Street, you're at 16th, so that ten blocks away.  But this is, this is where the African American community lived.  This is, this was the center of African American life, was right here.
Story_ID: 168418
Speaker 1: What you're saying is, let me--if I can just rephrase it, and tell me if I'm right or wrong, you're saying that the cardinal African American community for the country was developed right here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: We have more free blacks here in Philadelphia than any other place in America.
Speaker 1: That's right--(simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Any other place in America and so this was the birth for many things.  The Philadelphia Tribune is America's oldest, continuously published newspaper servicing the African American community.  This year we're gonna celebrate our 130th birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You have the oldest academic institution, both of 'em for African Americans, right here.  Well not right here in Philadelphia but not far from here.  You have Cheyney University [of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania].  They're the oldest in America, those two HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  Cheyney was the first, 1837, the Tribune started in 1884.
Speaker 1: Well the first black newspaper was--
Speaker 2: Freedom's Journal in New York City [New York], 1827, yes.  Harlem [New York City, New York] as we know it today.  John Russwurm and Samuel Cornish started the Freedom's Journal.  But there were subsequently different newspapers that served the African American community.  Frederick Douglass at the North Star, Ida B. Wells had her paper; I mean there was this--several outstanding black newspapers from 1827.  But none continued publishing.  The Tribune is the oldest.  Like I said, we started here in Philadelphia in 1884 at 7th and Samson Street which is now considered downtown Philadelphia, but it's in the south, southern portion or south of the city, South Philadelphia.  That's where you are right now.  This was the birthplace of the African American community.
Story_ID: 168419
Speaker 1: Now did you--were you ever a newsboy?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Long before I was supposed to be.  I think I had to be--I forget how old you had to be, but I was delivering [Philadelphia] Tribunes long before then, yes.  I was, absolutely, how could you be--not be a newsboy and work, and have your father [John Dudley Bogle] work for a black newspaper.  Yes, I was a newsboy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I can't imagine any of my brothers and sisters not having at some time, not having been a newsboy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, now did you--I know your mother [Roslyn Woods Bogle] was a stickler for English and proper speech, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: No, I was not.
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I enjoyed school.  Remember growing up you never, ever saw a reflection of you, as a person.  There were no African Americans, no Negroes, no blacks in any position in the schools I grew up and went too.  They were all white.  The only African American I saw in high school [Yeadon High School, Yeadon, Pennsylvania] was the janitor.  So you didn't have--I mean black history wasn't even taught when I went to school.  Black history was taught at home.  My parents taught me black history, taught my brothers and sisters black history.  No such thing as black history.  So this sense of identity and who you are was passed on, given to you by my parents.  But you didn't have role models that you saw in your high school or your elementary school.  You saw it when you came to places like the Tribune.  But there weren't many African American businesses.  So--school became something you should do.  With my parents, it was something you had to do.  But I never, ever considered not going to school.  Never, ever considered not going to school.  But in my high school, only 10 percent of my class was black.
Speaker 1: Okay now you, you moved at age twelve to--
Speaker 2: Somewhere around, it could have been thirteen, fourteen, right.  It wasn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Out, out to Yeadon [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, up to one mile away.
Speaker 1: Up to, okay.  Is, is Yeadon like a mainline community, called Or--
Speaker 2: It was a well-to-do community college, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That--yes, yes, that is, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: At that time, bear in mind you're talking about discrimination, segregation, well-to-do professional African Americans lived in this town.  The local doctor, lawyer, architect, teacher, yes, it was an abundant presence of African American professionals in Yeadon, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We lived in a portion of the town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was this the black portion of the town?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the African American professionals were dominant in that portion of the town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Going to Yeadon was like moving on up (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what--
Story_ID: 168420
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school in Yeadon [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeadon High School [Yeadon, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, Yeadon High School.  Okay, and were, were there any--now were you involved in high school activities--
Speaker 2: I sang.
Speaker 1: You sang, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So were you involved in the yearbook or, or the newspaper?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Photography or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Clubs, various clubs, French Club?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I took French--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but no.
Speaker 1: Sports?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I carried the bucket (laughing) yeah, never big in stature or size.  My father [John Dudley Bogle] always stressed that's why you need to have something here (gestures to brain) because I was never gonna be able to do it with a strong back.  So you had to develop this here.  Yes, that, those were--again engrained principles, you grew up knowing that.  That was a part of who you were.
Speaker 1: Now socially, would the African American students did they participate in their prom and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes they did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Were there--no, no teachers though, no African American teachers or--
Speaker 2: Not one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Matter fact, the first I saw African Americans outside my immediate community, but not in my school, but there were black teachers and college professors that lived in the town, but I didn't--they weren't in my school.  And I didn't begin to appreciate and have a love of education until I went to undergraduate school, post high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did that at Cheyney [State College, later Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, now were there any--
Speaker 2: And I did well academically there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there--what kind of counseling--did you get any counseling at all at Yeadon High School?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Was it helpful?
Speaker 2: Well they was always--not really.  They told me I was not college material, that I needed to hone my skills on the, on some trade, yes.
Speaker 1: That seems incredible when--I mean your parents were educated and you're--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, when I--in the tenth grade you had three basic areas you went into college preparatory, secretarial or--what did they called it?
Speaker 1: The general course?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was it, the general course, that's what they called it.  And I went home and--by this time I had already had the exposure of college because of my brother and sister.  And I told my parents that I wanted to go and be in college preparatory, but they were not prepared to let me into that program.  So my parents went to school the next day and told them to give me a chance.  And like I said, I did not do well academically.  That could have had some effect on that whole business.  And of course, I'm certain I had instructors who thought I shouldn't be there.
Story_ID: 168421
Speaker 1: But you did like go to--through the college preparatory course?
Speaker 2: Once I got to college, I had a sense of freedom.  I had a sense of being able to express who I was.  I had instructors who encouraged me, who guided me, yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did excel academically in college.
Speaker 1: Now did you have--were you--now you went to Cheyney [State College, later University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well was it a difficult decision as whether to go to Cheyney or some other black college or, or--
Speaker 2: I thought about going to Virginia Seminary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by the way, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Morgan [State University, Baltimore]--but remember, I didn't do well academically in high school so probably, I, I only think I applied at Cheyney.  And I applied there because my sister had graduated--was graduating from Cheyney.  And so I had a sense of who--what Cheyney was and maybe I could be successful.  In those days you, you had to take a college entrance examination.  They didn't have SATs.  And so I waited until the day of registration and went out to Cheyney and went and sat in the president's office because my father knew the president of the school, Dr. [James Henry] Duckrey, and so I waited to speak with him and told him I wanted to come to school, but I hadn't taken the college entrance exam.  So he called the dean and asked him if he would give it to me, and he agreed to give it to me.  And so I went over to the building and took this exam.  I think they had somebody else, they let somebody else take it--I'm not sure because all I remember was sitting there by myself.  And anyhow, I went back to the president's office and sat there and waited and he called and the president told him that I had done well and that I could be admitted.  And so then I told the president I needed a job 'cause I didn't have any money.  And so he sent me over to the cafeteria.  And he called the lady who ran the cafeteria and said, "I have a young man here that needs a job, I wanna send him over."  So he did and she gave me a job in the dish room, washing dishes.  It was a good experience in that, it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So as you said, you, you started making good grades and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I made the Dean's list the last two-- the last four semesters of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was it a struggle in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although I do believe I did have a good academic background which did prepare me somewhat for college.  I just didn't, I didn't do well nor did, I guess, I applied myself well.  There weren't, frankly, people who encouraged, other than my parents, but not at school.
Speaker 1: Not even at Cheyney?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, at Cheyney, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  But, but--
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: But, but you're talking about at Yeadon High School--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --there was no--.
Speaker 2: Oh at Cheyney?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Every day you had someone that--every day without exception.  They weren't equal in that sense but, I can remember instructors to this day who--I remember the first day of registration, I signed up to go over to, to be a teacher in elementary ed [education], but the man that ran industrial arts grabbed me and said, "No, you wanna go over here."  I mean--and then there was--but every--it was always a meaningful experience.  And you had people who would guide you, who would mentor you, help you.  You could go to their classrooms at any time and--someone was always there.  Like I said, I knew the president and his wife, and I would spend time with them, wash their cars so I could earn extra money.  I mean, there were-college was a good experience for me.  It was the lynchpin-- it was the thing that propelled me to do other things in my life.
Story_ID: 168422
Speaker 1: Now, now were you in school with Ed Bradley?  I know you went to Cheyney [State College, later University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he came right after me, yes.  But, yes, Ed was there, yeah, yes.  Ed was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah and who was some of the--I've read--there've been like maybe five people from Cheyney that we've interviewed in the last couple weeks, it's amazing.  They've all kinda ganged up on me.  But, but what's the--who were some of the instructors and some of people that encouraged you and--that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh quite a few.  Dr. Johnson, Catherine Wilson, Mrs. Conyers, Mrs. Johnson, Dr.--but she was--yes.  Dr. Turner, Dr. Gould, Mr. Butcher, there were--there were so many people who were there in one way or another to support you.  I mean I worked when I was in school, so I got to know the people in the Finance Department and his name was Mr. Jones who ran the Finance Department 'cause every month I had to go over there give up my check.  (Laughing) Yeah, yes.  But no, school turned out to be a good experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 168423
Speaker 1: Now at Cheyney State [College, later Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] did you--were you involved in a newspaper--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --school newspaper.  No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I really never had any interest in working at a newspaper.  So let's be clear about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my parents [Roslyn Woods Bogle and Robert Dudley Bogle]--my father in particular, never, ever spoke to me about coming to work here.  But I did tell you that I would come here as a kid, and I would see the people who ran it, whether it was the Advertising Department, the Editorial Department, but a man with whom I called Uncle Gene, ran the newspaper.  His name was E. Washington Rhodes.  And he--one day while I was in business, asked me to come and see him.  I saw him at a reception, he asked me to come and see him.  And so I arranged for the date, which was probably within a matter of days.  And he told me I needed to go sell my business and come to work at The Philadelphia Tribune and he made me an offer.  He offered me $11,750.
Speaker 1: Salary for a year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is 1970?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's, that's good for 1970.
Speaker 2: Then he would give me two shares of stock, and I had to go back to school for business for which--of which he would pay for.  That's how I went to work.  But anyhow he made me this offer and I told him I'd get back to him.  Well I didn't right away and so, I don't know, we spoke again, I don't know, two or three weeks, I don't remember the exact amount of time and he said, "I haven't heard from you."  I said, "Well, I haven't made up my mind."  So he said, "Well, if you haven't made up your mind by the end of this month, my offer is off."  So I came to work here.  I did sell my business.
Story_ID: 168424
Speaker 1: So, let me go backtrack a little bit to Cheyney [State College, later Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], so you graduated from Cheyney in what year?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay, Cheyney.  All right, and your major was--
Speaker 2: I graduated in sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--you, now what--why did you major in sociology?  Did you see yourself as being involved in social science?
Speaker 2: Well remember I, I had gone back to school.  I dropped out and went back to school.
Speaker 1: Oh, you went back to--so you dropped out of Cheyney at some point--
Speaker 2: And in going back being in an urban environment, I changed my discipline to Urban Studies which really was a description of, of living in urban area and you were--we were taught all kinds of issues.  But, but you still had language, you still had the other important things whether it was--and I had a minor in--I called it a minor in communications or which you got marketing and economics.  But in doing so I had a better sense of what I wanted to do and it was no longer to be a teacher.  But coming here, Mr. Rhodes wanted me to go and learn business because part of his offer was that my father expected to retire in three years and if I worked out, then I would be considered for his job.  It was not given to me, it wasn't offered, but I would be considered.  It worked out that way, but yes, that's how I started.  I started here as a salesman.  I didn't start here in any big role.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I did have entree to him, Mr. Rhodes, and I had only been here probably a month, and he asked me did I wanna go to Chicago [Illinois] to represent him at the National Newspaper Publishers Association meeting which was being held in Chicago in June of that year.  Of course, I'd never been to Chicago so I said yes very quickly.  And it was because of Mr. Rhodes and my father that I came here.  Regrettably, unfortunately, two months after I came here Mr. Rhodes died and four months after I came here my father died.  But I stayed.  It's, it's been a good run.  It's been a good place to be.  And we've tried to make it a better place during the time I've been here.
Story_ID: 168425
Speaker 1: Let me just backtrack a little bit, you would have been, I guess, you would've been in college, I guess, when March on Washington [Washington, D.C. 1963] took place?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you go?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I wasn't feeling well that day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  Of course, that's one of the regrets but I can't spend a whole lot of time on what was.
Speaker 1: Well not everybody went, you know, that's, that's for sure, but, that's, you know, sorry you weren't--but were, were you involved in college in--because there was a lot of activism going on in--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was class president, but stepped down and became vice president because I didn't have the time to dedicate and spend to what was really needed to be the president.  But I was elected that, but I, I gave that up.  But yes, I was very active--
Speaker 1: Were you--
Speaker 2: --in college work and some community work but not a lot.
Speaker 1: Were you involved, were you a member of the student chapters of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or anything?
Speaker 2: Student Union, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  They were all still somewhat new at that time, but no I wasn't involved in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: NAACP, but not SNCC or any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had your parents [Roslyn Woods Bogle and John Dudley Bogle] been involved in NAACP?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
