Story_ID: 467533
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] John Beasley, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: You have no middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.  An interesting story.  My father's name was John Wilfred Beasley [John W. Beasley], and so I'm really a junior but my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] didn't like the name Wilfred so she refused to pin it on me.  So I'm just John Beasley.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, when I was young, everybody called me Johnny, Jr., and then there were a sundry of other names.  Bumpy, Lumpy, you know, I had a pretty bad acne problem when I was younger, you know, so, but other than that, no.  Well, I take that back.  I, when I lived, I lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for about five years and I worked on the waterfront and when you're from Philadelphia, if you don't have a nickname, you weren't anybody.  And I worked on the waterfront and, and a lot, people used to call me Red, and some, some of my friends called me Dirty Red, and when I got to Philadelphia, I was working on a--after a while I was working on the waterfront and I worked with a friend of mine, his name was Raymond Gibson [ph.], and Raymond's nickname was Sugar Bear.  And so there was a commercial out at that time, an S.O.S commercial, with the Brillo Pad, the pink pad, you know.  And so, and the thing was that the S.O.S pad would always say, "You're washed up in this town, pink pad."  He started calling me Pink Pad, and so the name kind of caught on the waterfront, you know, and I'd, you know, I'd hear people say, "There's that guy they call Pink Pad," you know, and all up and down the waterfront, I was known because of that nickname, you know.  Some of the guys would call me Pink.  Some of them would call me Pad, you know, some of them would call me, that sort of, that sort of thing so, Pink Pad stuck on the waterfront.  I'm Pink Pad with all these ex-convicts and all then these heavy guys and I was Pink Pad, so, that's the only nickname.
Speaker 1: That's a story, that's quite a story.  So, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 26th, '43 [1943].  I was born in Omaha [Nebraska] at St. Catherine's Hospital.  I don't think it's, exists, it exists any longer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an actor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you.  I know it's October, my closest guess would be October the 11th [sic. October 8, 2007], what is, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I also should say, you're the founder of John Beasley Theater [John Beasley Theater and Workshop]--
Speaker 2: Yes I am.
Speaker 1: --in Omaha, which is a, it requires more than acting to do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah it does, you know, I'll tell you.  Got into it.  I didn't know what I was doing.  I probably still don't but we've been around for seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're here in Omaha, Nebraska.  This is a small business network.  This is where our administrative offices are housed.
Story_ID: 467534
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, you know, I like meatloaf and I love fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that I've ever gone on a vacation.  My wife [Judy Beasley] and I spent some time in Vancouver Island [Canada], loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved it.
Speaker 1: The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I imagine I do.  I can't think of what it would be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Maybe it'll come (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It'll come, it'll come to me.
Speaker 1: Maybe so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 467535
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John W. Beasley] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Grace Virginia Triplett [Grace Triplett Beasley].  That was her maiden name, Triplett.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Omaha [Nebraska], and I'm not very good with dates so I couldn't tell you the year.
Speaker 1: About the '20s [1920s], you think or--
Speaker 2: You know, it was in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Thirties [1930s], okay.
Speaker 2: Thirties [1930s], she was--you know, actually, it was, it was in the, yeah, it was in the '20s [1920s] because, you know, she was twenty years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1923, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about her side of the family, about the ancestors?  How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Her grandmother would be the farthest, you know, that would be the best I could do, her grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's the great-grandmother and, and where did she come from?  Was she from around here too?
Speaker 2: She came from Alexandria, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and did the grandmother, great-grandmother, come directly to Omaha?  Was that the first generation of them that--
Speaker 2: Yes, she, that was the first generation, yes.  She was a single parent.  I can't tell you why but she had three sons, and three daughters.  The daughters were kind of the matriarchs of the family, Laura Triplett [Laura Collier Triplett], who was my grandmother.  Oh, her name was Collier, the last name was Collier.  Triplett was my grandmother's married name.  Then there was Marcella Moore [Marcella Collier Moore] and--
Speaker 1: Now who was Marcella Moore?
Speaker 2: Marcella Moore was my grandmother's sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then there was Lilly [ph.].  Lilly was the other sister.  She was the youngest sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you remember much about them and--
Speaker 2: I remember my aunts, I don't remember my great-grandmother, though.  I believe she was gone.  I never remember her.  She was never--my mother used to tell me various stories about her but I never remembered her.
Speaker 1: Do you, can you remember any stories about her or about--
Speaker 2: I remember my mother telling me that they left Alexandria possibly because one of the brothers got in trouble or because of racial situations down there they left and she came, they came north looking for work.  And the story I was told that she was on her way to Canada and they came through Omaha, and the boys, you know, she left the boys here in Omaha, and they, the boys were older than the girls and she continued on to Canada.  But she got to South Dakota and she, and somehow she left the girls in South Dakota with this farmer and his wife.  She, my grandmother tells the story that it was really a tough time there.  They worked 'em really hard and she remembered her mother coming back, her mother coming back from Canada, she couldn't get into Canada.  She came back to pick the girls up, and my grandmother told the story about them seeing her coming from, you know, far off down the road, you know, and then they, they ran to me, they were so glad to, to see her and then they came back to Omaha because the boys had found work in the packinghouses and, and that was one of the stories that I remember her telling about my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a story, it's a dramatic kind of a story--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, when, anytime your mother has to leave you and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and come back, you know, like that.  It's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and leave her, leave them with strangers too.  Other than working them hard and, and that sort of thing, I didn't hear anything else.
Speaker 1: So one of the brothers must have been in serious trouble, I guess, for them to move so far away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I suppose, you know, I suppose.  You know, I have an uncle living here now that probably knows the story better than, you know, but I couldn't give you any more details on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would have been turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or before, right?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was born in 1900, so, it was, yeah, it was probably in that, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, in 1910s I guess, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother's born in 1900, okay, your mother, 1923?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's, that's, anyway that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my mother was born here so, yeah, it would have been, yeah, the first part of the last century.
Story_ID: 467536
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] talk about growing up here in Omaha [Nebraska]?  What it was like for her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did, you know.  She used to talk about how tough it was, how her brother, Russell [Russell Triplett], would go down to the Hostess bakery and, you know, they would fill out cupcakes and that sort of thing and how he would go around, he's just a young, young boy but he was the oldest brother and he would go out and hustle up food and that sort of thing.  She was talking about how tough it was at a certain period of time, but she also would tell me about my grandfather, he was from, his family was from Davenport, Iowa, as far as I recall and they, they met in Omaha and my grandfather was a cook in the [U.S.] Navy.  In fact, he worked for Cudahy packinghouse [Cudahy Packing Company] at one point and he was the one that invented the brick of chili, you know.  You know what I'm talking about?  When I was a kid, they used to have this chili, you know, it would come in a block and it was, I think it was encased in--lard would hold it together, that sort of thing and you could buy it in a brick and that's what they would make chili with, you know.  I guess you would put it in the, you know, and then they put--
Speaker 1: Hot water and just mix it, okay.
Speaker 2: --the beans in there and that sort of thing.  And he invented that and there was a little blurb in the Cudahy newspaper about my grandfather and, you know, this, but they never gave him anything for it but they made a ton of money for it because I remember, when I was a kid, it was in all the grocery stores and, you know, that's how people made their chili.
Speaker 1: Now that's something.
Speaker 2: He also, in the first black theater in Omaha, he ran the concessions.  So did, he was an entrepreneur.  He also was--
Speaker 1: Was that the Dreamland [Dreamland Ballroom, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: No, the thea- it was called, I don't, I don't remember what it was called.  I saw something in print on it.  It was the first black theater in Nebraska, and he was also part owner of the Ritz Cab Company.  Ritz Cab was the black cab company here in Omaha.  At one point, Omaha was, had a really great black community and, of course, white cabs wouldn't come over but they would, so the Ritz Cab Company did pretty, quite well, you know, until the white cab company started coming into the neighborhood and then jitney stands and that sort of thing kind of ran him out of business.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, you know, he sounds like a real entrepreneur, somebody who's trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but he was an alcoholic.  He became an alcoholic and he squandered all of his money so, and lost everything eventually because of his alcoholism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a, kind of tough in that--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ward Triplett.
Speaker 1: Ward Triplett.  Yeah, it's interesting that they could preserve chili in a block of lard or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  I remember it was orange in color but I could imagine that was only, I imagine that was animal fat that it was encased in and I think that's what kept it together in a solid block and I remember they would just put it in a pot and put the heat on it and then it would, it had the suet and the meat in it and that sort of thing and I think you would add your beans and, you know, and beans are great, chili.  I remember it being kind of greasy though but I mean that fat gave it flavor, though, you know, very flavorful.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's an interesting idea.  I guess a lot of people without refrigera- you know, I would think 'cause I was thinking of it as a frozen product--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no--
Speaker 1: --and then I was thinking back, nobody could do that, though.
Speaker 2: No, no, they had ice boxes in those days but because it was in that, you know, once, once that fat sets up, you know--
Speaker 1: Nothing can get to it really, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, did your mother have a chance to go to school and finish?
Speaker 2: My mother, she had ten brothers and sisters, and she dropped out of school.  Every one of them, except one, dropped out of school early because they had to work.  She eventually went back to get her GED [General Educational Development].  She was a very talented hairdresser, a beautician, and she used to do hair in the kitchen when we were coming up, that was, you know, she was on AFDC [Aid to Families with Dependent Children] but, you know, but it never, you know, it never really was enough to exist on and she would do hair in the kitchen for like a dollar a head, you know, and that's how we ate for the most part.  It was that kind of, you know, that money that, that helped us quite a bit, you know.  It wasn't a lot but she would do that and eventually she wanted to be a beautician.  She wanted to get her license and in order to get her license, she had to go back and get her GED.  And so she got her GED and she went to beauty college and eventually was a licensed beautician.
Story_ID: 467537
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: John Wilfred Beasley [John W. Beasley].  Everybody called him Johnny.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I seldom, I know, I feel like I'm stupid in that regard but I just, I've never been one to keep track of dates and birthdays, and I think the reason why is because my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] never really celebrated birthdays that much, you know.  I guess, well, we never had anything but I remember she would never remember my birthday until after it was past and she would say, "Well, I always remember your birthday 'cause your Uncle Edgar [Edgar Triplett] is on the same date, you know, June 26th," and, but she never remembered my birthday and, I mean, you know, she, you know, knew it was coming or she knew it was but she knew the dates but she never, you know, never thought about it too much.  And so, I don't know, my wife [Judy Beasley] knows everybody's birthday.  If she met you for, and she would know your birthday after a while, you know, and she would send you a card but I'm really bad with that.
Speaker 1: Now did you, was he older than your mother?
Speaker 2: My father, they were pretty close in age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were pretty close in age.
Speaker 1: So, he's about, about the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Early '20s [1920s], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and where was your father born?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not sure but I believe he was born in Broken Bow, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Broken Bow, now that's, that's a picturesque name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's, it was near an Indian [Native American] reservation, I guess.  I'm told that, you know, that I do have some, some Indian blood on that side of the family and my father was kind of a reddish in color and that may be where, you know, where I get my redness from.
Speaker 1: Now where is Broken Bow?  Is that like western Nebraska or--
Speaker 2: It's west of here, probably in the middle of the state, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now are there any stories from the ancestors on that side out in Broken Bow?
Speaker 2: I never knew my father's side of the family that, that much.  He never was with us.  I can never remember my father being in the house with us.  My earliest memories are living with my grandmother [Laura Collier Triplett] and my grandfather [Ward Triplett].  They had a house on the near north side here in Omaha [Nebraska] and I remember that I and my siblings were there.  It was a two bedroom house, actually, three, three bedroom house not very, very large but my uncles lived there, my grandmother, my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Those are on your paternal side, on your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: On your father's side or your--
Speaker 2: My mother's side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I remember a couple of aunts.  It was a crowded place but, and my mother was there with maybe three kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like two--
Speaker 2: I've got four brothers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --four brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm the oldest brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, oldest of four, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Oldest of five.
Speaker 1: Of five, all right.  Now, do you know very much about your father--well, I know you used to live with him in Chicago [Illinois] later on.
Speaker 2: I, you know, I would visit him.  I never lived with him.  My father was quite a--he was an outgoing person, everybody liked him.  But my father also was a con man and according to my mother he was very likeable but she'd tell, she told a story of them living in Council Bluffs, Iowa, which is just right across the river from Omaha here, and how they used to really like it, like Johnny, and he worked for this one guy and my mother said she would, he was stealing, stealing the guy blind but he just liked him and I guess he had been arrested a couple of times because my mother tried to get him eventually, tried to get him into the [U.S.] Army.  He, she tried to get the Army to take him but they said they wouldn't take him because he would probably sell 'em out to the enemies (laughter) and I, he was that kind of guy but he would, he, you know, and the cops there, the cops knew him, they liked him, you know, and he was a very likeable guy but he just really was, you know, he was a con man, you know, but very, and he didn't graduate from grade school.  He never even had a grade school education but yet he went on to become an electrical contractor.
Story_ID: 467538
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a story about how your parents [Grace Triplett Beasley and John W. Beasley] met?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there is but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, and now did he start studying, you know, to be an electrician here?
Speaker 2: You know, he always was good with his hands.  He tells, he used to tell me about him working construction for Peter Kiewit [Kiewit Corporation] here in Omaha [Nebraska], him and his brother, and his brother was a mason and he, you know, they were very good workers.  In fact, his uncle used to, his brother used to run a game for Peter Kiewit.  So he was always good in that area.  He was good with his hands.  He, in fact, he won a garage in a crap game and it was across from Kellom Pool on 24th Street [Omaha, Nebraska] and I remember going by there and, you know, getting pop and that sort of thing when I was a very little guy.  But he eventually went to, moved to Chicago [Illinois] and that's where he'd be, that, he became an electrician in Chicago and eventually an electrical contractor.  A lot of the Jews liked him and, you know, and he just moved up pretty good.  He was a very popular guy.
Speaker 1: Now he, well, so your mother and father separated early?
Speaker 2: Early.  You know, I never remember him being in the house but I remember my mother getting pregnant and coming home with another baby, you know, all five of us have the same father but, you know, for some reason he, you know, she, I don't think she ever fell out of love with this guy, that's what, my gut feeling, you know.  She never had another man in her life but after my last brother, you know, he, I never remember him being in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he left Omaha after the birth of your youngest brother?
Speaker 2: No, he was here for a while.  I can't tell you when he left Omaha but I don't, I think I was, no, I'm not sure.  I was five years old, I think, maybe around that time, maybe he left 'cause I don't remember him being here after that.  He would come back to visit once, maybe once a year.  He would also, you know, around Christmas, I guess, he would give my mother ten dollars apiece for the boys, you know.  I remember, I tell the story about graduating from high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] and my father giving me ten dollars and saying, go to college (laughter).  Johnny Beasley was not a, you know, he wasn't, he wasn't much of a father.  He wasn't much of a father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was always crazy about him though, you know.  Nobody could talk about my dad but he really, he never was much of a father but, you know, on the same token, he helped me quite a bit because, you know, as a father, I try to be everything that he, you know, he wasn't.
Story_ID: 467539
Speaker 1: So you would go to visit him in the summers you said?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, yeah, in the summers my brother, Anthony [Anthony Beasley], who's a year below me, we would, we would go up to visit him in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So how would you go?  Did your mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] send you on a train or something, on a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we would go on a train, take a train ride up to Chicago and visit him, stay maybe a couple of weeks.  I remember being ready to always come back home afterwards, though.  I love Chicago, the feel of Chicago, being in Chicago and that sort of thing and it was fun but at the same time, my father [John W. Beasley] was a, was tough, he was tough and, you know, I came to realize that it's a good thing he wasn't around when we were coming up.
Speaker 1: It'd be a lot different?
Speaker 2: It would have been a lot different.  I think he would have been, you know, he was pretty stern, you know, and, I don't think he would have been great being there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell me this.  Now when you think about your father's personality, your mother's personality, their talents and various attributes, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I have some of both of them in me.  I have my mother's, my father's personality.  I'm outgoing, I've always been popular and at the same time, my mother was more of a giving person, a caring person.  She would feed anybody and I think I have those attributes also and she's very likeable, a very likeable person but I think I lack my father's drive to a certain extent.  He was a hard worker.  I didn't, I never cared for hard work but I, you know, I would do what I had to do.
Story_ID: 467540
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have a first, an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  You know, I can, I can remember my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] coming home from the hospital with my brother, one of my brothers, probably Gary [Gary Beasley], I remember that.  I remember visiting my, my father's [John W. Beasley] mother, my grandmother on my father's side.  She lived not too far from us and I remember going up these stairs to her apartment.  I never knew my grandmother that much.  I never knew her.  She died, in fact, that fierce family history thing.  She died at an early age so that's probably why.  I didn't know her that well.
Story_ID: 467541
Speaker 1: You described the house, did you grow up in that same house that, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, I did.  We grew up on 26th and Caldwell [Street], until I was in the fourth grade, and I remember we had this coal stove and, and the basement was not finished, it was, in fact it was like clay or dirt in the basement, this big stove down there, and we had chickens in the yard.  We had chickens.
Speaker 1: Now was that common in Omaha [Nebraska] in those days?
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  In the neighborhood that I was in, in fact, catty-corner from us, Mr. Kimsey [ph.] had a barn in his backyard, and they had chickens and, and ducks and I remember going in there, getting eggs and that sort of thing, maybe stealing eggs or something like that, you know, and across the street from him, this guy had fruit trees and we used to go and steal apples, and that sort of thing but, yeah.  In fact, when I was a kid, I remember the ice man coming around and I remember there was one guy that had a horse and wagon, a junk man, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it common to see a horse and wagon in Omaha in those days?
Speaker 2: Not common, no, not common.  It was becoming less and less common, I guess, in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  I guess it was probably done by the '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 467542
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, if you talk about smells, you'd have to talk about the Omaha [Nebraska] packinghouses.  In the summer when it was really hot, the smell, well, I guess 'cause the wind was coming from the south it would blow that smell into North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] but growing up in Omaha was, it was, I remember really a great time because of the three, the community was really vibrant.  You could walk down 24th Street and eventually hit 24th and Lake [Street] and anybody that, you know, if you were looking for anybody on a Friday or Saturday night, you would find them right there.  You know, you could stand on that corner and eventually they would come by but there were stores, there were all kinds of stores.  There were ice cream stores, there were drugstores, there were clothing stores, barbershops, it was just a lively community up until about 1968, you know, when they started burning things down but I would imagine prior to then, prior to that time the stores were probably leaving the community.  There was a shopping center that opened up and I think it killed downtown and, and the community, the neighborhood stores also.
Story_ID: 467543
Speaker 1: A lot of cities have kind of a black downtown, like a pre-downtown or something.  Was 24th [Street] kind of like that too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it was.  It was just part of the community.  The blacks were limited to the north side, the near, what they call the near north side.  This is, you know, this is where you had to live.  And so, you know, we had quite a community.  We had black doctors, we had lawyers, we had dentists, we had all that and so it was, it was anything you wanted, you know, you could find in the neighborhood which is one of the things I loved about Chicago [Illinois].  You had neighborhoods.  Omaha [Nebraska] really doesn't have neighborhoods, maybe with the exception of one or two areas in the city but we used to have this community and we had clubs and all that stuff and I remember, as a kid, there was even a comic book store, you know, used comics and we could go in there and my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] would take us in there and we could buy these used comics.  They would have the cover torn or something because they couldn't resell them, whatever, but she would let us pick out a couple of comic books or something, maybe it'd cost a nickel or less and, and then there was also the Ritz Theater [Omaha, Nebraska] and this was the black theater.  It was owned by a Jew but this is where, you know, the black films were played and, and I would imagine some, some A films, I'm not sure or I can't remember, but I remember seeing things like, 'Flash Gordon' and that sort of thing in serials.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that a popular thing to do on Saturdays or something to go to a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was, it was pretty popular, you know, and they sold pop and popcorn, of course.  The pop came in a bottle and I remember they had the red or the orange, you know.  You could (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Red or orange.
Speaker 2: Red or orange, it was strawberry or orange, you know, pop.  Eventually, later on, kids used to, you know, started throwing the pop bottles in the theater, you know, and of course there was always the, the talking, you know, to the movie and talking, that black people do, you know, that sort of thing so you didn't really go there to enjoy the movie, you know, but it was a social thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, Ritz was primarily a movie house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the, the other place that I read about, it was the Dreamland [Dreamland Ballroom, Omaha, Nebraska], that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Dreamland was a, yeah, was a, Dreamland was a--
Speaker 1: --big shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would do shows.  I remember, as a kid, going by and seeing Ray Charles' bus in front of the, you know, the side there or, or James Brown or, or [HistoryMaker] B.B. King or, you know, somebody like that, you know, and because blacks couldn't stay downtown, you know, they would stay in the neighborhood, either with people that they knew or there was a hotel on the north side called Hotel Calhoun [Calhoun Hotel, Omaha, Nebraska] and they would stay there.  And, of course, there were houses, there were boardinghouses and that sort of thing but that was, that was all part of growing up in Omaha.
Speaker 1: Now do they have like a black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] or anything?
Speaker 2: We had a black YMCA.  It was one of the places we used to hang out as a kid.  It never, it was, it never was much of a facility but it did have a basketball court and that's about all it had really.  It might have had an area where you could play ping pong but YMCA never invested very heavily in the black neighborhood.  Even to this day, they have a presence in the black neighborhood but not the kind of presence that they should have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think they do it because the charter, you know, because of their mission statement, you know, but, and that, and then it was just recent, last ten, twelve years, I guess, that--
Speaker 1: Now what were you interested in most, as a young kid?
Speaker 2: Sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved sports, loved football, you know.  I loved basketball, not as much as football.  We used to play football in the, in the street, you know, that sort of thing.  So you could always play football.  In fact, when we left my [maternal] grandmother's [Laura Collier Triplett] house when I was in fourth grade, we moved to the projects which was really just moving on up, you know.  You had hot and cold running water, you know, and that sort of thing and, and we had, I remember we had green spaces there and I would always, you know, I was always the leader in getting the pickup football games going.  And so we, you know, I and all my brothers played, eventually played football.
Story_ID: 467544
Speaker 1: Now, the interesting thing that you said, a lot of people now, listening to this, when you said it, would probably, you would say, "Huh?" when you talked about the projects being a move up.  And in those days they actually were, right?
Speaker 2: It really was because with my [maternal] grandmother's [Laura Collier Triplett] house, we never had hot water and you'd have to boil the water and so we, you know, you get hot water from the tap and refrigerator and, and all that stuff.  Eventually, my grandmother eventually, they got a refrigerator and that sort of thing.  In fact, my uncle, Leon [Leon Triplett], when he came back from the [U.S.] Air Force, we also had, when I was at my grandmother's, we also had the first TV in the neighborhood.  So I remember, you know, the people used to come around and sit around and watch these few shows that were on, you know, that was on the TV, you know, but we were--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite show?
Speaker 2: 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] was (laughter), 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie,' where did that come from (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that was produced in Chicago [Illinois], yeah, right there in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Howdy Doody' was a, was the big show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then we used to watch, what, was it Wednesday or Friday night fights.
Speaker 1: Oh, the ones that Gillette [The Gillette Company] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Gillette ['The Gillette Cavalcade of Sports'], you know.
Speaker 1: Pabst Blue Ribbon beer.
Speaker 2: Pabst Blue Ribbon, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so TV was a big part of, I guess, of growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yes it was.
Story_ID: 467545
Speaker 1: And the football.  Now, so you all liked to play football, now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I've noticed that baseball does--it doesn't seem to be as big out here?
Speaker 2: You know, it was when I was younger.  Bob Gibson was here, you know, from, and Bob and Josh [Josh Gibson], and I remember, but baseball was not a big part of what we did.  I think the neighborhood I was growing up in, we didn't have a baseball field.  We didn't have a place to play baseball.  We would play at, you know, on the street but, you know, but it really wasn't as exciting as football and baseball was kind of boring, you know, but that's because I didn't know the game.  Golf used to be boring to me but now that I play it (laughter), but I remember a really, really terrible experience in baseball for me.  I was in, Howard Kennedy [Howard Kennedy Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska], I went to Howard Kennedy School.  After we moved to the projects, in the fourth grade, I went to Howard Kennedy School and Bob Rose was the gym teacher and the coach there.  He coached all the sports.  [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers was there, Roger Sayers, his brother, a lot of great athletes came through at that time.  Actually, Bob Rose was Marlin Briscoe's cousin, taught him everything he knew, and I was really good, you know, on the field, the playground, I could hit that ball a ton and I remember Rose coming to me, because I played flag football for him, he said, "We need another guy for the baseball team," 'cause we're playing in the, you know, this team, so, I said, okay.  I, so I go out there and play and now this ball is moving faster than I've ever seen it move before.  I couldn't hit it.  I was out in the outfield, the ball would come at me and I would drop it.  I was just, it was just a really, a bad experience.  It, and that stayed with me all the rest of my life.  I never could play baseball because I, you know, I never, if I had taken the time, you know, had somebody throw to me and, and of course I'm very athletic, I could have done it but I think that experience really tainted baseball for me.  I tried it several times when I was in the [U.S.] Army.  I went out for the softball team and, and it was just, I don't know, I would just freeze up, you know.  That's the only sport that I never really mastered, I never could get a hold of.  I play tennis, golf, football, basketball.  I remember, not too long ago, talking to my high school coach [Richard Christie] and asking him how come he never let me on the basketball team and he says, "Because, John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], you were a football player," and that's how I played basketball, like I was a football player, so, but, yeah, I had, I, you know, sports was a big part of my, my coming out.  In fact, when I got, when I went into the service, I played on, on a few football teams and I went to Germany.  I was in Germany for a year and a half and I played on, I played football on the group level, this was the highest level sports in the [U.S.] military, and in fact we were USAR [U.S. Army Reserve], U.S. Army and [U.S.] Air Force champions the year that Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed and we had beat the best team in Europe, 24th Infantry Division, we had beat them and they were just really, they had a couple of great running backs, Clarence Childs and Roy Shivers, both of them came out and played football, eventually professional football.  In fact, Clarence Childs I understand, is probably a commissioner up in Canada.  I saw his name come up not too long ago, and he played for the New York Giants and Roy Shivers played for St. Louis Cardinals [Arizona Cardinals], St. Louis, was it Cardinals then?  Yeah, it was St. Louis Cardinals then, and, but we, we beat them and then in the next week, we got beat by a team that hadn't won anything.  I guess it was such a big letdown.  So we were co-champions and we were going to have a playoff and Kennedy was assassinated and they just cancelled everything, all sports and all, all activities so we wound up being co-champions.  And so, I had made a decision when I was in the Army that I was going to come back and get an education because some of the superiors, our sarge- I remember being in a formation and this sergeant was saying, "All right you men, what's wrong with you men, can't you hear?"  And I thought, you know, this is the guy that's over me, you know, I, there's no way I'm going to stay in the Army, you know.  I'm going to get out of here and get an education.
Story_ID: 467546
Speaker 1: And so my football coach in the [U.S.] Army asked me, he said, "What school do you want to go to when you--," I said well, I didn't know anything about college.  "Ah, University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]."  So, I get back to Omaha [Nebraska] and there were a couple of community leaders, Beverly Blackburn was one and Charles, Charlie Washington [Charles B. Washington] was the other, and they gave me a call and said, you know, Bob Devaney, the new coach down in Nebraska is, wants to meet you, he wants you to come down.  He said, you can drive down with us on fest day of, you know, to meet him.  So, I'm, I was, I got to thinking, I was, you know, how am I going to live in Lincoln [Nebraska] and where am I going to stay.  How am I going to eat?  If I stay here in Omaha, I could always stay with mom [Grace Triplett Beasley] and eat her food.  So I went out to Omaha University [University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] at the time and Coach Al Caniglia, he was the head football coach there, I walked in his office and I told him how, I wanted a football scholarship.  And so, Al said, "Well first we have to see if you can play football."  And I felt, well, no problem, you know, I learned quite a bit while I was in the service.
Speaker 2: What did you play?  What position did you play?
Speaker 1: I played guard.  I was left guard and I played, in those days we played both ways and I played on defense.  I played monster back which was the middle linebacker, sort of, you know, you played on the line or back and as a freshman, and I went in and I got a scholarship, I earned a scholarship and my brother, Gary [Gary Beasley], was graduating from high school.  He had a scholarship offer of, football scholarship offer from Iowa State [Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa] and an academic and football scholarship offer from the University of Nebraska and we wanted to play together.  So, I told them, you know, we had to get my brother a scholarship.  I didn't know how this stuff worked.  And they said, "Well John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], we can't do that," you know.  Well, if you don't want my brother, you don't want me, so I left.  I left the school and they called me for a week, you know, and finally they got a hold of me and I went back and they said, all right, we'll give your brother a scholarship, but we both went back.
Story_ID: 467547
Speaker 1: My brother [Gary Beasley] didn't feel he was getting a fair shot so he eventually left and, and joined the [U.S.] Air Force but I stayed on to play and, and Marlin Briscoe was the quarterback, you know, and a heck of a guy.  I remember him, yeah--
Speaker 2: Marlin Briscoe, now this is, he's the first, I guess, he's first--
Speaker 1: First starting black quarterback in the NFL [National Football League].
Speaker 2: --start in NFL, eventually, yeah, but he was the quarterback at Omaha University [University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] when you--
Speaker 1: At Omaha University and then he got, they called him there, Marlin the Magician.  He was just magical on the field.  This guy was, he was Fran Tarkenton, a black Fran Tarkenton, so he was better.  He was better than Fran Tarkenton.  In fact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he could run and pass and--
Speaker 1: --he can run and he can pass the ball and he and Fran Tarkenton became pretty good friends.  In fact, I did a show called, 'NCIS' with Tom [Mark Harmon], with the, he was the quarterback for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], Tom, what's Tom, Harmon, Harmon, yeah, and Harmon, you know, and I were talking and he told me a story about Marlin.  He said that when he was quarterback at UCLA, he talked to Fran Tarkenton about the option, you know, being an option quarterback and Fran Tarkenton told him, he said, you know, if you want to be an option quarterback, you know, study Marlin Briscoe.  And so he said he studied Marlin Briscoe.  He said, Marlin, with Marlin he said, it's just, it's like kissing, you know, when you're running that option it's like kissing a girl.  He said, you stick that ball in there and you hold it in for as long as you can and then you take it out.  And he said that, you know, he perfected his position by studying Marlin Briscoe, you know, incredible.  Marlin was only, Marlin's only 5'10".  They thought he was too small to play full quarterback in the NFL plus they didn't want a black quarterback--
Speaker 2: Right, right, that was always the--
Speaker 1: --but he did win a position and was runner up to Rookie of the Year, for Rookie of the Year, though he hadn't started the season.
Speaker 2: I think he won the, the games he started for Denver [Denver Broncos] when he--
Speaker 1: He won the games he started, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think the regular quarterback--
Speaker 1: Steve Tensi went down with an injury, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went down and Briscoe was, came in and won all the rest of the games.
Speaker 1: Won the games but, in the NFL highlight films ['NFL Films'], I remember John Facenda who was the voice of the NFL highlight films, talking about Marlin the Magician, you know.  We used to watch every Sunday just to see if we can, you know, get a glimpse of Marlin, you know, and, but Lou Saban just didn't care for Marlin and didn't want a black quarterback so at the end of that year, he got rid of him, sent him, sent him out and Marlin eventually wound up with Buffalo [Buffalo Bills], with a rookie, O.J. Simpson and Haven Moses, at wide receiver.  They switched Marlin to wide receiver.  He was the most valuable player on that team, at that position, and, you know, went on to the Pro Bowl at a position he had never played before.  Lou Saban was fired at Denver, got hired at Buffalo, first thing he did was sent Marlin packing, you know, and sent him--
Speaker 2: I wonder what that kind of a, you know, did Marlin ever talk about what, what that was about, why Lou Saban didn't like him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he did.  You know, Lou Saban just didn't like him, didn't want him.  In fact, Lou Saban, Marlin, he, they held a special quarterbacks camp Marlin's second year and, and Marlin, one of the coaches up there, assistant coaches who liked Marlin, he says, you know, he was traded because he was the one that got Marlin a chance to play.  And so he fired the--Lou Saban eventually fired this guy.  The guy called Marlin and said, "Hey listen, I think you need to know this but they're holding a quarterback camp up there in Denver [Colorado]," and Marlin wasn't invited.  So he went up and, you know, he ran into Steve Tensi and Steve says, "Marlin, I'm sorry to hear about this, man, I'm sorry about this," you know, and, but he eventually, they got rid of Marlin and, but, you know, it turned out for Marlin's best.  He went to Miami [Miami Dolphins] and was a part of the 17-0 team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, undefeated, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and also, you know, an integral part of their, their next Super Bowl.  So he won a couple of Super Bowl rings.
Story_ID: 467548
Speaker 1: I want to go back to, believe it or not, to grade school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we didn't talk about that but, but where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to grade school, my first grade school was Long School [Omaha, Nebraska] and then transferred at the, in the fourth grade when we moved to the projects.  We, I went to Howard Kennedy [Howard Kennedy Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay, Howard Kennedy.  Now, was this, I suppose this is mostly a black school--students, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, black students mostly.  I remember one white kid and the principal was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, because in those days, they didn't have, yeah well there was one black principal in the, in the system, his name was Eugene Skinner and Skinner was the principal at Long School but blacks couldn't teach in high school or any place like that so that's all, and you only had, you had only them in the grade school level.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, were most of your teachers white at Howard?
Speaker 2: Most of my teachers were black.  They were all black with the exception of, well they were all, with one, Mr. Vincent [ph.], when I was in the fourth grade and the kids gave him such a hard time and I remember one girl throwing an eraser at him and they just didn't respect Mr. Vincent and he, I remember him always saying, "You're not going to run me away from here," and then one day coming to school and he had gotten a job as an insurance salesman.
Speaker 1: So they did, actually?
Speaker 2: Did run him away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, okay so, what kind of a student were you in school?
Speaker 2: I was a, I was never--was a very good student.  I was always a daydreamer and kind of student that would, the day before a test, I would start studying and that sort of thing.  I was always, I, you know, I would pick stuff up in class, you know, during the discussions and all that stuff, you know, and, and I'd know all that stuff but as far as reading the books and that sort of thing, I just never, I never really got into the books and my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] wasn't one to really push us and follow us, though she wanted us to graduate from high school, that was very important to her, but she never, but, and, and, and the reason for that was, she had, she had all she could do to put food on the table and to make sure that we had shoes or that sort of thing.  I remember going to school with holes in my shoes and that sort of thing and clothes maybe too small for me but, you know, her thing was trying to find something to eat for us and she had a lot on her plate with five boys.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you couldn't even wear the hand-me-downs 'cause you were the oldest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the oldest, yeah, and, but I, you know, I always knew she was doing the best that she could do.
Story_ID: 467549
Speaker 1: Did you have to work and that sort of thing as a kid?
Speaker 2: I did work.  She [Beasley's mother, Grace Triplett Beasley] never forced us to work or get out to work but I did.  Well I remember having a paper route, I wasn't very good at it.  I remember being a dishwasher and a pot washer at, one of, a couple of the hotels around town, that sort of thing but nothing really, didn't do a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: There weren't a lot of work, there wasn't a lot of work for kids in those days, you know, I mean, unless you did those, especially in Omaha [Nebraska].  I remember there was a black employment office, you know, they would find you work and that sort of thing.  You couldn't go to the white employment, you know, looking for jobs 'cause, you know, you just wouldn't, you know, it wasn't anything there.  In those days, when I was coming up, blacks couldn't work as, in the retail stores.  You couldn't, the only thing you could do in the retail stores downtown was run the elevator or, you know, janitor at night, you know, they came out at night so they weren't seen so there really, never really was any black presence.  So that, those were kind of jobs that, you know, we thought were prestigious in those days, you know, being a clerk at a, because you couldn't get those jobs.  I was surprised when I went to Chicago [Illinois] and in the black neighborhoods and saw black people working in grocery stores and that sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a, yeah, okay, yeah, that's right, though, you're right.  There weren't blacks behind cash registers in those days in most places.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I loved English and, yeah, English was probably my favorite subject even though I didn't even study that too much but I loved, you know, making speeches and that sort of thing and, again, I was the kind of person that, when it was time for me to give a speech, I would go up in front of the class and I would wing it and the class, they would just love it, you know.  I'd give great speeches and then I'd go back to my desk and, and do the outline, after I had given the speech (laughter).  I was a bad student.  I really was a bad student.  I don't know any--in my mind, I always felt that I didn't need this for what I wanted to do in life.  Some reason I always felt that I was going to be an entertainer of, you know, of some sort.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did think that early on?
Speaker 2: Early on--
Speaker 1: You thought that, okay.
Speaker 2: --as a kid, I remember learning the commercials and singing the commercials in front of the family gathering or something, you know.  "Come on, Johnny [HistoryMaker John Beasley], let's hear that Jello song," you know, you know, something like that, you know, and so I would do that sort of thing, you know, and I like singing.  I thought maybe I would be a singer, you know.  I was in several, even in grade school, I would be in singing groups, you know, doo-wop stuff and talent shows and that sort of thing.  I thought eventually I would be a singer, you know, in some kind of Temptations-type group [The Temptations], you know, but the problem was is that the guys that I would be in the groups with, they never had those kind of visions that they could go any further, you know, so they didn't really put into it and I never thought of myself as a lead singer, so, it was, you know, and, but, I knew that I loved speeches and working with my voice and that sort of thing--
Story_ID: 467550
Speaker 1: We had two black theaters here.  The, one of the stories that I heard, the one where my grandfather had the concession stand was, is that Mr. Taylor [ph.], who owned the Ritz Theater [Omaha, Nebraska], had somebody throw a stink bomb in the theater and--
Speaker 2: His own theater or the other theater?
Speaker 1: No, the other theater--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the competition, and eventually that one closed down and it was before I was, before, you know, I had a memory of it, so, we wound up with the one theater.
Speaker 2: So one stink bomb is all it took?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just closed them down.
Story_ID: 467551
Speaker 1: I was asking you who your favorite singers were, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, and I used to, you know, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson.  I remember when I was in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] and, of course, Aretha Franklin, Little Willie John, oh, there was any number of, I just loved music, just loved music and when I was coming up, there was no Top 40 so a lot of the tunes I remember were tunes like, you know, those little standards that they're doing now again, you know, the Cole Porter stuff.  It seems like it would be around forever.
Speaker 1: That was a--
Speaker 2: Just beautiful music.
Speaker 1: Were the black 45s [45 rpm record] being sold out of these little corner stores in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  We had the record sto- we had a couple of record stores here and we'd buy those 45s, Little Richard and those guys, you know, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you're right at the, in the generation where rock and roll hit?
Speaker 2: Rock and roll was starting, yeah, just starting, yeah.
Speaker 1: And well, what we would now call rhythm and blues, I think, rock and roll, the name has morphed into something else (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Into something else, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to a long hair and all that other stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in those days, we'd call it rock and roll, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chuck Berry and all that.  Yeah, it was, in the '50s [1950s], you know, it was, it was a great time, great time, musically.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you pattern, when you were a kid, did you see yourself singing like any particular singer?  Did you think you were going to be like Johnny Mathis or Roy Hamilton--
Speaker 2: Johnny Mathis, you know, I used to love Johnny Mathis, you know, and I could see doing some of that Johnny Mathis, I said, I could do that.  'Chances Are,' you know, Johnny Mathis and, but, you know, it has a--but loved the singing groups, though.
Speaker 1: Sam Cooke and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved Sam Cooke, you know, and I loved harmony.  Harmony was, you know, it was just--
Speaker 1: So you liked The Temptations?
Speaker 2: Just loved, yeah, I just loved harmony, you know, good harmony.
Speaker 1: I think before, or The Coasters or The Drifters.
Speaker 2: Coasters, Drifters, they had a group and I think they had some, some of the members, there's a group called The Sultans and I think some of the members were from Omaha [Nebraska].  Eugene McDaniels was from here, 'A Hundred Pounds of Clay,' you know.  Gene was here and there was just so many of 'em and I just, just loved the, loved the harmony and loved the, loved the vocal groups but I never, never thought I would, I never thought I was going to be an actor, I don't know why.  Never thought of, thought acting was going to be my thing until I got to high school.
Story_ID: 467552
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Went to Tech High [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay, Omaha Tech (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, went to Omaha Tech.  Went to Tech because Tech was, it was like a family tradition.  Everybody in the family went to Tech High.  The other school that we could go to was Central [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska].  And so there was only really two schools that we could go to, Tech or Central, and so, you know, blacks, you know, either went to Tech or Central.  My family went to Tech.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers and his brother, they went to Central, you know, and so that we'd play together in high school, we played against each other in, in--
Speaker 1: Really, now what, what was that like playing against Gale Sayers in high school?  So I take it he hasn't hurt then, 'cause in the pros [National Football League], I mean, people say, and I agree, that he was probably the--of all the running backs that ever played, he's probably the greatest to watch and he didn't set the record as some of the rest of them did only 'cause he kept getting hurt but he was, had to be the best running back anybody ever saw.
Speaker 2: He was the best.  Gale was, Gale was incredible.  I remember playing against him as a freshman and then as a junior, playing against him in a big stadium and we were behind, and this was the big rivalry, Tech and Central, and we were behind 27-0 at halftime.
Speaker 1: Twenty-seven to nothing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then we came back and we won the game, 34-27.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  Did Gale Sayers get hurt?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't get hurt.  We just, we stopped him.  We stopped him in the second half.  I remember the halftime, was really funny, there was some, some drunk that got in there and, into the locker room and he kind of gave us a pep speech but I remember the coach, Christie [Richard Christie], saying, you guys are doing everything that I've told you.  He said, "All I can say is that, you know, just keep playing, just keep playing."  We went back out there and just had a hell of a second half and won that game.  The next year--
Speaker 1: So, and that was--
Speaker 2: --and that game also you had, you know, it had, not only did it have Gale Sayers on it, it had Roger Sayers, his brother.  Roger was the only athlete to beat Bob Hayes in the hundred yard dash.  He beat him in a meet out in Los Angeles [California] with Wilma Rudolph and the Russians were there and, and he beat Bobby Hayes in the hundred yard dash.  And so, Gale's senior year, Roger was gone, Gale, Gale ran four touchdowns against us (laughter).  He ran four touchdowns against us.  I remember tackling Gale one time and, you know, on a kickoff, I tackled Gale on a kick off once and I remember him looking up, "Beasley [HistoryMaker John Beasley]," you know.  Gale and I remain friends to this day.  I remember visiting him in Chicago [Illinois] on a couple of occasions and Gale was injured twice with knee injuries but, in the five year period, Gale made history.  I mean, he just, he was just an incredible back to watch.  He always said that he wasn't fast, but Gale had the moves.  I mean, he had the vision and he just, his moves, he just was incredible and he was following a legend in Chicago with Willie Galimore, I believe it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  Willie Galimore was, we used to, as you said, we used to sit on Sundays and wait for the football highlights--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to see Little Willie Galimore, Chicago, and see what he's going to do next.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and see, we would get Chicago [Chicago Bears] here in Omaha [Nebraska].  We'd get Chicago and we'd get Kansas City [Kansas City Chiefs] when they eventually came, but we would get Chicago so everybody here, Omaha, they, we were Chicago Bear fans, you know.  We'd watch the game on Sunday and then go out and play football and somebody would, my brother would always be Mike Ditka or, you know, you know, those kind of, you know, you know, those kind of, I always fancied myself as a Jim Brown.  You know, I was, and I was considered a big guy coming up but eventually I, so I'd always, they would always put me on the line and I always--every linesman's dream was to become a running back, you know, and I always wanted to run fullback, you know.  And so, you know, you had asked me what position I played, so I played left guard because I had the speed and on defense--
Speaker 1: You can pull out ahead of the back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could pull out ahead of the back, you know, and I was always, I was always pulling to the right, you know, leading that back around and, and, but I always wanted to play fullback, you know.  And so, Marlin Briscoe and various guys always laugh at me to, even today, you know, about wanting to play.  He was one of the best guards in the city, you know, and even in high school, I'm the best guards in the city in my senior year, I'd give out, I played fullback, should have stayed on the line, though, you know.  Just didn't have the experience or the moves, you know, or probably the speed either, you know, to be a great running back but I like running over people, I like hitting people so I figured that's what, you know, all I had to do was run over people--
Speaker 1: Okay, so well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but again being a bad student, you know, I never would study the plays that well.  So, and as a freshman in college, I called defensive plays, I called the defensive plays as a freshman.
Story_ID: 467553
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well you're playing the key position, that monster back thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's the guy really running the defense, yeah.  So, in, in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] now, so your mother's [Grace Triplett Beasley] dictum was to finish high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you got to finish high school.
Speaker 1: --had, everybody finish, so you took, what the general course to study or did you, or did you think that you were going, take the college--
Speaker 2: General cour- you know, I actually, I took college prep courses because I didn't want to take just the, you know, I didn't want to, you know, take the dumb class 'cause I've always felt I was pretty intelligent, you know.  I was just lazy as far as reading, you know, but if it was said in class, I could pick it up, I could reason it out and I was always in the discussions in class, you know.
Speaker 1: Now were you interested in the arts in general?  I think, did you draw or did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the arts were always my draw, I was, in fact when I went to college [Omaha University; University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], I took up drawing and my art teacher in college, Gary Day, was his name, and we would be, and we'd draw, he'd give us different projects and we'd be in school drawing and Gary would walk around to the various students and he would say, hey, well, listen, you do this and do that and Gary would always give somebody instruction.  And so one day I asked him, I said, Gary, I said, you know, I thought, you know, maybe it's a racial thing, and I asked him flat out one day, I said, "Gary," I said, "you never critique my work.  You never say anything about my work, why is that?"  He said, "Because you always work it out."  And so he never, you know, and he told me, he said, "I think you'd be a hell of a draftsman, you know, if you stay with this."  And I took another class after his and this guy, the art teacher asked me, he said, "Where did you learn to draw like this?"  I said, "Well, Gary taught me but I guess it was just something that I had in me," you know, I--
Speaker 1: Did you draw a lot when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah, I loved drawing, you know.  I could, I was sort of like a photo realist, I guess.  Yeah, I could, I have a pretty good eye, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, it seems like a lot of, more actors and musicians than people think actually draw too.
Speaker 2: And I think, yeah, yeah, and I think that's the reason why I was not as interested in, in classes, you know, because I was more into the art than anything.  Art was always my life, you know, those things always drew me to them, you know, and I was, and, and I was always--
Speaker 1: Were you the kid that they would call upon to draw the stuff at Christmas and things like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not necessarily but when you talk about speeches and, and acting and stuff, people would always come to me and, for some reason--
Speaker 1: To be the spokesperson or the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to be the spokesperson.
Story_ID: 467554
Speaker 1: I remember being involved in politics here on a local level, and they kind of put me out in front, the guys that really knew what they were doing, put me out in front to be a spokesman.  We had, in 1968, when the riots were going on and the police were pretty brutal here and everywhere else, I guess, I remember I was working for Eugene McCarthy because I, I had gotten out of the service and I was, you know, I was dumb to politics.  I didn't know what was going on and I had a couple of friends that said, hey, well listen, this is what's going on with Vietnam [Vietnam War] and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and Eugene McCarthy is the man, and he was running against Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and Robert Kennedy came to Omaha [Nebraska] to campaign.
Speaker 2: Now, now just to get this straight.  You never went to Vietnam, right?
Speaker 1: I never went to Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went to, I went to Germany.  I was, I had volunteered to go to Germany and that's a story in itself but I went to Germany and while I was there, I wanted to join the Special Forces [U.S. Army Special Forces] and, and go to Vietnam so I could learn how to fly helicopters.  I wanted to fly a helicopter, but the [U.S.] Army refused to let me go because I had what they call a critical MOS [military occupational specialty] and my specialty was nuclear weapons, maintenance, and I had a top secret clearance.  And so they refused to let me go.
Speaker 2: Okay, that being that if something happened and you were captured or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, captured or something like that.
Speaker 2: You would know too much.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I wondered if that--well, that's, I got that one right.  That's interesting, okay.
Story_ID: 467555
Speaker 1: When you were in the [U.S.] Army now, did you--well, let's talk about that.  Let's finish high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and get you to the Army and we'll take, we'll kind of put this back in order, but when you were in high school, did you, was there any thought of going to college right after high school?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, not really and, and as we alluded earlier, I mean, even in Tech High [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] they weren't encouraging blacks to go to college either, you know.  I mean, I'm sure some of the, did, the better students maybe they were, you know, but I was an average student.  I kept average grades, you know, and they never, it never, no one ever talked to me about going to college or getting your grades up so you could go to college and, of course, my family knew nothing about college.  So it was like, you know, after, you know, all you thought about when you graduated was going to the service, the [U.S.] military.  That was the way out for poor kids, for black people.
Speaker 1: Okay, one other question about high school, or maybe two others, but did you participate in any plays in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I started, I did, I loved speech classes, I always give these great speeches, you know, they were very entertaining and, and I have a pretty good imagination and so at one point one of my English teachers told the dramatic art teacher, Kenneth Roy, he said, "You know, you should look at John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], you know."  And so, he came and found me and started me doing plays and, you know, I, although I enjoyed it, I didn't like the idea of having to rehearse every day and I didn't like that.  The rehearsal process, nah, and, but, you know, Mr. Roy was kind of a, like in those days, teachers intimidated students, you know, you know, and he was a very intimidating figure though, you know, he was funny, though, he's a funny guy and I liked Mr. Roy and I enjoyed work--doing the plays but I just, it was the rehearsal and I thought I knew it all, you know.  I knew the lines, hey, why should I have to come to rehearsal and he would, he would always come and get me every time he had a play.  After the first time, he would always come and, hey, I got a, you know, I want you to come out and try out for this play, and so I would go out and I would get a part.  Eventually, he got me into competition, you know, or interpretation of prose literature and that sort of thing, and I got in and then my first contest I got an excellent award, and then the second one I got a superior award which is the highest you can get.  And so, I, you know, I used to do that sort of thing and, and I enjoyed it and in my senior year, we did a play that he based around me, it was called 'God's Trombones' ['God's Trombones: Seven Negro Sermons in Verse'] by James Weldon Johnson.  I was the Preacher Man in that, and everybody thought I was going to be a preacher, you know, they were so convinced, you know, that this guy must be, he's going to be a preacher, you know.  And I thought about that, you know, because I knew that I could talk and I could, you know, I could convince people, you know, or, you know, get people to, to listen to me, you know.  People would listen when I talked.  And so that was pretty cool.  So when I went into college [University of Nebraska at Omaha; University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], when I got to college, you know, so naturally I'd take up speech and one day this guy comes to me that I knew, he said, "Hey, they're doing this oral, this reader's theater, 'In White America' [Martin Duberman], and one of the guys dropped out, would you be interested in doing this?"  I said, "Well, okay, I guess."  So I did that and it worked out pretty well, but then I dropped out of college.
Story_ID: 467556
Speaker 1: --You graduated from high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, then [U.S.] military from '61 [1961] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Military through '64 [1964], yeah.
Speaker 1: To '64 [1964], okay.  You were in three years?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, then you went to the University of Omaha [University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Went to, yeah, went to Omaha University, yeah.
Speaker 1: Omaha University, okay.
Speaker 2: Eventually it became UNO, University of Nebraska at Omaha and I dropped out after a couple of years and moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I knew that I still wanted to be in entertainment art, TV or something, oh, and another thing, another thing.  When I was a kid, there used to be, there used to be a show on, on TV called, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [sic. 'Uncle Tom's Playhouse'] and Uncle Tom would have--
Speaker 1: A television show, actually?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that one, okay.
Speaker 2: And, no, it was a local show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this guy would, you know, they would show cowboy flicks, I guess, you know, serials or something like that, but they would have, they would have an enter--yeah, you know, they would talk to the kids too.  You know, the kids would come into the studio and they'd be in the gallery.  So I remember--
Speaker 1: Now who was, I mean, now this is really intriguing here.  Is that a kids show?  Now we had like similar kids shows in Dayton [Ohio], and I know I've seen them in Chicago [Illinois] too, but, a local studio produced called, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'
Speaker 2: 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'
Speaker 1: Now was Uncle Tom black or--
Speaker 2: No, he was a white guy.
Speaker 1: A white guy.
Speaker 2: He was a white guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His name was Tom Chase [Thomas B. Chase].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His name was Tom.  I don't know why I remember that, but here is 'Uncle Tom's Cabin,' and they, and he would, had a cowboy thing on, I guess, sort of, and so we'd go there and just sat in there because they would give away this, they were sponsored by Sealtest Ice Cream [Sealtest Dairy], I think, and so they would give away free ice cream bars and that sort of thing.  So I would take the streetcar up to WOWT [WOW-TV; WOWT-TV, Omaha, Nebraska] and be on that show and eventually I'd take my brothers up there, you know.  We'd be on there and I was on there several times and so I always, you know, liked TV.  So when I got to Philadelphia, I left Philadelphia in '68 [1968].  I was run out of Omaha [Nebraska]--
Speaker 1: Now, you were run out of--now wait a minute.  You can't just rush past that.  We've got to talk--well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I told you I was involved in politics, you know, so I was working for Eugene McCarthy, on his campaign, and so one night we were coming from the headquarters and I'm walking down 24th Street and there was this drive-thru liquor store and in back, in the alley, guys used to play craps back there, you know, and not a big game, maybe ten guys, you know.  I was driving by there and there were like ten cop cars there, you know, breaking up this crap game and I pull up in there and this one cop had a guy down on the ground, he had him handcuffed and he was spraying mace in his face, you know.  So, you know, I'm like, you know, is that necessary?  Why you doing that?  You got the guy, you know, and so my youngest brother had come up and he was beside me and this one cop threw a shotgun right up, you know, in his face 'cause my brother got pretty vocal and I just knew, I said, "Well I better get this guy away from here."  So, I got him away and so the next day we decide to call a press conference just to talk about what we had seen.  And so, these guys figured, you need to be the spokesperson.  I don't know, they just saw it in me and you need to be this, you know, you'll be good on camera, you know.  So, we went up and I, you know, got on camera at the press conference and they, you know, we talked and denounced the action and the next day in the paper they had a story that they recognized me as one of the troublemakers in the group.  And so, you know, the police were, you know, yeah, he's a troublemaker and blah, blah, blah and the press didn't, they didn't, you know, they didn't follow up.  And anyhow, in those days, they would put your address and everything in the paper, [HistoryMaker] John Beasley at 2415 North 32nd Street, you know.  So I started getting hate mail, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been assassinated, and letters, you know, Martin Luther King got it, you'll get it too and the cops used to, were following us around, you know, and trailing us.  It became--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  That's a feature of a small town paper.  Since I've been back in Ohio, I noticed they do that, put people's full addresses in the paper.
Speaker 2: Yeah, full address, everything, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's got to be, intimidate the heck out of you.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean, so now everybody knows where you live and so, you know, I started getting harassing phone calls and that sort of thing so I decided that it would be best if I got my family out of town.  And so I sent my wife [Judy Beasley] and my kids back to Philadelphia where she was from, and eventually I followed her out there and I got to Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 467557
Speaker 1: Now, let's pause right here and just ask you, now how did you meet your wife [Judy Beasley] and--
Speaker 2: My wife, I was living, I lived in the projects and I'm still living with my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley].  After I got out of the [U.S. military] service, I came back, still staying with my mother in the projects.
Speaker 1: Now what are the names of those projects?
Speaker 2: It was Pleasant [Pleasantview Homes, Omaha, Nebraska], Pleasant, no, Hilltop [Hilltop Homes, Omaha, Nebraska], Hilltop, yeah.
Speaker 1: Hilltop, okay.
Speaker 2: And my wife's sister and brother-in-law, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, he was, he came here from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he was in the Air Force and they lived across the street from my mother and now I'm in high--I'm in college [Omaha University; University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] now, I'm playing football, I had married my high school sweetheart and while I was in the service, that marriage broke up.  So now I'm back and I never considered myself, I was always likeable and I never was that really outgoing with the girls.  I was, because of the pimples and stuff that I had, you know, I was always kind of bashful in that way, though I was outgoing and graduated from high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], most popular male and, but I never thought of myself as, you know, a ladies man.  So I come out of service now and, and I'm going to, I'm going to college, becoming popular with the young women, you know, and especially the women from North High [Omaha North High School; Omaha North High Magnet School, Omaha, Nebraska] and these young girls now, you know, now I'm popular with the girls and I remember coming in one night, after being out partying or something and my wife was sitting outdoors with my cousin who lived next door to her, and I heard them say something about, you know, bring me back a cheeseburger or something.
Story_ID: 467558
Speaker 1: She was going on a run to get some hamburgers.  There was this place called King's [King's Food Host] and, you know, and so I heard them say, you know, bring me back this and that.  So, I said, "How about bringing me back some French fries," and she said, "Well why don't you go with me?"  And my wife, if you know her, she's very--she's not, she's very shy, and this was something that, you know, was just out of character for her.  I guess she didn't think I would go but I guess she had seen me and she kind of liked me and so I went with her, and on the way to the restaurant, we never said too much, you know, 'cause she wasn't a very talkative person and I didn't know what to say so we drove there and so, "You're from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?"  Yeah, yeah, you know, one of those things and so we came back and I went by to see her a couple of times and I thought, well, we didn't say too much, we listened to a little Marvin Gaye and, and finally I decided well, nah, she's not the one for me, you know.  And so, I stopped seeing her and then one day she told my cousin, she said, "You tell Johnny [HistoryMaker John Beasley] he better come by and see me."  So I said, well I thought, okay, and eventually I was--like I said, I was married and we were, my, I was going through this divorce, and at one point my ex-wife and I had agreed on terms and, and so I decided, you know, I was going to go up to Chicago [Illinois] while the thing is being finalized.  And so I asked her, I said, "So listen, are you still going to be my Judy [Judy Beasley] when I get back?"  And so she said, "Are you asking me to go with you?"  And I'm like, yeah, I guess (laughter), you know, I really wasn't ready for a commitment but she had gotten me in a situation like, oh okay, all right.  So eventually, you know, I, you know, we got married and we've been married forty-two years now, you know, and I thought maybe it would last a couple of years or so.  She got pregnant, you know, before we got married, and we couldn't get married because the divorce really hadn't been finalized, I guess.  And, but I don't know, I just really wasn't ready for that commitment.  I thought, well, she's having my baby, I got to, you know, my mother [Grace Triplett Beasley] always taught us, she said, "If you get 'em pregnant, you got to marry 'em."  That was the thing in those days, you know.  So, there was nothing left for me to do but to get married, you know.  I figured, well, it'll last a couple of years, give a child a name, fell in love with my son [Tyrone Beasley], you know, and eventually in that third year I wanted another child, so we had our second son [Michael Beasley] and, but, you know, I always like to say, she came here looking for me.  You know, I think things have, everything happens for a reason.
Speaker 2: Now how, how did she wind up in Omaha [Nebraska] from Philadelphia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She came to visit her sister, who lived across the street from my mother, and she came to visit, you know, and she just wound up staying here.
Story_ID: 467559
Speaker 1: So, okay, after the heat is on you and this is 1968?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], yeah.
Speaker 1: You got to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got to go to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So you go to Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Go to Philadelphia and now I'm there in Philadelphia, what am I going to do for a living?  What do I want to do?  I'd like to work in TV.  So I look at the telephone book and I look up these TV stations and I call one, WFIL [WFIL-TV; WPVI-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I called the director of personnel, and I said, "Well listen, I'm from, I'm just in from Omaha [Nebraska], I did TV in Omaha and I knew a few of the technical terms like, camera, microphone."  So, I called this guy up and I impressed him enough to say, well, we had a guy in who, just had an applicant in who graduated from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] but, you know, I like the way, you know, come on in, we'll start you off in the mailroom.  So I went in there, I start off in the mailroom and eventually wound up as an associate producer of a children's program called, 'The World Around Us.'  Our biggest competition at that time was 'Captain Kangaroo.'  And so I worked in the TV station and then really kind of got bored with it after a while, but in those days, we had another show up there, at the station called, 'The Jerry Blavat Show,' the Geator with the Heater.  Jerry [Jerry Blavat] was a former dancer on Dick Clark's 'American Bandstand' and he wanted to be another Dick Clark.  And so Jerry always had a lot of guests in and I got to meet a lot of people like Gladys Knight and David Ruffin, a lot of entertainers that would come in, you know, and that was enjoyable but after a couple of years, I kind of got bored with it and I quit and because, I guess, I still, I wanted to be in front of the camera and it didn't seem like that was going to happen.  I was doing skits for 'The World Around Us.'  In fact, that's how I got attached to the show.  A guy came in one day, into the mailroom, he says, he said, "John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], you ever do any acting?"  And I said, yeah, you know, so.
Story_ID: 467560
Speaker 1: Okay, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the station is, what's the name?
Speaker 2: It was WFIL [WFIL-TV; WPVI-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: WFIL (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had a radio station, which was an AM station, which was the top radio station in Philadelphia at that time, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, this an ABC outlet and, and the show--
Speaker 2: ABC affiliation, sure.
Speaker 1: --is 'The World Around Us'--
Speaker 2: 'World Around Us.'
Speaker 1: --and they ask you to do something on the show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they ask me to do some skits, you know, and I sort--I did skits and they would pay me a little extra.
Speaker 1: What would you do?  What kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like some children's thing.  They'd have a little skit, you know.  It was a children's program, and I'd go and I'd be a character, you know, whatever the little skit was, you know, and they liked me so well that they would have me come up, you know, in various times and eventually they asked me to be a part of the show so, a part of the, you know, as associate director, or producer.  And so, I did that and it was really an interesting time but got, got bored with it and eventually left there and looking for another job, this friend of mine, Ray Gibson [ph.], said, "Hey you ought to come down to the waterfront."  It was paying pretty good money, I think $30 a day, and this is at a time when $100 a week was a lot of money, you know, as far as I was concerned.  My goal, when I got out of the [U.S. military] service, was really kind of to find a job where I was making $100 a week, you know, I'd be happy.  So I was making maybe $75 a week, I guess, at, right after the TV station, you know.  And so I needed more money and so I went to the waterfront and caught on at the waterfront and my first year I earned my stevedore card.  I earned a union card which is kind of unheard of but I got a reputation as a good worker around the waterfront.  And so guys would come and, you know, they'd hire me for, you'd get hired daily unless you were part of a gang and, you know, if a ship came in, maybe they would be unloading that ship for a week, two weeks, you know, so they'd at least have that job and being part of the gang, every time a ship would come in, they would be assured of a job.  So, as a clean head, is what they called us, you know, you'd have to be hired daily because union people would always be hired over you.  I earned my union card that first year 'cause I had enough hours.  And while I was in Philly, I got the urge to act again just to see if I could do it.  And so, I saw where they wanted, they were looking for actors, they were casting for a play, 'As You Like It' by William Shakespeare at Germantown Theatre Guild [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So I went over to see, just see if I had it, auditioned and I got the role of Charles, the wrestler.  And so, I started, you know, started rehearsing with them and then got bored with the rehearsal process, ah, and so I dropped out and they kept calling me, you know.  So eventually I went back and became a part of the cast and wound up the most popular character in the play as far as the kids were, the young kids were concerned.  And so when I went back, when I left Philadelphia after five years, it was, it was, I made a lot of friends in Philadelphia but I was, eventually I was ready to return to Omaha [Nebraska].  It was about time, there was a school strike there and my youngest son [Michael Beasley] was in school, it was the first teacher strike in the country, I believe.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what year is this?  Now--
Speaker 2: That would be about 1971, '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in Oma- Philadelphia for--
Speaker 2: We were there, I was there five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, from '68 [1968] to '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is, I think this is ironic in some ways and maybe you just, my mind thinks it is, but, you know, Marlon Brando from Omaha.  So here you go, you're working on the waterfront, you're trying to become an actor and here you're working on, did you think about that?
Speaker 2: No, I never thought about it, I never thought about it.
Speaker 1: On the waterfront, here you are, just before you get your big break.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I just start, you know, in fact, when I first, the waterfront was interesting because, you know, these were a lot of hard guys down there, you know, and I was always tough, you know, and, but, I remember guys telling me that you don't look like you belong here, you know, I'm coming out of TV.  The thing that I pride myself in is I can move amongst all classes.  You know, I can hang out with the lowest of low and had in Philadelphia in the north side, the south side, the black bottom, you know, and I could run with them but I was, you know, like everybody in those days, I was doing marijuana and, and into drugs, you know, in those days.  I never got into the hard stuff like heroin, you know, though, every--you know, cocaine was the elite drug, you know, and eventually, you know, snorted that but was in, you know, in Philadelphia, was, you know, around marijuana a lot and just had a great time in Philly, but it was time to leave there.  I don't know why I got off of that, I know there's a story somewhere.
Speaker 1: Now did your wife [Judy Beasley] want to stay in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, as I said, you know, because of the teachers strike and things were just, it was just a low period, you know.  In fact, I had got stopped by the police for marijuana and had to go into, went to, you know, I was in jail for a day and I went to court the next day and they said that, you know, you know, I think it was a $50 fine and I had to go, that was going to be on parole or something, whatever.  So I went to the parole office that I was supposed to go to and I'm sitting there, I'm sitting there for hours and nobody comes to talk to me and so I talk to the guy there, I said, "So, you know, what's going on?"  He said, "Well we don't have your name down here anywhere," you know.  So, I thought, okay.
Story_ID: 467561
Speaker 1: --Little more time goes by, I say, "Hey, to hell with this, I'm out of here," you know, so I left, but I was, it was just a down period and then the school problems and I thought, you know, the one thing about Omaha [Nebraska] is we always had, even though the blacks were, were undereducated, you didn't have the same facilities and the same quality as the white schools.  You could, you still could get a good education if you wanted one, you know, a black school, leave Omaha and do very well outside of Omaha because of the standard of education was certainly much better than what you could get in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Chicago [Illinois] or any of the bigger cities.  And so, we decided to come back to Omaha.  And so we came back to Omaha and re-enrolled in UNO [University of Nebraska at Omaha; University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], and I decided to take an introduction to theater class and I didn't know what it was all about but it's one of the, you know, I'm taking some classes to get some credits.  So I take an introduction to theater class and Dr. Clark [Edwin L. Clark] was the instructor, and one day he announced that he was having auditions for a play, 'Happy Birthday, Wanda June' [Kurt Vonnegut].  And so, he says, you know, "If any of you are interested, you know, come on out for the audition."  And so I asked him, I said, "Well if a black auditioned for the play, could he get a part?"  And he said, "Well, if the black was good enough he could."  And so, I thought all right, that's all I need.  So I auditioned and got a role in the play and after I did that, there was a new professor that was coming in and, Bill Smith was his name, and Bill saw me in that production and he was doing the next play at UNO and he came and asked me apart, you know, asked--talked, interviewed me and he says, you know, I think he says, "You're raw but, you know, I see a lot of talent there."  Bill proceeded to teach me a lot about what I know today, about acting, and it was so much deeper and that's when I started to get an appreciation for audition, for rehearsal and doing my homework because I started to discover things about myself and about the character that only came from studying that character, you know.  And then after that, David Suchet, of the Royal Shakespeare Company came through UNO, and David Suchet was one of the actors that was with the company and they were doing workshops.  So, I met them in a workshop and we hit it off pretty good and then the following semester, David Suchet was coming back as guest celebrity on campus to direct a play and be in a play.  And when he came back, he was doing, he was going to do a play called, 'John Brown's Body' [Stephen Vincent Benet], and I see this in the newspaper, I think, I don't, I might not have even been in school at that time, I see this in the newspaper and I'm like, where is he going to find blacks for this play, you know?  So, he gets there and it seems as though they couldn't get the rights for 'John Brown's Body' so they were going to do 'Streetcar Named Desire' ['A Streetcar Named Desire,' Tennessee Williams] and he had me audition for it and he cast me in a role of Mitch [Harold Mitchell] and I thought, well, it's racism again because I'm good enough to do Stanley Kowalski and, but I'm black, you know, not even thinking that he's casting me as Mitch whose love interest is Blanche [Blanche DuBois] in the play, you know.  And so, David, David casts me in that role and he says, "You know, I know you can do," I never said anything but he said, "I know you can do Stanley hands down," he said, "but Mitch would be a stretch for you," and this is when I first found out what a stretch was, you know.  And so, I got in there and did it.  He said, "If you do Mitch like I think you can do it, you'll steal the show," and I did.  And after the show was over, I asked David, I said, "David, do you think I have, you know, you think I could do anything in this business?"  He says, "John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], I think you can do it," he says, "but you got to leave, you got to leave Omaha," I'm like twenty-nine now.  He says, "You got to leave Omaha," he says, "because eventually they're going to say, well, the guy's, well, where's he been, you know?"
Story_ID: 467562
Speaker 1: And so, I went to, I went to New York [New York] and I went to David Suchet, the agency that he was with.
Speaker 2: Now this is what year?  This is 1970--
Speaker 1: This has to be, you know, I really can't say.  This was, '72 [1972], it had to be about '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].  I went there and the agent was going to take me on.  I got up to New York and I was determined that I was going to see this agent, you know.  So I just walked in and the lady there said, "Well we're not taking on any new clients," but I was convinced that I wasn't going to leave there without letting this lady know how good I was.  And so, I convinced her that I was pretty good and then I dropped David Suchet's name.  So I go back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I was staying with a friend and I get a call the next day and she says that Mr. Lance [ph.] would like to see, no, he calls me and he had this accent and I thought it was maybe one of my friends making a joke or something, he says, "No, I'd like to see you," and he says, "I'm going to see," he says, "I won't be able to see you today because I've got a couple of clients that have an opening," it was called, 'River Break,' and those clients were Marlon Brando and, I forget who else was in that movie, but he said, can you be in--
Speaker 2: Called 'Missouri Breaks' ['The Missouri Breaks']?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: River--
Speaker 1: 'River Breaks,' something like that.
Speaker 2: 'Missouri Breaks'--
Speaker 1: 'Missouri Break,' was that--
Speaker 2: --is that the one you're talking about--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --with Marlon Brando and--
Speaker 1: --and who--
Speaker 2: --Jack Nicholson?
Speaker 1: Nicholson, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'Missouri Breaks.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, my client, those were his clients.  So I said, "Okay."  So I'm about to be, yeah, and then, I'm about to be, you know, represented by this guy, you know.  So, he says, "I can see you on Monday."  So, now I'm having problems with my wife [Judy Beasley] and she, this is not something that she wanted and there was, you know, marriage was still rocky because I really wasn't committed to it as much as I should have been and so she felt that, you know, no, that's not, you know, that's not the life for me.  An actor's life is, you know, you know, just wouldn't be conducive to a good family life and so I fly back to Omaha [Nebraska] to convince her, that, you know, I need to do this and I couldn't do that and so I missed my appointment on Monday and so I never got back up there to see this guy.  And it seems like every time I got a chance, I wanted to do this, you know, it was like something would just, you know, she wasn't agreeing with this and so it wasn't until later on in life when she finally said, figured out that if I don't let this guy do this, you know, I'm never, we're never going to have any peace.
Story_ID: 467563
Speaker 1: Now I read that you made a promise that you wouldn't, to yourself or to her [Beasley's wife, Judy Beasley] or, that you wouldn't pursue this full-time until after your last kid [Michael Beasley] was in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't make a promise but I guess it was, I guess it was something.  When he was a senior in college, I, you know, I got to the point I had been working for the railroad, I came back, I got a job eventually with the railroad, worked with them for seven years and I just never really wanted to be there and it just got to a point where I just knew I had to do, you know, I had something to offer and, you know, I was doing a lot of local theater and I knew that I was better than a lot of the people there, you know, I was working with and I just felt that I had something to offer and my brother was living in Minneapolis [Minnesota] at that time and one day I remember watching 'The Today Show' ['Today'] and, and Jane Pauley were in Minneapolis [Minnesota], you know, they would go to various cities and they were talking about all the theater that was up in Minneapolis and--
Speaker 1: And the Penumbra Theatre [St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 2: --various stuff like that and so I got up there and my, of course I went to visit my brother and I saw, I got up there and started auditioning.  I would just go around to, to various theaters.  I went to the Guthrie [Guthrie Theater, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and various places and I would go in and I would say, listen, I don't know if this is how you do it but I'm just a country boy from Omaha [Nebraska], I don't know any better but I want to audition.  And so they would always let me audition and I would impress them and the first job I got was at the Mixed Blood Theatre [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and a young Don Cheadle was in the cast, you know, ironic.  Don Cheadle was in the cast, and I, and then my career kind of took off in Minneapolis.  I landed my first movie, well, yeah, I landed my first movie.  I did a lot of commercials, landed my first movie, it was called 'Mighty Ducks,' 'The Mighty Ducks,' the original 'Mighty Ducks.'  I was forty-five years old there, started my professional career, and eventually I met a casting agent from Chicago [Illinois] who was visiting Minneapolis and my game plan was to go to these various markets and establish myself.  And so my goal was to eventually get to Chicago.  My father [John W. Beasley], who became a fan of mine before he died, had always tried to get me in Chicago.  He said, "I know some of these Jews that own theater," said, "come on up there and I can get you a job," and I mean, yeah, what's, Chicago theater, you know.  I never knew anything, I didn't know.  And in fact, when I was in college [University of Omaha at Nebraska; University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], eventually they offered me a scholarship if I would change my major to theater and I thought, what am I going to do with that kind of job, I mean, what the hell am I going to do with a theater major degree, you know, nah, no thank you, you know, I'm, I'm in communication, nah, that's okay, no thank you.  Little did I realize eventually, but my father tried to get me to come up there and I didn't know anything about that.  So, but I knew they were doing a theater in Minneapolis.  So I'm up in Chi- in Minneapolis, I'm, do my first movie, meet a casting agent from Chicago, she calls me in and she says, and I audition for her and she says, you know, "If I ever find anything that I think you're right for, I'll call you," and I'm like, yeah right.
Story_ID: 467564
Speaker 1: Few months later, my agent in Minneapolis [Minnesota] calls, says, "You remember Jane Brody?"  I said, "Yeah, I remember Jane, you know, I auditioned for her at the, at your office up there."  And so she says, "Well Jane wants to know if you would be interested in coming into Chicago [Illinois] to audition."  And I just remembered reading in the USA Today, Oprah Winfrey was going to do a TV series called 'Brewster Place' based on 'The Women of Brewster Place,' and I thought, wow, that'll be a great, you know, great opportunity for some Chicago actors.  And so she calls me into Chicago to audition for 'Brewster Place,' and I go in there and I meet [HistoryMaker] Reuben Cannon who had, I had worked for before, and it was a long process and they had me in there several times and then eventually they bring me in to read with Oprah Winfrey and I remember sitting in this cast, you know, office and Oprah Winfrey comes up the steps with her aide, with an aide, and they go in this room, you know, she doesn't give me an eye contact or anything, she goes in the room and so I go in and I do this and, you know, I do this audition, I know I'm good, I know I'm good and so after I, when I get ready to leave, I say to Oprah, I said, incidentally, I said, "Judy [Judy Beasley] says hi."  So she says, "Who's Judy?"  I said, "She's my wife."  So, "Oh, tell her I said hi."  So, eventually they called me in to screen test with Oprah, and so they give me this mail uniform, I don't wear a ring today, they give me this mail, I'm the mail carrier, he's a mail carrier, so I'm, so the master props man, he comes around he says, "So what, you need anything?"  I said, I said, "Yeah," I said, "a mailman always has keys so I'm going to need some keys and, oh, I need a wedding band 'cause Reuben says that he's probably married and has a couple of kids."  And I'm thinking, damn, you know, 'cause if I can have some kind of a relationship with Oprah's character, you know, that would mean that I'd be in it a lot more and I think it'd mean more to me, you know, but hey, I'm just happy to get a job.  So we're sitting there while they're waiting and Oprah's sitting there and I'm sitting across from her and I'm just looking at Oprah and I'm giving her eye contact and she's looking at me and so eventually Oprah says, "So, how's the family?"  And so, I figure okay, you know, I'd done some selling in my days and I know that in a situation like that, the first person that speaks loses.  So now I get a little bolder and Oprah, I hope she never, she'll never see this, and so I get a little bolder and so I said, Oprah, I said to Oprah, I said, "Oprah," I said, "so where'd you study acting," I said, "because I really loved you in 'The Color Purple.'"  And she says, "I never studied."  I said, "Well," I said, "well, don't mess up 'cause this is my big chance," and so Reuben cracks up and Oprah's like, is this nigger for real (laughter)?  I mean, you know, so, but I think it had to impress her because we're sitting there and as we go along a little further, Oprah looks down at the ring and she says, "You know, I don't think Mr. Willie is married," and I said, "You know what Oprah, I don't think he is either (laughter)."  And so I got the job, I got the job as her love interest.  We did eleven episodes.  ABC didn't want it, it was a half an hour, half an hour dramedy, something like that, like 'Frank's Place,' very innovative, you know.  'Frank's Place' was an incredible show.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I thought it was one of the best shows not to make it on TV and, but this was, 'Brewster Place' was sort of like that, you know, and we were breaking grounds.  ABC didn't want it but they wanted Oprah Winfrey so they gave her a shot, you know, and they kept moving it around, you know.  You know, they would show two weeks and then the next week it wouldn't be on and then they would move it around again to different nights and they really knew how to program it to fail and so it never made it but I had my experience with Oprah Winfrey.  A wonderful woman, I might add, she really is, you know and I felt that she looked out for me while I was there.  There would be times, I came on as a recurring character and wound up having more episodes than some of the regulars and because Oprah would be, you know, they'd be at a table read and Oprah would say, "Well that sounds like something Mr. Willie would say," and the next thing I know I'd be getting a call, you know, "You're going to be working this week," you know.  So--
Speaker 2: So, did they shoot that in Chicago or--
Speaker 1: We shot it in Chicago, yeah.  Worked out of Chicago and it was a great time, it was a great time--
Story_ID: 467565
Speaker 1: That was, I think that was my first national exposure and then I went back and I did, in Minneapolis [Minnesota] I did 'The Mighty Ducks' and I followed that up with another movie up there called, 'Untamed Heart' with Christian Slater, Rosie Perez and, what's her name, she won an Academy Award [Oscar], I forget her name, Maria, Marisa, Marisa Tomei, and, and then I did another movie and, they called, 'Little Big League,' a baseball movie, came back to Chicago [Illinois] and did a thing with Kathleen Turner.  I can't believe I'm there working with all these people, Kathleen, 'Body Heat,' Turner.  We did a thing called, 'V.I. Warshawski.'  Then I did a movie--
Speaker 2: Right, I remember that.
Speaker 1: --called, 'Rudy,' and 'Rudy' was a little small movie that went on to do quite well, that's a classic now, and--
Speaker 2: He's got a football kind of thing, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the Notre Dame story [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], you know, and that was a story in itself and while I was in Chicago, I started working at the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] doing August Wilson work.  Actually, the way I got August Wilson, the way I got to the Goodman Theatre, they were looking for someone to do 'Fences,' an August Wilson play at the New American Theater in Rockford, Illinois and they looked all over for this guy and, to play Troy [Troy Maxson], the lead in the show, and so my agent called me in and said, "Hey, you know, this guy wants to meet you and wants to, you know, they're doing 'Fences,'" and I wanted to do that show 'cause I had done everything that James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] had--Jones had done it at the theatre up to that point 'cause he was a guy that I thought, you know, this was the man, you know, he's doing stuff that I want to do.  So I'm following James Earl Jones and, and I'm thinking, damn, I really want to do this role.  And so, but at the time I was doing, what we call an industrial for Nabisco and they were shooting in, shooting one day in Minneapolis and one day in Chicago.  And so, I told her I would be in Chicago but I had to be in Minneapolis the next day and I can meet this guy at the airport.  And so, he said, okay.  So we meet at the airport in a bar there and have a beer and I was determined, I had to get this role and I told this guy, I said, you know, "Nobody can do this role like I can," and I said, you know, "I know it sounds like I'm blowing my, I'm tooting my own horn," I said, "but in this business, if you, you, sometimes if you don't toot your own horn, there ain't no music."  And so, convinced this guy and by the time I got to Minneapolis, he said, "Yeah, we want him."
Story_ID: 467566
Speaker 1: So I came back and did 'Fences' [August Wilson] in Rockford [Illinois] and we were selling out every night and they heard about me in Chicago [Illinois] at the Goodman [Goodman Theatre] because they were looking for someone to replace the lead in 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson] to play Bynum in Chicago.  And so, I went down and Jonathan Wilson was the director, went down and I had to replace this guy and I had to be in in two weeks.  And so it meant doing 'Fences' in Rockford at night, coming down in Philadelph- in Chicago in the daytime, rehearsing with the director and the stage manager and then eventually going in to replace this guy in two weeks.  And so, 'Fences' ended and so now I'm just in Chicago but I was so exhausted by that time, you know.  You can imagine driving back and forth to Chicago doing Troy [Troy Maxson], which is a demanding role and then going and doing Bynum, which is even more demanding and so I was exhausted.  By that time, 'Fences' ended and so I'm in Chicago and they said, you know, you got to come in every night and watch this guy 'cause you, it's a duplicate situation, so we want you to watch him every night.  So I go in two nights and I got this cold and I figured that Wednesday night, I'm going to stay in and just memorize the script and the heck with this guy 'cause he wasn't impressing me anyhow.  And so I go back the next day and the stage manager reminds me that it's a duplicate situation and you got to come in and watch this guy.  So I said, okay.  So we proceed to rehearse.  I show them some stuff they'd never seen before in this role 'cause I say this guy is not, he's just scratching the surface of this guy.  And so after that rehearsal, they said, you don't have to come in to watch this anymore.  So, I said, thank you.  So I was able to stay at my hotel room and do my homework and really came in and was seen by a casting agent in Chicago, Jane Alderman, and Bynum is an older character than I was.  I had built my career on playing older, older characters.  And so, I get that and--
Speaker 2: Now, Bynum, that, that's the lead in 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone,' yeah, he's the--
Speaker 2: That's the man who's got his daughter at the boardinghouse, he's--
Speaker 1: No, he, no that's--
Speaker 2: --he's, that's not the--
Speaker 1: --the, Bynum is the guy that, he's the guy that had the roots and conjured up the, he was the people finder.
Speaker 2: Oh, the people finder, okay.
Speaker 1: Bynum, not, not the people, that was, no, Bynum, bind, he bound people together--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --so people would, if they were looking for somebody--
Speaker 2: I understand.  I haven't seen it so long--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --but that's the one that the movie--
Speaker 1: He was the, he lived in the house--he lived in the boardinghouse, yeah.
Speaker 2: --kind of opens up with, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he's the one that, that, that, you know, that told about going into this other land where there, where people were bigger than life and that's where he, where he found his calling.  And so, he's, he was an older character.  And so, Jane Alderman, a casting agent in Chicago, saw me in that and when they were casting for 'V.I. Warshawski,' she called me in because this, this character in 'V.I. Warshawski' was an older character.  And so, I went in and I'm in my forties and so I go into this casting office and they've got all these older black men in there and I'm thinking, wow, these old guys, they're going to cast somebody that's old, you know.  And so, Jane Alderman calls me in and so this one guy says, "Wait a minute, I was here first."  And so she says, "Well, your name's not--."  He says, "Well, I just didn't sign, I was here first, I should be going in next."  So she said, "John [HistoryMaker John Beasley], is it okay with you?"  I said, "Sure, that's okay with me," 'cause I thought to myself, 'cause I'm going to get this damn job anyhow.  And so, he motivated me to go in there and give my best old guy and Jane said, "Well you know, John," she says, "you're a little young for this part but I sure want the director to see you."  So I said, "Fine."  She says, "Can you come back?"  So I get a call back to meet the director.  I go to, I go to Walgreens [Walgreens Company] and I get a bi- I get a pair of glasses, you know, and get some white stuff on my hair and I go in and I audition for the guy and the guy says, "Well, you're a little young but we add some makeup, you know, and do this and do that, okay, thanks, John."  So I get the job, you know.  I get the job--
Story_ID: 467567
Speaker 1: Okay, just to introduce us, we were talking off--between, during the tape change about the art of what you do with the character of Bynum in the play, 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --what you were trying to bring to that character.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one, one thing that David Suchet had taught me, and Bill Smith, my teachers, was that you have to really go inside and, and you have to find the emotions inside and you got to get out of your head and you know what I call, head actors, you know, you're thinking about what you're going to do but you have to just be it, you have to do it, you have to be in the moment which will come and play later on.  You have to be in the moment and listen to and talk to.  And so, when I took on Bynum, and with the other characters, it became like we were, you know, we were talking and listening.  I would make them listen to me and they were reacting out of that as opposed to, you know, these are my lines.  And so what I was told when Johnny Lee [Johnny Lee Davenport] and I got into this one scene where he's trying to relay this journey he had and Bynum talks him through it and they told me, he said, it become, it became a two person scene as a pers- opposed to just that one person acting.  We would close out that show and, and that would be at halftime, I mean, intermission, and we would go out of there, man, it was just incredible, very, very spiritual piece and I was able to find the spirit in it and it was there, it was there.  August Wilson gives you everything you need but you got to really go down deep and, you know, really got to be in the moment with August's work.  So, Jane Alderman saw me in that and she called me in to do 'V.I. Warshawski' and do this older character, and it worked and I got the job.  Later on, I was doing a lot of work out of Chicago [Illinois] then.  At one point, Robert Duvall came through Chicago.  He was doing a movie called, 'The Apostle' and my goal was always, I wasn't going to go to Los Angeles [California] or New York [New York] and get lost in the crowd, I wanted to be a working actor.  I didn't want to be an actor/waiter, I wanted to be a working actor, so I wasn't looking to do anything but act, and that's what I was able to do.  I was able to act and--
Speaker 1: Now during this time now, is your family living in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, my family, my wife [Judy Beasley] was still in Omaha [Nebraska] because I was working now and I was always told, well, you know, if you move up to Minneapolis [Minnesota], you'll work all the time.  I said, well give me that job where I can afford to move to Minneapolis.  And I was making good money but I couldn't just take my wife and move her, you know.  We had set up a certain lifestyle for ourselves, you know.  I've been working for the railroad, we were a middle class family, you know, and she was working, and, and she had her life and I didn't want to change her life because I was pursuing my dream.  When I first, the thing is, when I first, when she first decided that it was, you know she was going to allow me to do this, I told her, I said, "Baby, give me three weeks, and if it doesn't work out, I'll come back and I'll get a normal job," and she says, "Okay, I'll give you three weeks" because I figured, in three weeks, she could pay, she could pay the bills, she could, you know, keep our lifestyle going, you know, and three weeks, if I can't do it in three weeks, and I don't know why I said, I just figured, three weeks she could carry the load.  So she said, okay.  In two and a half weeks, I was turning down jobs, that's when I learned--I landed the job at the Mixed Blood Theatre [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  The guy said he'd give me $100 a week, wound up he was giving me $50 a week so I was almost paying to be in the play but I was working.  I found out I could work, you know, and I was doing industrials and other things at that time.  So, but my goal was to go to market to market.  So I'm working out of Chi- now I'm out of Chicago and I was told, you know, I figured I had outgrown Minneapolis.  Those jobs that I wanted in Minneapolis weren't coming in Minneapolis at the level that I thought I was.  I had outgrown Minneapolis and eventually I got to the point where, you know, Chicago was becoming too small for me and, you know, I've dimmed--I've done the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] so what else is there, you know.  You know, it's fun but, you know, Steppenwolf [Steppenwolf Theater Company] maybe, you know, but other than that, you know, I don't see it, you know, where am I going to, what am I going to do now--
Story_ID: 467568
Speaker 1: Robert Duvall came through with a movie called 'The Apostle,' and so my agency never sent me out for it and I was, but I was multi-listed in Chicago [Illinois].  One agency just, they mostly dealt with commercials and industrial films.  This guy gives me a call one day and he says, "John [HistoryMaker John Beasley]," he said, "they've been through Chicago twice looking for this guy."  He says, "I think you can do this."  He had seen me do Bynum and he says, "I think you can do this," you know.  So, I had been doing a play here in Omaha [Nebraska] as a guest artist at the Omaha Playhouse [Omaha Community Playhouse], a play called 'Driving Miss Daisy' [Alfred Uhry] where every night I had to age before the audience without makeup and they were buying it.  And so, he says, you know, and I think you can do this.  So, he send--you know, he sends me the script and I look at it, I said, and I called him, I said, "They're looking for me," and he laughed.  I said, "No," I said, "I don't know how they knew I was out here," I said, "but they're looking for me."  Nobody can do this but me and he says, "Well, put it on tape and send it out to, send it out to Duvall."  So--
Speaker 2: So, where were they producing 'The Apostle'?
Speaker 1: 'The Apostle' was being produced in, in Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Okay, I thought it was like--
Speaker 1: Lafayette [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: --out in the Southwest or something, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in Lafayette.
Speaker 2: Lafayette, okay.
Speaker 1: Lafayette is where they were shooting.  And so, so my agent calls, he says, Bobby wants to, you know, we call him Bobby, I mean you know, Robert Duvall, he's Bobby Duvall.  So he says, "Bobby wants to either come to Omaha and meet you or bring you down to Louisiana for three days.  He wants to spend some time with you and, you know, see how you guys get along, you know."  And, of course, I sent the tape off to Bobby and Bobby said, this is the guy, this is the guy, and I knew I was the guy.  I just knew, you know, it's just something.  I got this and I said, this is, this is mine.  And so I held on to the script for about three days, you know, 'cause I said, they're going to find an older black guy.  This guy's in his sixties, he had a few heart attacks, you know, and I've always been in pretty good shape.  I, oh I spent a lot of time in the gym and I'm physically, you know, I thought, you know, they're gonna see me and they're going to think that I'm too physically fit for this role and, and they're going to look for, they're going to need older guys.  And so I told my son, I said, after three days, I said listen, I said, they've been buying me aging so far.  I said, here's what I want you to do.  I want you to shoot me from here to here, okay, and if I get in front of him, I'm going to sell it.  So he shoots me from there and so send it off to Bobby and Bobby says, this is the guy.  So he's going to come to Omaha to meet me and if he doesn't have time, they're going to bring me down to Louisiana.  So they fly me down to Louisiana and I meet up with Bobby and the next day we met at a Cajun restaurant and Bobby loves to feed you, you know.  And so the next thing he says, well what time do you get up in the morning?  I said, hey, I'm, you know, what time do you want me?  He says, well, you know, I said, just seven, eight, you know, nine.  He says, well, what, eleven o'clock, we'll meet in the office, in the production office at eleven o'clock and we'll go over this and we'll read this and--so we get in and we read it and we go over it one time and Bobby says to the casting agent, he says, have you signed him yet?  And he says, ah, no, we were getting ready to.  He says, well sign him and let's go to lunch.  So they signed me, you know.  I had seen Bobby Duvall in a movie with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, again, called, 'The Family Affair' or 'Family Matter' [sic. 'A Family Thing'], remember where he finds out he's got this black brother?  There's a scene in the movie where Bobby is talking to his father.  He gets this letter from his mother who he, the woman he thought was his mother, this white woman, who died and left him this letter saying that, you know, she wasn't his mother, his father raped this black woman and he's got a brother out there.  And so, Bobby is in this scene, he, he's, you know it's just an unbelievable scene.  It's just like he can't find the words to say and he says to his father he says, "Daddy," he says, "you son of a bitch."  He says, "I love you daddy, but you son of a bitch," and it looked like he couldn't find the words and I'm just leaning forward in my seat and I said, "Damn, I want to work with that guy."  Two weeks later I get this script, you know.  And so, they say, you know, see if you get along with Bobby, I love this guy, you know, I know we'll get along.  We get down there and we start, we, in three days and so, I come back and then eventually we start shooting the thing and Bobby says, he said, "Big John [HistoryMaker John Beasley]," he says, "we looked all over for you."  He says, "I'm glad we found you."  I said, "Bobby, you don't even know the half of it, you were looking for me."  And this was a spiritual experience in itself, you know.  This was his dream for eleven years to do this, this movie and finally he had to put up his own money and $5 million and he put up his own money, and we all knew that we were working on something special but he said at the time, he said, "John," he says, you know, "a lot of people might see this or nobody'll see it," you know.  He gets nominated for an Academy Award [Oscar], and I loved to think that it was because of our scenes together.  We, it was very magical when he comes to my house looking for this preacher to start a church with.  And eventually did [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's show and Bobby was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and he talked about the realism of the scene and Bobby said, "You know, we were in the moment."  He said, "We were in the moment."  He said, "We were talking to and listening to each other and that was the magic of the scene, we're in the moment."  He gets nominated for Best Actor [Academy Award for Best Actor] and should have won it over Jack Nicholson.  Jack Nicholson did a great Jack Nicholson in 'As Good as It Gets' or something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think he does, some people say he does a parody of himself, sort of.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was, if that's all he did was a great, but he, you know, he had the votes, you know, he was the popular, he was Mr. Hollywood.
Story_ID: 467569
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Apostle,' I saw it and a lot of people saw it and they really were impressed with it.  It was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Well, the thing about it was, it opened L.A. [Los Angeles, California] up for me because everybody was like, he showed it to Francis Ford Coppola, and Francis, 'cause he wanted Francis to direct it and Francis said, "You need to do this," and the distributors never, they didn't want to give him any money for it and, you know, and so Francis saw it and he started raving about it and he said, "Where'd you find that wonderful non-actor?"  And Bobby [Robert Duvall] said, "Well that wonderful non-actor has done 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] on this Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] stage, you know."  I never did 'Othello' on the Goodman Theatre.  I did it here in Omaha [Nebraska] but it was right under a credit for the Goodman Theatre, Bobby's eyes went to the Goodman Theatre.  He says this on [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's show, Tavis Smiley's show and I'm, I, you knew I never had any, and he said it on, in, you know, in the media a couple of times and never had the heart to correct him, you know (laughter), but, but that opened up L.A.
Speaker 1: It seemed so natural--the scenes did seem very naturalistic in a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the thing, the challenge that he gave us was, we were in, the reason why he was looking all over for this guy is because we have a lot of real people in the movie, people that he had met in his experience of traveling through the South and studying and doing this and putting this thing together and a lot of them he came, he brought in so the challenge for the actors was to be real and my reputation in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and Chicago [Illinois] was at, you know, I was real people, you know.  This is a real actor and that's why I knew that they were looking, and reading this thing, I just knew that, for somehow, some reason I just knew they were looking for what I brought to the table and I didn't know of any other black actor that I had seen anywhere do what I was doing and you can talk about Sidney [Sidney Poitier], you can talk about any of them but nobody was, [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, nobody was doing what I was doing and, you know, I hadn't seen it but this is, so I just knew that I was the only one that could do this and, and I just didn't, I just didn't, couldn't fathom how they knew I was out there but they were looking for me and it opened up Los Angeles for me, everybody was saying, well where, who's this guy, you know, where'd he come from.
Story_ID: 467570
Speaker 1: I got a call from Los Angeles [California], now Los Angeles has opened up to me and I get a call, they're shooting a pilot called 'ATF' and they wanted me to play the part of the role of the secretary.  I started getting--secretary of the treasury, or something.  I started getting, I started getting calls for these, you know, these nice guys, you know.  I'm always playing the nice guy, you know, the guy that you like and so and naturally, you know, if you've got somebody you're going to kill off, it should be somebody that people will miss if they're killed, you know.  So, I'm, I get assassinated, I play the treasurer, the secretary of the treasury, now who assassinates (laughter), but I get, my car gets blown up with me in it, you know, so I was in the pilot but they send a limo out to my house to pick me up to take me to the airport, I get to the airport and there's a guy with a sign, [HistoryMaker] John Beasley, and, you know, he picks me up in a little Town Car [Lincoln Town Car] and he drives me to my hotel, they put me up at the, the, oh, this hotel across from the Beverly Center in Beverly Hills [California], a French name, I forget the name of it but, a nice hotel, there's a car waiting for me, you know, a rental car for my use and all I've got to do to check in is to give them a credit card for the incidentals 'cause everything is paid for.  I don't have a credit card.  As an actor, you know, I was--you know I never had to, you know, my credit wasn't very good, you know, well, so I didn't have a credit card, my wife [Judy Beasley] did.  And we were talking about, and I see how you can get out of sequence, but we were talking about, you know, me staying in Omaha [Nebraska].  So, when I moved to Chicago [Illinois], it was the same thing.  You know, if you move to Chicago, you'd work all the time and the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] wanted to start hiring me as a local and I refused to do that because I wasn't a local, you know, I was commuting.  I was going about work and I'd go back to Omaha because I couldn't afford to move my wife there and then, so she had a life of her own and this was my dream.  And so once, Chicago, once Los Angeles opened up for me, I started getting, saying, hey, you need to come, you need to move here and the agent that I was working with, he was always nervous about me not, you know, being there, and so I, you know, so finally I just fired him and had hired another agency.  I called the casting agent for 'The Apostle,' he and I became pretty good friends and Ed Johnston is his name and I said, "Ed, you know, recommend an agency for me."  And so I got with an agency out there and I said, "Listen, I live in Omaha and until I get that job where I can afford to move to Los Angeles, I'm going to be in Omaha."  And so, I'm get--I start getting a lot of work in Los Angeles and eventually I land a TV series called, 'Everwood.'  Now I can move to Los Angeles.  I can move anywhere I want to, but we're shooting in Salt Lake City [Utah].  So, I bought a place in Park City, Utah and maintained my home here and so after that series ended in, after four years, I still had my home here.  I sold the place up there, made a pretty good little profit on it and I bought a new home here in Omaha.  And so I'm still based here in Omaha and I'm still commuting.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Still commuting.
Speaker 2: But I--I don't have it in my hand right now but there's a list of roles that you've, different productions you've appeared in on the Internet.  IMDb [Internet Movie Database] has a list, there's several other lists, I guess, you can find, but there's a lot of work between, between--
Speaker 1: I've done a lot of work, over thirty films, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, lots of movies.  I remember you as a general in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the general, let's see, 'Sum of All Fears' ['The Sum of All Fears'] I was a general.
Speaker 2: 'Sum of All Fears,' right.
Speaker 1: I was a colonel in 'The General's Daughter.'
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, right, I remember that, that was a, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I get these roles, they're really a nice guy.  I've been trying to get a bad guy role, you know, thinking maybe I can get--and those older characters that I was playing, I think, I started getting typecast into it so I'd been trying to get rid of it.  Now that I'm the age that I used to portray, I don't like playing, you know, and I, and I think I probably played them older than sixty, you know, but, 'cause I, at this age of 63, 64, whatever I am now, I don't see myself as being old, you know.
Speaker 2: You don't feel old, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And, but I played those older characters and now I'm trying to get, get rid of them, you know.  I used to get called and things that Bill Cobbs would be called in for, you know.  In fact, I had got--landed a couple of roles and turned down a role that they eventually gave to Bill Cobbs.  I was cast to do, 'I Still Know What You Did Last Summer' and 'Crazy in Alabama' and then both of them were going to be shooting in, around the same timeframe, so I had to pass that up.  And I was getting a lot of offers.  I started getting a lot of offers because of that guy from, 'The Apostle' and, and they're all older characters, you know, and I used to do that, you know, but it just got to the point where I just didn't want, you know, I am who I am and I think that, you know, I should be doing some of these Morgan Freeman roles, some of these, some of these other roles that I'm not getting, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 467571
Speaker 1: You've done a lot of work but your name is not as well-known, a household word and that sort of thing but it's a, but people, when they see your face, they say, "Oh, I've seen him," and everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, people recognize me all over the place.  A lot of people know my name now because of 'Everwood.'
Speaker 1: Right, 'Everwood' was--
Speaker 2: I think because of 'Everwood.'  A lot of people know my name, especially here in Omaha [Nebraska], you know, the, well people know me here now but, you know, a lot of people know me and don't know my name but, you know, that's true of a lot of character actors.  You've seen them a thousand times and, you know, might not know their name but, yeah, it's not a name--
Speaker 1: But it seems to me that, you know, well in a certain point, you know, Morgan Freeman, once he got hot, he was in everything I would say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Every movie had a Morgan Freeman role.  Same thing with Samuel L. Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, right.
Speaker 1: For a while he was in every movie and no matter, big part, little part, he was in it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact I remember out of Chicago [Illinois] auditioning for a role that eventually went to Samuel L. Jackson and he wasn't well-known at that time but it was his first lead and this was probably after 'Do the Right Thing,' or whatever that was that he did for Spike Lee, but he, you know, he got that role and it was a lead and then, you know, next thing you know he's doing a lot, but there were, you know, he did, he started doing roles like I did, you know, like for instance, 'Jurassic Park,' where he was in there, you know.  You still didn't know he was Samuel L. Jackson.  You know, he was the black guy in that movie, you know, and still he had, I don't think--
Speaker 1: Well it got to the point where everybody knew who he was no matter how big or small the role was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they wondered what he was doing in a little role like that, you know, since he was Samuel L. Jackson, everybody knew his name, what's he doing playing this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, and people, you know, people talk about, you know, whether you've done smaller roles, not realizing that for every, every role out there, there are thousands of actors out there that would love to have that particular role, you know, and you're going up against a lot of people to get a part.  To me, getting a role is, you know, for the most part, it's like hitting the lottery, you know, especially for a movie or something like that, especially for a major feature film.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'Everwood' is a very popular show--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, but you're on, let's say, more than people realize sometimes, you're going to be on this week, Tuesday night on--
Speaker 2: Tuesday night on 'Boston Legal.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, I go on as a guest star and I've done a lot of guest star appearances.  Guest star appearances now, where it used to be, before I did 'Everwood' and started making a ton of money, I would just love doing the guest star appearance because, you know, hey, it's eight thousand dollars, you know, and star treatment, but now, you know, once you make some money, you start spending money and now that little seven, eight thousand dollars doesn't pay the bills, you know, so you're really looking for something more and being out of the market for four years has really kind of hurt me in a sense because now they've got to, not to, not to learn me all over again, you know.  So now I'm out there auditioning and really just getting into the flow of auditioning again but it's surprising to me that, you know, when I did 'Rudy,' Charles Dutton [Charles S. Dutton] was the star and, you know, he was the big guy.  I remember coming up, "How you doing?"  You know, "Hey, how you doing?"  And the last time I saw Charles Dutton, we were going up for the same role so, you know, times have changed, you know, and I'm meeting these guys like Ernie Hudson and these guys at these auditions.  I'm auditioning for those roles.  They're, they're still the name and I'm still not though I have a large body of work and people know my work but there's still, you know, as Charles Dutton, you know, but now Charles sees me and--, "Hey, man, what's going on?"  You know, "Hey, I was just watching 'Rudy' the other night," and blah, blah, blah, you know, so I'm respected by my peers and that's all you can ever ask for.
Story_ID: 467572
Speaker 1: Now tell us about how, about the theater, I guess.  We need to talk about that.
Speaker 2: You know, the theater, it used to be, the theater that I run is called, the John Beasley Theater [John Beasley Theater and Workshop, Omaha, Nebraska], and it's only because the people that owned the building at that time wanted to name it after me.  I didn't want my name on it.  I don't need my name on a building or anything like that, I know who I am and, but I was, I was working with some underprivileged kids in the projects over in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] and the Center Stage [Center Stage Theater, Omaha, Nebraska] is one of the theaters I came up on, you know.  We used to do a lot of good things there, had a good reputation, it was a black theater, only minority theater in the state, and it had been closed for about three years and they asked me if I would want to do something in the theater and I thought, well, no, I definitely don't want to be a busi- I'm not a businessman, I'm not a, my head's not there and I was working with a young lady who wanted to, to get into acting and I'd always told her that, you know, I would work with her at one point or another.  She's, was fifty years old at that time and finally I said, listen, we'll do, I'll do something with you.  So, I got the, I got 'Fences' by August Wilson and I gave her the role of Linda [sic.], and I said, "Study this," and I started working with her.  She came along to the point where I thought, let me put some other people around her.  So I put some people around her and the next thing I knew, we had enough for the cast for 'Fences,' and so I decided, okay, I'll do this over there and, you know, we'll do the show.  So after that, it was owned by Omaha public housing [Omaha Housing Authority] and they, the council decided, the board decided to name the theater after me and, and now I'm stuck with, you know, running this theater, you know, and, because my name's on it, you know, I want to make it successful.  So we started out doing three plays a year, four and five, and, and I've been with the--because I landed 'Everwood,' I was able to support this theater, you know, on my own, you know, with my own money and I've done that, I've done that up to the early part of this year, you know, when I decided that it's just, it's not good business, you know.  I'm using my retirement money to run this damn thing and I don't know that Omaha [Nebraska] appreciates it, you know.  And so it was a matter of, you know, the theater either making it on its own or, you know, we're just getting out of it, you know.  'Cause I never really wanted to run a theater but I've changed a lot of lives in here, in Omaha, and gotten peoples in the theater that never would have been there because we didn't have a large base to grow from, I'm normally training people and we would, we typecast a lot, you know.  If you look like or act like you, this character that I'm looking for, you know, bring you in there and teach you how to be yourself, you know, and, again, it's in being in the moment, teaching them what I do, and just learning how to be real and if I can teach them how to be themselves, you know, we've got it made, you know, and I've turned out some pretty good actors and I've got a couple that I'm really proud of.
Speaker 1: What are their names?  Some of the--
Speaker 2: Really proud of.  Andre McGraw is one of them.  He was in that first cast of 'Fences' and he played my son, and this guy, you know, he wasn't a very good reader but he really wanted to do this and, but once he got the words down, he was, he did really well.  But he was in love.  He had a girlfriend who lived in Kansas City [Missouri], and he was always on the phone with her and he, he was, you know, it was a distraction and one time I was on stage with him and I give his cue and there's no Andre and I'm waiting out there ad-libbing and this stuff.  I finally go offstage and I see him, he's out there talking on the phone to his girlfriend.  So I got on him about that.  Then one Sunday we were getting ready to perform, he calls me from the highway, he's on his way back from Kansas City and, so I had to delay the show and he got in there and I finally, I said, "He'll never work in my theater again, never again."  We were doing a play called, 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] and Andre called me, he said, "Mr. Beasley [HistoryMaker John Beasley]," he says, "listen, I know you, you know, that you took a chance on me, and I'm sorry and I, you know--I won't give you any problems, I really want to do this."  So I said, "All right, Andre," I said, "you know, I'm going to bring you back in," I said, "but if you mess up," I said, "that's it, you're through with me."  I brought him in and he was the surprise of that show.  He was just, did a fantastic job.  So my son, Tyrone [Tyrone Beasley], who directs for me, and I were, we're looking for a lead for 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson] and this character is, you know, is, it's a pretty strong character.  And so, the only person we could think of was Andre and, you know, I talk--we can do this, he can do this.
Story_ID: 467573
Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about Andre McGraw, one of your students (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and Andre was just one of the surprises of 'Raisin' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] and so we cast him.  My son and I thought, you know, Andre can do this role of Levee, and in 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson] and he did.  He did a great job and we brought him back in 'The Boys Next Door' [Tom Griffin] where he plays this mentally challenged guy, gets nominated for a TAG award.  A TAG is the Theater Arts Guild, theater, theater something guild here in Omaha [Nebraska], you know, where they nominate sort of like the Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and that sort of thing.  He was nominated this past season for his role in that and he's in our current production of '"Master Harold"...and the Boys' [Athol Fugard].  He's come a long, a long way, and he's very good.  He's done other theater work around Omaha, as a lot of our people have.  We just did 'Crowns,' by Regina Taylor and the Omaha Playhouse [Omaha Community Playhouse] is doing it now.  They've had three of our people in it.
Speaker 1: Now is there, there are a couple others you mentioned, too, besides Andre.
Speaker 2: Well, my son, Tyrone [Tyrone Beasley], is coming along very well.  He's a very fine actor but he's done some things outside of, you know, Omaha, Chicago [Illinois] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and there's another gentleman by the name of Charles Galloway who started when he was, he's, Charlie was in his late fifties and he's done several of our plays.  He's a very good, very good in August Wilson's, you know, August Wilson kept black people, black middle aged men in work.  So, he, you know, we used him quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is there now, now--
Speaker 2: And my youngest son, my youngest son just did a film ['The Great Debaters'] with Denzel Washington, his first, first SAG [Screen Actors Guild] role.  He's doing 'K-Ville' with Anthony Anderson, and he's done maybe three films now working out of, oh, he's, yeah, doing a lot, working out of Atlanta [Georgia] and he started kind of late.  I started him in high school, he played my son, we did 'Death of a Salesman' [Arthur Miller], he played Biff [Biff Loman].  He's 6'5", and so we were looking for a male to play Biff in 'Death of a Salesman' when I was playing at the Center Stage [Center Stage Theater, Omaha, Nebraska] and I told the director, I said, "You know, I got somebody that might be able to do this," and I didn't tell her what his name was and so, just told her it was Michael [Michael Beasley].  And so, she said, "Okay, bring Michael over," and so went over there and she liked him, you know, so she says, "What's your last name, Michael?"  And he said, "Beasley," and so he did that but he stayed out of it for a long time and then we were doing 'Two Trains Running' [August Wilson] here several years ago and so I brought him in and he played a, played a role in that and then we brought him back in for one of our biggest shows, was 'Jitney' [August Wilson].  I had two of the original cast members of 'Jitney' in the, in the production with me, both of my sons and the rest were local actors and it was the biggest show we had ever done here.  I mean, it was just huge and the only show to surpass it, surpass it as far as attendance was, 'Crowns,' the show we just did last season.
Story_ID: 467574
Speaker 1: Is it like a, since there was a black theater company here before--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called Center Stage [Center Stage Theater].
Speaker 1: Center Stage, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, this, they did very well.  They went on to do, they did a production of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] and won, they went to an international contest with that in Japan, and won best play.  They went to Alaska with--I think they first went to Canada, then Alaska and then Japan, you know.  So it was doing pretty good but the artistic director left and went elsewhere, and I had left town, and it fell on hard times.  Our finding actors was one of the problems and funding was another, I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay, I imagine audience is being built here for a theater that--the theater wasn't a traditional--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have the most diverse audience in the city.  We, we do a lot of, a lot of whites attend, you know, our theater and more so than blacks for the most part and I think that, I've seen that trend a lot of places, though even in Chicago [Illinois].  When I was working Chicago, you'd have most of your theatergoers would be white.
Speaker 1: Well, in downtown, yeah, yeah, North Side but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right, sure, and you know, of course the black theaters--
Speaker 1: --you know, we have black theaters in--
Speaker 2: --you know, yeah, would be a different, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, Black Ensemble [Black Ensemble Theater Company] and eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], out south, and there are a few others--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the bigger cities--
Speaker 1: --the Chicago Theater Company.  We have three black theaters with mainly black audiences, but, yeah--
Speaker 2: --you know, and, but in the main theaters, yeah--
Speaker 1: --the ones downtown, August Wilson's shows and those sorts of things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the only thing I can draw on because I never had done a lot of black theater, well, I haven't done black theater that much and very few black films.  That's why, you know, when I meet some of these, the black actors in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know, they know who I am, and, you know, because I've, but just, that would be my first time meeting them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, 'cause you're--
Speaker 2: --because they may have been doing a lot of black films but, you know, I've been doing the mainstream stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you are unusual that you didn't come out of the Black Arts Movement--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --though you're the age where something, a lot of people did--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you didn't, you weren't involved in the black film--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --activity.
Speaker 2: And mostly, mostly because, you know, coming up here in Omaha [Nebraska], there was no thea- black theater for the most part, and I would have to audition for roles that would normally be cast white but I'd be the best there and I would get these jobs.  We had an actress here by the name of Margaret Bryant [ph.], and Margaret and I would team up and we'd go audition for various theaters, you know, as, as, you know, a couple and we landed plays like 'Come Back, Little Sheba' [William Inge] and stuff like that.  I would do plays at the Playhouse [Omaha Community Playhouse], the Community Playhouse, and they rarely do a black play, if ever, and there were no other theaters that were doing black work but my interest had always been the classics.  I just wanted to do the classics, the great stuff, you know.  I wasn't interested in anything else.
Story_ID: 467575
Speaker 1: Do you have plans to write anything or any plans to produce or, or act in anything that you, I mean, do you have a dream job, I mean, a thing that you would like to see produced?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I'm, but it's in film, it's in film.  We have the rights to 'First Black Quarterback' ['The First Black Quarterback: Marlin Briscoe's Journey to Break the Color Barrier and Start in the NFL'] by Marlin Briscoe and I have a couple of partners, we're working on that, developing the script right now.  We have a white screenwriter that's doing it.  The dialogue that I've seen so far from this guy is just not black dialogue.  It's just not, you know, whites hear blacks differently than we hear ourselves.  You know, they think that, you know, and, you know, he's writing like, "Well we be going to," and this sort of thing and coming up, we didn't talk like that.  I mean, you know, these younger kids today kind of, with Ebonics and all that, you know, they kind of butcher the language a little bit, but back when we were coming up, you know, the thing was, you needed to speak proper English, you know, in order to get ahead, you know, and, you know, we were always corrected coming up.  Even though my family wasn't educated, we didn't, you know, we didn't do all that broken stuff that, you know, like white people think that we do, you know.
Speaker 1: Well the story, well, yeah, now, there's the story of Marlin Briscoe and it would just seem like it'd be good to have a, I don't know, somebody that, well, I don't know, I'm from the old school.  If it's a black story, it needs a black writer but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, and this is the point.  I think my son and I are talking about maybe doing the screenplay ourselves, you know, at least, or either bringing in Ted Lange, who I had him to direct for me before.  Ted is a fine writer, you know.  Maybe getting Ted to put out a script for me because there is a whole different, you know, if you don't walk in our shoes, it's just like, you know, I don't think that I could, though I'm probably more familiar with white life than they are with black, I still don't think I could, you know, I, you know, I'm not white so, you know, I'm, maybe I wouldn't be the best person to write that story, you know, but we come from a different point of view, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I couldn't see you writing a surfer movie or something or something that has nothing to do with your experiences.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay, so that's the big project now on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and, and then eventually I do want to write something.  I'm a producer now, you know, I mean, producing the show at the theater is pretty, it's quite similar to producing a movie, you know, believe it or not.  I mean, a producer has to put everything together, has to put everything in place, has to find the money, you've got to find the people that can do the job and that's what a film producer does, you know.  There's a lot more money involved but--
Speaker 1: Same job, basically, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same job.
Story_ID: 467576
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I'll tell you.  You know, my hopes and concerns, you know, we, every week it seems, if not every day, some of these kids are shooting each other in the neighborhood.  I've never been able to figure that out, you know.  How can you, you know, they, we've got so much hatred of each other in our community, you know, I just, I do a lot of work in the community.  I try to go wherever I'm needed but my hope is that one day these kids will come together and see that they're their own worst enemy, you know, that, that we can do anything we want to do, all we have to do is set down, you know, with a positive goal in mind and I was telling my wife [Judy Beasley] yesterday, I don't understand the desire to be a gangster, it only ends up one way, you know.  You never end up with anything.  It's a dead end street, you know, and, and how these kids can have no concern for life.  I mean, you don't give life, how can you take it away?  And that's, you know, it really, it really hurts.  Here's a six-year-old girl here in Omaha [Nebraska], was killed by somebody shooting at a car and the guy that turned himself in is, his name is Michael Coleman.  Now my father's [John W. Beasley] son, by another woman, his name is Michael Coleman.  Now I don't know if this is his offspring or not.  I would imagine that it is.  I haven't found out yet but this used to be, this, when I was coming up, the memories of North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] when I was coming up, were so wonderful.  I mean, it was just a wonderful place to be.  You could do anything here, you know, and we've lost that and we'll never get that back, you know, and I don't see any way we'll get that back and, but if there was just anything that I could do to get these kids to stop the violence, it's so, so idiotic.
Story_ID: 467577
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point and your journey to the place you are today, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, when I came, when I got out of the [U.S. military] service and I was twenty, twenty-one, I wanted to go to Los Angeles [California] and be an actor.  I think had I done that, you would be talking to me, you know, in terms of James, what [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones has done, Sidney Poitier, Denzel Washington, you know.  Do I regret not having done it at an earlier age but at the same time I would not have given up being with my family, raising my family, my boys [Tyrone Beasley and Michael Beasley].  We did a lot together.  We, the whole family played tennis.  We, you know, my old--youngest son played basketball in those games and being there for my kids.  My wife [Judy Beasley] and I, at one point in our life, about the twelfth year, we went through some major changes, mainly with me wanting to get out of here and do some other things and, and not being as committed to the marriage as I should have been and we were going to break up at that time but the thing that stayed with me that kept coming back to me is keeping the family unit together, and that was more important to me that, and so I was ready to give that up, and I made a promise to myself.  I, you know, that's important to me.  And so, I stayed through the marriage for a little while with some abuse from my wife, you know, I mean, she was, when a woman turns, you know, and my wife is the greatest woman in the world, she's the sweetest woman you could ever meet, she's a God-fearing woman, a very spiritual person, but once you hit that other side, it can be hell and she put me through hell for a while there and, but I was determined I was going to take it 'cause I wanted to be with my boys.  I didn't want anybody raising my boys but me and I stayed through it and one day she caught me down on my knees praying and that turned everything around for us and, but I would not have given up raising those boys, you know, for anything in the world.  So, do I have regrets?  I would imagine I have a few, but then again, too few to mention.
Story_ID: 467578
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done and the journey you've been on here, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, it, my boys [Tyrone Beasley and Michael Beasley] would have to be my legacy but I don't know.  You know, I live life one day at a time and I don't think too much about that.  You know, someone talked about this theater [John Beasley Theater and Workshop, Omaha, Nebraska] being my legacy.  Nah, I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I still have a lot of life to live and a lot of things that I want to do and a lot of things I want to give.  So, I really haven't thought about it.
Story_ID: 467579
Speaker 1: Is there anything that--we've talked about your family, and did we mention everybody, did we get every (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't mention my Uncle Leon [Leon Triplett].  My Uncle Leon was my father figure growing up.  He was the one that bought the TV.  He was the one that got me out of boxing.  I used to box.  I was fourteen years old, I was a boxer, you know, and he came home from the [U.S.] Air Force and my Uncle Leon was a boxer and my Uncle David [David Triplett], we call him Pal, he was a storyteller and, and Pal was a, he's a preacher now and he was the storyteller before TV and all that stuff.  He used to tell stories and I guess he's the one that I really got the storytelling from and, but my Uncle Leon was a father figure.  He was the guy that everybody in the family went to when they had problems, you know, and still to this day.  He was, he was the one that said to me when I was forty-five, he says, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John Beasley], what are you going to do?"  And I said, "I want to be an actor."  He says, "Time is getting short," and that's when I decided that, you know, I had to leave Omaha [Nebraska] and do what I had to do but he's a very special, special person in my life.  Uncle Leon is a great man.  He was, I don't think he did any--in fact, there's a good story on him.  When he was in the Air Force, he was in a plane crash and Air Force tried to cover it up, tried to hide him for a while.  And my grandmother [Laura Collier Triplett] found him, and he's had problems since, you know, ever since then, this was like in the '50s [1950s], but he was just a great man.  He worked as a janitor for a health clinic and he worked as a janitor, he was a TV repairman, he did all that stuff.  He was, he worked as a janitor because he wanted, he was able to make his own hours, and he could go to the racetracks.  He's a handicapper, and, excellent handicapper.  Made a lot of money betting on the races.  Never lost his own money.  He would be out at the racetrack and he could be having a bad day, people would come up to him and just give him money.  "What you betting on, Trip?" you know, just give him money, you know.  He never lost his own money, it always, made quite a bit, made quite a bit of money.  I don't know how much money he made but I know his bank account was such that he had problems at the bank one time and he went down and told them that he would take his money out of the bank.  "Oh, Mr. Triplett, no," you know, so, but, don't know where he got it, but, you know, and he, if we needed anything and to this day, you know, and he's been retired for a long time.  He's still, he's still the man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's just a great man.
Story_ID: 467580
Speaker 1: This is something I didn't ask earlier, I probably should have 'cause I've only got two more questions to go but, do you have a favorite role that you've played?
Speaker 2: Favorite role.  In film, it had to, it would have to be, Brother Blackwell in 'The Apostle' and on stage, Willy Loman, 'Death of a Salesman' [Arthur Miller], and Troy [Troy Maxson], from 'Fences' [August Wilson].  They are two similar guys with two, the same problems, you know.  I mean, the one's white and one's black.  Well, if I played him, you know, well I guess he would have been Jewish but Willy Loman was just a--to me he was quite a, he and his son, he loved his son but they never could get along.  I mean, he idolized his son.  I mean, his son was, you know, the center of his, you know, but he and his son fell out because of another woman.  Same thing with Troy, you know, what, Troy never did, Troy was, Troy lived in a past.  He wanted to be a baseball player in the Major League [Major League Baseball].  He was good enough to play for the Yankees [New York Yankees] but he was black, and when his son came along, a great athlete, and was offered a college scholarship to play football, he says, "No, you need to get you a trade, get you a job so, it's something that the white man can't, you know, hold you back in."  You know, you need to go on because they ain't going to let you get nowhere with that ball no way.  He alienates his son, and his son leaves, and Troy has a baby by another woman, and he loses his best friend and he brings an illegitimate child home and, and his wife says, you know, for my own, this baby's got a mother but from now on, you're a womanless man.  And he goes down, he lives his life out in--and it's just a tragedy and Willy Loman is just another great, two of the great figures, I think, in the theater, and those are my favorite roles.
Story_ID: 467581
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about right now before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a good man, as a good person.
