Story_ID: 3521
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm William Bonaparte, Jr. W-I-L-L-I-A-M, B-O-N-A-P-A-R-T-E, J-R-period.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 11th, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: Presently?  Chief Executive Officer for Bonaparte Corporation.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 9th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my offices at 1455 S. Michigan.
Story_ID: 3522
Speaker 1: There are five kind of People Magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  And they just require a brief answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food--that is such a broad question.  I don't have a favorite food.  I don't even have a favorite type of food.  I eat a variety of foods.  I'll eat anything.  I guess if I, if I were about to die and somebody came and says "here is your last meal," what would I have on the plate?  I'd probably have some of my mother's chicken and dumplings, a piece of chocolate pie that she made.  But I wouldn't go through life calling it or claiming that that has been my favorite foods.  I love food.  I mean, but I love a variety of tastes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green is probably the best color, green and black, some derivatives of those because they kind of simulate what money looks like (laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?  It depends on where I'm at.
Speaker 2: I love the warm weather.  I love the sunshine.  I love to fish and so if there's a time of the year, if it's summer in Brazil, then, then let it be summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?  Yeah, any place that the sun shines and there's a beach and there's fish in the water.
Speaker 2: I love, I love, I love sport fishing.  I love, love--I love watching whales.  I mean I'll get in a boat and spend hours after hours after hours chasing the whales.  So as the whales migrate from Boston [Massachusetts] around the Horn [Cape Horn, South America], all the way down, you know, I'll, I'll--I'll take vacations to follow where whales are.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you like just, watch, watching the whales?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's amazing to me.  I mean and the things that surround the venues where the whales are down in, in, you know, Hawaii, Alaska.  You get a chance to take some pretty good vacations if you follow the whales (laughter).  They seem to find some exotic places to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah--Life is a series of one-day events, you have to live each one.
Story_ID: 3523
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  How, how far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Well, there are two sides of the family, you know, my mother's [Lucy] and father [William Sr.].  On my father's side, my father was orphaned before he was ten years told.  So we, we don't have a great deal of history about things that happened in his, in his family life.  I knew that, that--oh, going--after "Roots" [TV mini-series] was on, and we went back and tried to go through this with my dad, and my dad didn't have a whole lot to talk about.  He never did talk too much about his past.  So I don't have a great deal of history about my father other than having seen the place that he was, he had been born, having an understanding that his father may have been of a race other than our-- than, than the African American.  A lot of, lot of, lot of things he never talked about.  So I don't know about his side.  He had two sisters.  They were all separated around the time he was eight or nine years old.  And then he lived most of his life in, around Earl, Arkansas.  He was born in a town called Earl, Arkansas.  And he, he migrated.  He was like a, a nomad.  He lived wherever he could, different families.  And, and big guy.  He survived, he struggled.  On my mother's [Lucy] side of the family, it's maybe a little bit different.  I can--my grandfather remembers his father being a slave, an Eldridge Hawkins.  My grandmother's mother was an Indian.  And I'm not sure of the, the tribe, but the--all the Indian tribes migrated down to Florida and they were part of the Seminole tribe. And I remember her talking a lot about how there was this blending of African Americans or black people and Indians and how the In- Indians had accepted the blacks that had run away as slaves into their communities.  And, and it was a tremendous blending of races that I don't think that everybody understands as much as it was.  But my grandmother was part of that heritage.  I got a lot of things about the Indian culture that she talked to me about when I was growing up.  And she, she had a tremendous influence in my life.  She talked sometimes about, you know, just the process of life. But not that much about the history, not, not much about her, her mother or her father.
Story_ID: 3524
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories at all that they passed down from the slavery period or nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can remember Papa--my, my grandfather was not a, not a very-- he was a slightly built man, very hard working person.  I re- I remember him telling me about the-- that after the slave days were over and, you know, they were just, they were just out there, just living, trying to find shelter.  They finally were able to create a shelter in a, and a-- made a stakehold.  And they find themselves into sharecropping situation.  And that's how Papa says they made is that they, they were, it was almost like being in slavery.  But they were able to find shelter and food and a way to take care of themselves.  Papa, Papa grew up with that same culture.  He was a sharecropper, all my life.  I remember we spent our summers going down to Augusta, Arkansas, chopping cotton in the spring and picking cotton in the summertime. But that was, that was where Papa-- Papa never talked that much about the slavery time.  Wasn't a whole lot of that discussion.  It was--we talked more about living, getting through life.  You know, we were poor people.
Story_ID: 3525
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Lucy Hawkins.  L-U-C-Y, H-A-W-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born November 17th, 1919.  And she was born in Augusta, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your mother like, and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's a great lady.  That's a great question.  What was she like or what is she like cause she's still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother came--you know, the--she was born in the, you know-- 1919 in that era.  Horses and buggies and farms, farmland, picking cotton, just a kind of a, just get through life kind of thing.  She had four sisters and brother.  She, she was born on a farm.  She lived in a, in a-- in that type of lifestyle.  Augusta is a small community about 5,000 people today.  It was much less then.  Everybody seemed to be related to everybody.  Half the town was African American, you know, to perform most of the tasks where cotton was the major crop in that, in that --so my mother grew up a wholesome lifestyle.  I remember--I was born in '42 [1942] so I can talk about my mother after I was born probably better than I can how she lived before then.
Story_ID: 3526
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of why she came to Chicago cause you, you were born here, right?
Speaker 2: That's a--you know, back, back in--back in--it was the boll weevil [cotton eating beetle] that hit cotton crop.  I'm not sure what the year, but it was right after the Depression.  You know, they, they went through the Depression, Depression in '28 [1928][sic,1929] and then, and they recovered from the Depression in the early '30's [1930s].  And then the boll weevil  came and killed the cotton crop in the South.  And during that same time, the, you know, the Pullman [train] cars [referring to Pullman Train porters] would come down and tell the stories about Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and other places.  Trying to etch out a life down in Arkansas was very difficult.  My mom [Lucy] married my dad [William Sr.] back in 1938.  My dad and my uncle, my mother's brother, got together one day and decided that it was time to leave Augusta [Arkansas]  cause there was just no way to make a living.  And they'd heard these Pullman porter car stories about Chicago and other places.  They actually hoboed their way to, first to St. Louis [Missouri].  And they got to St. Louis and tried to establish themselves and, you know, find a way to use the skills that they knew to just, to--to find work.  Stayed there a while.  Wasn't as successful as they wanted to be and moved on to Chicago, clipped another train and got to Chicago.  And, you know, again, my dad was, was a survivor.  You know, he had found a way to take care of himself.  And that's what I learned from my dad is that you have to find a way to take care of yourself.  He learned, you know, the mechanics trades and, and changing tires--a lot of things just to get through life.  And so he, when he found Chicago, he found a way to find work cause he was a strong, big husky guy.
Story_ID: 3527
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about that story other than, you know, in Arkansas, it's--in a small town, you just know everybody.  And I didn't--never heard that story.  You know, not, not just how they met, but how they got together?  I don't know how they got together.  I never had an interest in it.  I probably should.  My sisters probably could tell you that story, but I, I couldn't tell you the story.  You know.  Okay. Well--But they migrated to, to Chicago [Illinois].  That's how they--you know, dad hoboed his way to Chicago, leaving Arkansas so that he could take of-- my brother had been born.  He was born in, in '38 [1938] and it was '40 [1940] when dad decided to leave and come to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you about him too, but I wanted to stay with your mother for a little bit.  But was it difficult for a woman to hobo?
Speaker 2: Oh, she didn't hobo.  I mean--no, dad came and he, he--he situated himself, found work and then he found an apartment, around--in the Doolittle School area, 35th and Vernon [Avenue], 34th and Vernon, some place in that, in, in that area.  And then he sent for my mother.  Okay, all right.  The way you described it at first, it sounded like they, all three of them--
Speaker 1: No, no--no.  My uncle and my, my dad, you know, hoboed to try to find, you know, a place and then my uncle went on to Detroit [Michigan]. My dad stopped in Chicago--
Speaker 2: Oh, sounded like they all--I wasn't straight on it, but it sounded like they all (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no--no, no, mom was still home with grandma and grandpa and with [older brother] Matthew  You know, but dad decided that Arkansas wasn't the place.
Story_ID: 3528
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother have a chance to go to school much in Arkansas or here?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my--I hear these stories about the schools.  I don't think--my mom says she went to seventh grade, maybe.  And my dad claims he went to seventh grade too.  Well, maybe.  The schools weren't the same as they are now.  Schools were very difficult, working, taking care of.  If you worked on a, on a-- if you were a sharecropper, you spent most of your life picking, chopping cotton, doing chores.  And the schoolhouse that, that I can recall that they took me to-- that they'd attended school there, they had a one-room school.  That kind of situation, so education wasn't really high on the agenda.
Story_ID: 3529
Speaker 1: So what kind of work did your mother have to do here in Chicago when she came here?  When she got here?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mom [Lucy] was a domestic.  She cleaned homes for others, you know, Jewish families when she, when she found work.  She worked in restaurants.  I remember there was a period of time that she, she worked in the-- in the washrooms in the, in the Café of Tomorrow, out on 75th and Halsted.  She, she was a washroom attendant, and I used to wash her towels to get her ready for work.  Dad [William Sr.] worked the-- one bathroom,  she worked another.  I washed dishes.  (chuckle)
Story_ID: 3530
Speaker 1: What was your mother's personality like?
Speaker 2: She was just a great lady.  She was a wonderful mother.  She has a big heart, but she's, she's afraid of blood and trauma and stuff like that, you know.  If she sees blood she gets, you know (makes hand motions indicating fear), but other than that, she's very loving.  Passionate, has a lot of wisdom for her education.  She's been a lot of places, seen a lot of things.  I think her exposure, when she went through a period of time when she was doing domestic work, when she did a lot for doctors and business owners.  And she went into their homes.  She was able to see things and, and make adjustments.  And she-- things she'd see, she'd mimic.  And, you know, she was able to make life pretty good for us.  And that's a, that's an educational aspect.
Speaker 1: I mean I'm not saying, a life (unclear) that people don't often talk about.  If you know anything about, you know, domestic work and the places where people work, you know, there is an opportunity to learn something new all the time, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, without question.  Every day you learn something.  But I think she, she had a--you know, the type of work dad did, you know, he always stayed as a mechanic, working with his hands, and because he had the literacy problems, he, you know, had to take a lot of stuff.  He said, "Yes, sir" and "No, sir" to every white person he saw, no matter how old they were.  It was how he was taught.  And his, his environment really didn't expand a lot because of whatever, his work activity.  But mom, she was, you know, she'd go into these neighborhoods.  And she'd sit all day with these women who had a lot to talk about and they found the time in which to become friendly with some of the people that worked for them.  So I think mom gained a lot.
Story_ID: 3531
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father.  What's his full name, as if we don't know since you're a Junior, I mean but would you say it?
Speaker 2: William Bonaparte, Sr.
Speaker 1: And where was he born, I mean area?
Speaker 2: Well, he was born December 2nd, 1902--no, 1912, I'm sorry, 1912, in Earle, Arkansas.  And Earle is famous for, for growing rice now, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's your father like and is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he died in 1975.
Speaker 1: Well--Okay, what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was a survivor.  He had tremendous survivor skills.  He had gone through a lot in his life.  He never talked about anything he'd gone through.  I can only imagine what it would have been like for a ten year-old black kid in, in the rural South to have to fend for himself, learn to take care of himself.  But he was able to do it.  (Unclear) probably a lot of hard stories that happened to him.  I would think that if he grew up without--like we were talking about, being able to mimic behavior, if you don't see a lot of love in, in certain ways, it's hard to mimic that.  So I, I don't, I'm not sure that there was a lot of sharing, lot of love, a lot of domestic relationships in his, in his life as he grew.  And so, you know, trying to--I mean with love in his heart, sometimes, he was -- he'd do things very basic.  It was, this is the way that he understood it, and he didn't have parameters about how you could change a little bit sometimes.  But a very loving man, you know, loved the way he loved.  He wanted to take care of-- very protective of his family.  He was very protective of his family; always wanted us to do the right thing; spent a lot energy trying to prepare us for life, even when he was making mistakes.  He always tried the best he could.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was kind of a jack of all trades, you've described.  So he could do a little bit of everything mechanically?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he could do everything.  (Laughter)  He worked on, he worked on cars.  I guess -- and, and my relationship with work with my father, I can remember periods of time he worked for a company called Blitz Auto Body.  And they repaired eighteen-wheelers that had been in, in accidents.  And his job was to go and retrieve those accident-- you know, those, those vehicles wherever they were and bring them back.  And sometimes, you know, it was a, a eighteen wheeler that's in a ditch and it's collapsed on the side and it's mangled.  And you got to go back and set it on the roadway and put it in a situation where it can be traveled.  Well, it took a great deal of engineering.  I mean he was not an engineer, but he certainly was very gifted and skilled at doing that, you know, to get the vehicle just to a point where it was ready.  And generally, he did it by his self.  I remember there were times that he would make me ride to Ohio or some place with him, you know, keep him woke and help him.  He never paid me,  I remember that.  (Laughter)  But dad used to make me, you know, he used to--you know, Saturday mornings, I was another helpmate to him to help him get some of the work that he needed to get done, done.  We'd go out to ICX [Illinois California Express Railroad] when he worked there in the yards.  He was responsible for making the lights on those eighteen-wheelers work.  All the lights have to be functional on the, on the tractors and the trailers.  And I think that that was my introduction into electricity because dad would have me out there on Saturday's working out in the cold zero weather, climbing on top of one of those eighteen-wheelers to see if I could make, get the light to work, you know, take the cap off, change the bulb, check the wires, scrape off the, the contacts and those kind of things.  So he was a extremely hardworking person.  I got that from him.  I learned that from him, that you can only do eight hour's work in an eight-hour day, but you do eight hour's work.  And I think that was a good lesson to learn from him.
Story_ID: 3532
Speaker 1: Okay, now, describe growing up for us.  What were some of the sights and sounds or smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of me growing me up?  Well, let's see.  I grew up at 9346 S. Stewart in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I was practically born there, though we did live on Vernon [Street] right before we moved.  I was born in Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  And in Princeton Park, in that day, it was, it was, I think that whole community was almost new, you know, the home--they were still building as I was, as I remember.  I can remember as I was going to kindergarten that they still building some of those units out there.  There were pot holes and mud holes and there were tractors and trailers and construction equipment still going on.  But as, as I grew through years, well, Chicago in that, that time line was the "Hog butcher of the world" [opening lines from a Carl Sandburg poem- 'Chicago'].  And the stockyards were just filled with cows and hogs and chickens and any other kind of fowl that you can think of.  And the roadways were filled with, with tractor-trailers, you know, carrying, you know, hogs and cows in those big trucks.  And they would pass our doorways.  So there was this stench in the air that was just there from the, from the stockyards.  You could just, it was--it was penetrating.  And you'd-- it was, it was just part of what was life like.  On the other end of town, if you looked on the South side, we had all the steel mills that were permeating and, and the U.S. Steel and those big, huge steel plants.  You had the Whiting [Indiana] Oil Refineries [Standard Oil].  There was a lot of industry.  The skies at night were just yellow and there was, it was, there was this overcast of, of smoke and plumage that was just--And there was a, there was a stench from that as well.  So when you would marry these two odors together, you know, it was part of what--and then, then back in those days we had, we had-- we had old--coal stoves.  You know and you had to--and everybody had coal stoves.  So there was this soot from the coal that was also in the air.  So that was the kind of, what was going on in the, in the environment.  And we had streetcars that, that-- as far as transportation, buses that did run.  We had a ragman that would come down, down the street--down the alley on Fridays.  We, we had the iceman that would come down around, at least three times a week. The milkman would come twice a week.  We'd put the milk bottles out on the door, get your milk that way.
Story_ID: 3533
Speaker 1: Princeton Park is like a--it's an apartment complex that, you know, resembles low-rise projects in some, some ways.  And it was a project as such--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a government-subsidized facility.  So in that sense, it was.  But it wasn't part of the [Chicago] Housing Authority, housing stock.  It was a private developer, Justin J. Princeton.  And they developed these --group of duplex homes.  But there was some federal subsidy to keep the cost down.  It was different than being in the project,  we paid to a private landowner.  I think life, life in Princeton Park when I grew up was very, very wholesome.  And if we were poor, I didn't know it.  But I guess we were, you know, because we were all poor.  I knew all my neighbors.  They all knew us; a lot of friends, a lot of other mothers.  There was Ms. White, and Ms. Rhodes and Ms. Giller and the Johnson's and the Hampton's and the Dooley's and the Jenkins and on and on and on.  A lot of kids and because of the timing of the development, there were a lot of, of the children that were the same age bracket.  So a lot of friendships,  you know, almost like an island, self contained.
Story_ID: 3534
Speaker 1: What, now what were you like when you were a little boy?  What did you like to do?  What kind of personality did you have?
Speaker 2: I think that, and 5, 6 to 8, 10 years old, that time line, I was just-- I looked up to my big brother, Matthew.  I looked to him for leadership.  I did all of his dirty work and stuff like that, you know how brothers do.  I guess if you had walked down 95th Street during that time, you'd see, you know, African American men standing in front of the pool hall and in front of the, the liquor taverns there.  And not a lot of energy because there was not a lot of, lot more.  They were going to do those jobs that were task driven.  If you worked in the steel mills, you work hard, you know.  If you worked at the stockyards, you worked hard, you know.  So there was a lot of need for luxury, you know, of leisure time.  I don't think I was highly motivated.  And I mean I was adventurous.  I, you know, looked for frogs and snakes and I played games in a lot, a wooded area, like there was a jungle.  I had a high imagination.  But just another kid.  I don't think that things became, you know, focused for me until I was around the seventh grade.  Up until the seventh grade, I just kind of went through school, went to classes.  But in seventh grade at [Frank L.] Gillespie [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I went to Gillespie on 93rd Street. And there was a teacher, Barbara Sizemore.  She was my seventh grade teacher.
Story_ID: 3535
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about Dr. Barbara Sizemore.  She, she was a Dr. Barbara Sizemore.  She was your seventh grade teacher at Frank L. Gillespie School [Chicago, Illinois], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barbara Sizemore.  I remem-- my impressions of Barbara Sizemore.  She was the youngest teacher in school at the time, you know.
Speaker 1: And, you know, at--in the seventh grade, I guess what, you're about thirteen?--
Speaker 2: Twelve, thirteen.  You know, and all of a sudden, you know, things that look good, start to look good especially if it looks like a woman.  So we used to gawk at Barbara Sizemore,  she was a very beautiful. One day, one day, I was, I was sitting up in class.  She had given us an assignment.  And like I did most of the assignments, you know, did enough to get by.  That's how I got through school up to that point, just enough to get by.  I was, I was a, you know, a better-than-average student.  But I never put any energy into it.  I never did homework.  I just did enough to get by.  One day she gave this homework assignment out.  I got to school a little early and scribbled some stuff down on paper, enough to get by.  And she looked at me and she came over, reached down and grabbed me by my, by my shirt.  And she says, "Billy Bonaparte, you can do this work."  Scared me to death.  I'm serious!  Nobody had ever said anything about the work, plus, you know, my mother couldn't tell if I was doing my homework nor could my father, you know.  As long as I got report cards and the grades were okay, they were happy, you know.  So, she did that to me and then she, she threatened me and told me that if I didn't do my work, I was gonna have to come over and cut her grass.  And that Saturday, I had to go cut her grass with a push mower.  And she got my attention.  All of a sudden-- and she gave me a couple of books too, that she wanted me to read.  They had to do with history, black history.  I'd never gotten a black history book.  And in Princeton Park where we lived, there were only two bedrooms.  There were--there were 14, 15, 16, 18 people living in this two-bedroom house.  We had three families in the house.  See, back then, you know, as--as families would move from Arkansas, Mississippi or come to Chicago [Illinois], and had no place to go, they'd move in with somebody they knew.  And so we had two families living in our house besides us.  That's eighteen people in your house?  Yeah.  And we slept on the floor.  No, there were --  Those are small places in Princeton Park.  There're not huge places.  There were, there were five of us, my sisters and brothers, slept in a bed. We slept this way (motioning across).  (laughs).  We had pallets on the floor.  We didn't know it was a, you know, we didn't know it was that crowded.  But one bathroom (laughs).  One bathroom in the whole house.  And then six of the people were adults, you know, I mean, it's -- but that was the way it was.
Speaker 1: So three families actually living in the--
Speaker 2: For a period of time, sure.  Oh, it was common.  Three families.  Yeah, Carla, Carla -- I'm gonna show you pictures with Carla Taylor and her sister and her mother and Patsy.  And then we had-- I shouldn't telling, naming these people (laughter).  Yeah, we had that many families over there, and that wasn't uncommon in the, in the neighborhood.  So there was a limited amount of space that you could do things, you know.  And there was a closet in the bedroom that we slept in that was probably four feet this way, and maybe three feet this way.  It was, and it had a pull-chain light in it.  And I remember the day I took that book--because I was scared that she was gonna grab me again.  And so I got home, and I went in the closet, pulled the pull-chain on and started reading the book.  Much to my surprise, I enjoyed reading.  I had, I had been saying words out loud before.  You know, I could pronounce the word, but I didn't know what the words meant.  I didn't, I didn't spend the time to get the detail about words.  But all of a sudden I started to ingest the meanings of words.  And reading started to take me away from 9346 S. Stewart, started to explore 'Rikki-tikki' ['Rikki-tikki-tavi' stor by Rudyard Kipling] and India and Africa and so many other places, just in my mind from reading.  I got that from Barbara Sizemore.  I think that was the most significant thing that I can recall that did something that may have changed my life, is, is that situation when she made me aware that I was better than I thought I was. And then started to facilitate that by giving me books to read, and letting me know that I could do better.  So that was important.  I guess I was, I was kind of a-- I was a cute kid, you know, by standards. Wore my brother's [Matthew] hand-me-down clothes cause we couldn't--I don't think I got a new anything till I was twelve years old.  I used to wear all of his shoes after they had holes in them and his pants when he--they didn't fit him anymore.  So I wasn't well dressed, but none of the kids were.  We were all about the same.  And as I got older, I became more self-sufficient, started-- was a paperboy, delivered papers first thing in the morning before I went to school.  And on Sundays and Saturdays, sometimes my dad [William, Sr.] would help me by driving me in his car on Sundays with those big, heavy papers.  And we'd drive down the street, delivering papers.  And I cut grass on the weekends and got a job at a, at the café at--out of the Casino Café Demar (ph.)  was the name of the place, but it was a night club-- washing dishes, cleaning up.
Speaker 1: Was that close by?  Is it close by?  Was it close by Princeton Park?
Speaker 2: It was on 75th and Halsted [Street, Chicago, Illinois]  actually.  Not-- a little ways away.  Some days I'd find a way to hitchhike over there, walk or sometimes my dad would take me or I'd leave school and go directly there.  On the weekends I worked hustling with my dad [William Sr.].  I've always had some kind of, some way to find to make money.  It was important to find some energy to-- and half of what I earned, I had to give to my mother, help the family out.
Speaker 1: Was the Woodson Library there at that time on 95th and Halsted?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  Let's see, on that corner back then was, I can't even think of what was on that corner, a restaurant.  No, the Woodson Library didn't come in until in the late '60's [1960s].  The library that we went to was the Pullman Library.  It was on 111th and--I want to say it was South Park then, King Drive.
Speaker 1: That's a long way away from where you lived (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, from a 111th and 9346 Stewart, it wasn't-- I used to walk out there.  It was, back then, they had the State, State--State Theater and the Michigan Theater, out there in Roseland.  And that was, that was our life, that was our world from, from 95th Street to 111th Street and that shopping area.
Story_ID: 3536
Speaker 1: Tell me about music.  Kind of off-camera, you were telling us about your music lessons and how you became a drummer with Bobby Blue Bland.
Speaker 2: Well, my, my dad [William Sr.] really believed that, that in order for us to be successful, as he saw it, you know, it was the music industry.  So he encouraged us to take music lessons.  He found this place called the Boston Music School downtown.  And my brother [Matthew] who was four years older than I was, every Saturday morning, we'd get up  and have to go down to the Boston Music School to take lessons.  He played alto sax.  He was extremely gifted and skilled.  I wasn't.  I played accordion.  I played flute.  I played trombone.  I played so many different instrument trying to find what I could play (laughter).  But I had, I had rhythm, a little bit.  You know, I could, I could keep time. And I guess of all the instruments I played, I was probably better at playing drums and bongos and congos because, you know, you can shake your body, do a little stuff with it.  But all my, all my Saturdays were spent taking music lessons, most of my life.  Like I said, my, my brother was gifted and talented.  But I don't know if I was that good.  But over, over time, dad used to take us around on the weekends to some of the honky tonks and taverns and let us sit in.  We created a band, 'Blue Flames'.  We populated the Bin.  We got pretty good; started to go out on these gigs and playing VFW's [Veterans of Foreign Wars--meeting halls] and, you know, those kind of sets for $25 a, a head.  And then we started trying to get into playing in talent shows.  And when we were talking earlier, the talent show that we played--there was a talent show one weekend some radio station was giving down on 63rd Street.  And along with the Dells and the, the Commodores and the Flamingos and I can't remember all-- Jerry Butler.  It was just so many folks that, that became popular that weren't at the day that we played at that talent show, that performed.  And we came in second place.  I think the Dells won.  And after it was over, we went across the street to, to another set that had Bobbie "Blue" Bland and Junior Parker playing.  I think it was the Budland.  And we went in there.  And during the course of, while we were there, the drummer that was playing with their band, was inebriated, fell out.  And when he fell out, Bobby "Blue" Bland asked, is there a drummer in the house?  And I think I was only fourteen--
Speaker 1: Not a doctor, but a drummer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, is there a drummer in the house (laughs).  Well, you know, we had just came from across the street.  Again, I was not the greatest drummer.  I could keep time.  I didn't-- I, my, my goal wasn't to become a, you know, musician.  I was doing that cause dad wanted me to do it.  And so they hollered out, "Blanks!"  That's what my nickname was.  And Bobby says, "Come on up here, Blanks."  So he saw me and says, you're just a kid.  So he started to call me "Kid" and asked me if I could hold the sticks.  And, and that night I played with Bobby Blue Bland.  And subsequent to that, when he came to Chicago, I'd, I was blessed enough to play with him.  And when I was in the service down in Fort Benning, Georgia, he came to the Coliseum, and I played with him one night out there.  So.
Speaker 1: Gosh, that must have been exciting, playing with Bobby "Blue" Bland, you know?
Speaker 2: He was just another guy then (laughs).  He's famous now.  I can remember a night we played down at, there was a club on 47th Street, (unclear) 47th Street was really the popular, you know, enclave then.  They had Club DeLisa that was on State Street at 51st.  They had the Trianon Ballroom, you know.  It was a lot of different places that, you know-- but 47th was, was the 'Red Light District' if you want to call it that.  I can't think of the name of the club.  It was on 47th around Prairie, and we were playing upstairs and Muddy Waters [famed Chicago blues artist]  was playing downstairs.  And we had the crowd (laughs).  Yeah, so.  That's something.  My brother was really good.  He was talented.  He wound up playing with Gene Ammons, Sonny Stitt and he played a long time down at the Playboy Mansion with Leo Walker.  So he was, he was very gifted.  I wasn't gifted.  I could just keep time.
Speaker 1: You seem to have done, done it to --
Speaker 2: I got through it.  (Laughs)
Story_ID: 3537
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school.  You went to John Marshall Harlan High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a new high school.  Well, actually, after I graduated from Gillespie [Elementary School], again, understanding the times, and you know, it was '53, '54, '55, '56, '57 [1953, 1954, 1955, 1956, 1957].  It was '54 [1954] when, when they desegregated the schools [ref. to Brown v. Topeka Kansas Board of Education ].  And at the time I was, after I went from grammar school, I went to Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois] .  And there was a lot of churn in the, in the community because of the schools opening up and what was going on down in Arkansas [ref. to the federally ordered 1957 integration of Little Rock Central High School], you know, with the schools, the busing.  And at Calumet, Calumet was predominantly a white school.  There were a few blacks that came from Princeton Park in that area that went there.  And we'd go in the school, and there was, there were signs about the things that were going on in society, "Niggers this, Nigger that."  And--
Speaker 1: In the, in the school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, I mean I remember getting beat so bad.  I mean we used to get-- it was, you took your life in your hands going to school.  (laughter).  You know, it was, you know, they would -- the last day of school there was race riots, they called them that.  You know, but there was some racial incident at Calumet almost daily.  The same thing with Fenger [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And so when they built Harlan and Ben Willis' [Chicago Public Schools Superintendent] dream school, at the back end of Abbott Park on 96th and Michigan [Avenue], it was, it was-- it was between the [Dan Ryan] expressway  and the park.  It was kind of a buffer zone, you know.  If you went that way, you went toward Roseland and that community was almost all white.  And you'd come back on this side, and you went into Lilydale, West Chesterfield, you know, Princeton Park, Lowden Homes and that community was all black.  But when they, when Ben Willis created Harlan, he, he, in his mind, was going to try to solve this race, diversity issue.  And he had this perfect school he wanted to create.  And so I would-- we were blessed enough to be part of that experiment.  When they, when they created Harlan [High School, opened in 1958, 9652 South Michigan Avenue 60628] , they, they drew kids from both Calumet and Fenger [High School , Chicago, Illinois ].  And it was 50-50 mix of white and black, the school was the day it opened.  And, and it was a challenge.  But the, the teachers that they put in the school as an experiment, the classes were twice as long as the standard classes.  The teachers were focused on a new method of trying to teach.  So I had--it was a wonderful experience.  There was Nancy Rosenblum and Mr. Martin, some teachers that, that excelled and that have gone on to do real stellar things in life, written books and things.  But they were part of that experience.  And I think that the energy of trying to make that work, you know, that's the city, and there was a national focus on Will, Willis' work.  I think we, we bene-- benefited from that experiment.  But there was churn in the school back then.  There was a lot of race fights and, you know, who sat on first.  But we were able to participate in naming the school song and the school colors and being the captain of the first chess club and, you know, creating the hall guard systems.  And, you know, there was a lot of things that, that by it being new, you could participate in doing.  There was no--you didn't have to go in and try to be something for somebody else.  So.
Story_ID: 3538
Speaker 1: What were some of the activities that you were engaged in?
Speaker 2: Oh, I --
Speaker 1: Did you play music in school?
Speaker 2: I played music on Saturday's (laughter).  But you -- it didn't transfer to the school band or anything?  It--I didn't have.  dad, dad--dad couldn't make me take Band so I didn't take band.  Yet, I was not enamored with the music in my life.  I had--I became involved in, in the chess club.  I was president of the chess club for about--student council.  And I started to get somewhat involved in government and law.  I started to have an interest in, in history.  So let's see.  What else was I involved in, in school?  I didn't play basketball, didn't play football.  I was in track for a while.  Drama club.  That's about it.  You know, you did a lot of girl watching (laughs).  There were some cute girls that went to [John Marshall] Harlan [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I think they were the best in the city at the time.  It was a great, great time.
Speaker 1: And did your grades improve from grade school, you know, when you were in high school?  Did your--were you making better grades?
Speaker 2: I was doing--my grades were good when I was in grammar school.  I mean it was my effort that was, wasn't there.  You know, I was, I was probably one of the, those kids that somebody says, here, you know, do this.  And I did it without effort.  I didn't have to spend a lot of energy.  I, I didn't have to--if I were going to take a test, I could read the information and I wouldn't have to read it again.  So, okay, I wasn't a bad student.  I just was not a dedicated student.  When I was in high school, my grades were pretty good.  It was, it was--I mean I was a good student.  I--you know, I, I think there was things that I had a keen interest in.  I, I began writing.  English became-- and reading, literature became significant to me because of the adventure that it brought with it, you know, the places that it allowed my mind to take me to.  Some of the things that I do today, some of the travels, some of the trips that I've gone to, (unclear) China, India, around the world, basically, in, you know, my adult life.  But it was, it was because of things that I had my exposure to when I was--from books I read.  Books have made the difference in my life.  And I was never a bad student.  I don't mean to imply that I'd even have a--they say I have a pretty high intelligence quotient.  I, I take tests well.
Story_ID: 3539
Speaker 1: Okay, when you -- well, in high school, what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Girls.  (Laughs)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) academic kind.  This is almost universally true.
Speaker 2: I would think that they--like I say, there was this Nancy Rosenblum.  She was a teacher and she taught literature.  I think that's what it was called.  And she made it so interesting.  And I thought, I think that was my--and I, I became exposed to, to Shakespeare and Chaucer and, you know, that was an era of really learning a lot about the world.  I guess that was really my favorite subject.  Math was okay too.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a sense that you were going to go to college, you know, when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: My family was not focused on education.  Dad [William Sr.] always thought we'd have this career in music.  So, you know, dad wanted us to go to high school and get a high school education because he thought it was important.  But he really didn't understand the real value because of what he was exposed to in life, you know.  And so aft- after he started to get a better sense of it, then he wanted, he wanted my brother, my older brother, Matthew, to graduate from high school.  Well, Matt dropped out in his junior year.  He decided he didn't want to go any more.  So it became important to dad that I graduate from high school.  And so he tried--he lured me into graduating.  He says, you know, you need to graduate so you can be this and my counselors and teachers started talking about college.  I'd bring that information home.  So dad got involved in that.  He says, well, you ought to go to college.  And so it became a focus and because of the counselors at school, more than anything else, and the preparation and the-- what you need to do, the tests you need to take, all of the- all that stuff.  And so I decided that I was capable.  I wanted to go to the University of Illinois.  They had a campus down on Navy Pier [now University of Illinois at Chicago] at the time.  And, you know, you had to go, you had to be qual--you know, you had to qualify, pre-qualify.  So I spent time in my junior year going through that pre-qualification and trying to be accepted by three or four schools cause dad had told me that if I graduated from high school, I could go to college.  So I remember the day I got the letter from the University of Illinois, you know, in my senior year telling me that I had been accepted, told me what I had to do.  And so it was very exciting times when I thought I was going to leave high school and go into college.  But I think that's probably one of the disappointments that I had in life because the night I graduated from high school, I remember my dad looking at me saying, "Well, son, you know, I ain't got kind of money to send you to college.  I'm so happy you graduated, but, you know, why don't you get you a job for a while, you know, go to junior college."  And, and I had told all my friends that I was going to the University of Illinois.  You know, everybody was, you know, it was kind of a-- it was a big deal then.  They didn't accept a lot of people that looked like me then and it was, I, it was an achievement just being accepted.  And then when I found out on graduation night that I wasn't going to be allowed to go, I was devastated.  That was the night I left home.  I left home the night I graduated and became a man.  I was on my own since then.
Story_ID: 3540
Speaker 1: Where did you go?  That night?
Speaker 2: It was in January (laughs).  And, actually, I had a little small coat on and I curled up on the back of somebody's porch on 75th Street.  I had no clue where I was going.
Speaker 1: Did you have an argument or something at home or you just--
Speaker 2: I was just devastated that I couldn't--I was just disappointed.  I was really disappointed.  I had, you know, I had--my life was all, had now started to focus on it, everybody, you know, I'm going to college, I'm going to coll--you know, kind of like that.  And then my dad [William Sr.] said, I'm sorry.  It was cutting.  It, it was probably one of the biggest hurts I think I had experienced up until that time.  I was on my own from that point.
Speaker 1: So you--what did you do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an older brother [Matthew].  I finally, that night again, I slept on the back porch in the cold.  And the, the next day I had enough pride to call my brother and ask him if I could stay with him and his wife for a few days, which I did.  In the course of the next week we went out and tried to find, help me find a job.  I got a job at R.R. Donnelley's [publishing company] unloading telephone books off of freight cars, four at a time or five at a time (whooshing sound) for a dollar an hour .  And I was on my own.  Found an, I found a--there was a young lady and she actually became my first wife, that I met at a restaurant while I was out there just trying to get through life.  She befriended me, helped me find food and helped me find a one-room apartment, just one room.  That's all.  I had a sink in it, the bed, a little kitchenette, I guess they called.  The sink was in it.  The refrigerator was in the hallway.  And she stole some pots and pans from her mom.  And I set up life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how long did this last?  I mean did this situation last?
Speaker 2: How long did I work for [R.R.] Donnelley's?  (laughs)
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause you went into the service or the service  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the--within--I worked like that and, you know, did enrollment with Wilson Junior College [now Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] for a while.  And started to, to explore what I was going to do with the rest of my life.  You know, I had no clue.  All of a sudden you wake up and you realize you got to take care of yourself.  You know, it's a suddenness to that, you know, I got to take care of myself.  And, and how do you do that?  I wondered how my father had done it, but I knew he had and I, I guess because I knew he had done it without any kind of support system, I knew I had to find a way.  Were your parents worried about you, about where you were? I'm sure they were.  But I was angry.  And my brother [Matthew] knew where I was.  I'm sure he kept them informed about, you know, I'm still okay.  But I was becoming my own man.  Read a, read brochure some place, you know, we were, it was in this turbulent times, you know.  The Cuban [Missile] crisis hadn't occurred yet, but the Berlin [Wall] crisis, all those things were--the world was in kind of a state of, almost, you know--And military service was something that was mandatory.  You had to do it anyway at some point.  So I decided that the Army offered a package where they paid for education.  They offered you a opportunity to go overseas, and you know, there was a package that you could, you know, if you, if you volunteered to go for two years or three years, you could do this or do this--or do this.  And so I sat in front of a recruiter.  It was an option, one of the options that I had, and I decided to go to the Army.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, had you gotten married at this time or?
Speaker 2: Not quite.  (Laughs)  No.  I, I got--I, I had decided to go in the Army because this marriage thing was cropping up and I figured I'd better get out of here, you know.  And so, I, I left, went in the service.  But, you know, the heart's weak, like it is, I kept seeing Gloria, and eventually we got married, got married in September, September 1961, I think, we got married.  So--
Speaker 1: So this is like less than a year after you graduated from high school?  Oh, yes, in the same year.  Yeah, I did a lot in that year.  A lot of dumb things too, but, you know. When you're kid growing up, you have to go and do the things that come your way.
Story_ID: 3541
Speaker 1: I read all the books about slavery.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did. I became, I became, you know, the '60's [1960s] were the '60's [1960s], you know.  Civil Rights became an issue that was in our life.
Speaker 2: So you kept up with Civil Rights activities when--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I mean I was-- it was an experience when I was in the service that, that changed my life.
Speaker 2: What happened?  Now, you, when you joined the service, you said that you were supposed to get-- well, tell us about the experience in the service?
Speaker 1: Well, I went in the service, you know, to get the education that they promised and live the, the experience and exposure, going overseas and for a minute I, I enjoyed the military service.  I think the problem I had with the military was that I was still in love when I got married and tried to take my wife with me, and-- when I was finally sent down to Georgia.  But before when I, when I first went in the service, when we-- the first time I was on a train down to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, when I was in, you know, had to take that trip.  You know, and then I spent my eight weeks in basic down in Fort  Leonard Wood.  Then we had another eight weeks down in Fort  Leonard Wood.  And after that I, I--I was part of the group that had to go from Fort  Leonard Wood, Missouri to Fort  Benning, Georgia.  I was the-- I had gotten a promotion, so I was, I was the, I was senior NCO [non-commissioned officer] in the group.  So I had responsibility for the group, had all the voucher money.  We had a bus, a Greyhound bus that we, they used to transport the-- I think it was fifty-two of us, you know, from-- So I had all the things to pay for meals. You know, I had the, I was a signature on the meals.  I was in charge of the group.
Speaker 2: And this is an integrated group, right, the soldiers?
Speaker 1: It was mostly white (laughter).  You know, there was, there were three black guys in the group, but it was, it was integrated at the time because it was integrated by that standard.  But there weren't a lot of blacks.  They were--
Speaker 2: And you're traveling from Missouri to --
Speaker 1: --to Fort Benning, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Fort  Benning, Georgia.  In the South.
Speaker 1: Imagine, this is back in 1960 --
Speaker 2: Yeah, during the days of the Freedom Rides.
Speaker 1: During the days of the Freedom Rides.  So we, we -- this is my first independent jaunt through the South.  You know, I'd gone with my dad [William Sr.] when I was growing up as a kid.  We'd take those trips down to, down to Augusta [Arkansas] in the summertime to pick cotton, to chop cotton to help Papa [his grandfather], you know.  You know, we'd drive and dad would stop on the highway.  He'd have to go take a leak on the road because we couldn't use the washrooms.  And we, we'd have fried chicken and stuff and water and stuff that we carried because you couldn't-- there were restaurants that wouldn't serve you.  And so I was familiar with that experience, but when I was in this uniform, you know, (laughter) I'm, we're military man. I'm, you know, I'm, I'm--I'm trained to kill now, kind of thing, a little cocky.  And I remember the, the officer telling me, "Well, son," he said, "Well, while you're on post here, things are all right, but you be careful out there."  That's what he said.  So we started-- the bus driver the deal.  And we would head-- he knew the places to stop for food.  And we'd stop and he'd tell me that I couldn't go in there (laughter).  They'd have to bring me something out.  And I-- that was the first, first real taste of, of--of, of something-- I won't give it a name, that I started to be exposed to.  And then after-- while I was in Fort, Fort Leonard Wood , you know, there were, there were guys that, you know, you learn the camaraderie with.  And there were guys, white guys from Texas and other parts of the country that, you know, you become a unit.  And the friendships, that I thought were friendships.  And when we got down to Fort  Benning , and the first thing they told us was that, you know, this is, this is Georgia, (laughter) you know.  While you're on the post here, you know, we don't allow this and we don't-- you can, you can do anything you want, you know. But once you get off the post and you go into town, you got to realize where you are.  You have to abide by the rules, especially black boys from Chicago [Illinois], you know.  So I kind of halfway understood what they were saying.
Story_ID: 3542
Speaker 1: But that Sunday morning, we got up and Dobert and Dawers (ph.), these two guys that I had become pretty close with-- I was going to Catholic church at the time.  Well, we got up going to church.  Then we decided let's go into town.  And, you know, one of them had a car.  We went to town.  That was an experience I won't forget, you know, trying to go to church.  It was, it was awful.  They didn't allow me in the building.  There was some, some drama.  I got hurt a little bit.
Speaker 2: What happened?  What happened?
Speaker 1: I was thrown down a flight of steps and I was stoned, to be honest.  Pretty bad.
Speaker 2: By the, by the--
Speaker 1: The parishioners that were --
Speaker 2: The parishioners of a Catholic church (unclear).  I didn't try to start anything.  I was just going to church.  And we were just guys going to church.  We weren't looking for trouble.  I wasn't trying to integrate the church.  I didn't know it wasn't integrated.  I was, I didn't know the church was that way.  That was my first exposure.  Changed my view of the Catholic church as well, the whole thing.  How could they be as ugly as they were?  But that was a, that was a defining moment for me in life as far as race relations in that, that I knew at that point that I was as, as a part of it as anybody.  I mean it had had a direct impact on me.  But --
Speaker 1: It wasn't just something on the news at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have news like we have now.  You know, everything today would have been on CNN [Cable News Network].  Back then it didn't--I don't think it was blurb in the, in the newspapers.  It was just something those people in that town did.  Then, you know, I got carted off to, back to the base and they wiped the blood off of me and told me don't do it no more.  That was about the summary of it.  Nobody went to jail.  There was no grand investigation of any sort.  I just never went to Catholic church again.
Story_ID: 3543
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that, about the service and all that at this point?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, and then I, I understood what was going on in the time that, you know.  It was the '60's [1960s], it was '61 [1961].  Integration was, was a topic.  [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had become a, a discussion.  There was fear.  In Columbus, Georgia, you know, the city outside of, outside of Fort Benning, they had started to picket the stores there to just have access to the lunch counters.  I was part of that.  I mean if you wanted to buy a new shirt that wasn't military, you'd go to a PX [post exchange] or if you went to town, you had to the stores that were there.  It was, it was funny because Columbus was so dependent on Fort Benning, you know, the military base that was associated there.  And the way they treated the military personnel was just-- you know, I don't know if they would have survived today's, in today's economy--today environment by the way the did.  So.  But the way I feel about it, it was the way it was.  You pick up the paper and you'd hear about blacks being, being taken off of buses. And burnt and the people in Mississippi that were, were dragged off and killed in, you know, the marches in Selma [Alabama].  And all of that turbulence was going on at that time.  So you couldn't avoid it.  Had a uniform on, you had a uniform on.  It didn't, you're still in America.  I remember, probably the harshest story that I can remember.  And that was in the service. There was a group of us, black guys, and we all lived in the Midwest. Got pretty friendly while we're down there and decided that we're going to take our liberty -- we, we got notice that we're going to Germany.  And we all got our, got our orders that we were going to go.  And so they gave us ten days liberty and with that liberty, we could do, you know, whatever we wanted to.  So one of the guys had a car.  And he lived in Detroit [Michigan].  So he, well, he had just bought the car.  He couldn't drive that well, but it was his car.  So we all decided-- it was seven of us-- six of us.  We were going to, we were going to take his car, drive through the Midwest.  We'll drop one guy off in Louisville and drop this guy off in Decatur [Georgia], drop me off in Chicago [Illinois], and they were going to go on to Detroit [Michigan].  And then on the return trip, just collect everybody else and we'll go back home.  We were just using the car as the vehicle, I mean the transportation.  And so when we got to Kentucky, the guy that was driving was driving like thirty miles an hour, forty-- he couldn't drive that well.  I says, "Hey, let me drive.  And so I started driving.  I'm a law-abiding driver.  I'm not a-- you know, so I'm driving the speed limits.  And we went through this place-- if it was a town there, I didn't see it (laughter), you know.  There was a place called Shepherdsville, Kentucky, little bitty small town.  It was just one of these speed traps.  That's all it exists for.  And we weren't' speeding, but the police stopped us, pulled us over. ou know, treated us extremely bad. Asked me for a license.  And I'm a military guy.  I don't have a license.  You got to have a license.  Your driving on the highway. Anyway, they took us all down to the courthouse.  And the police guy, was actually the magistrate, the judge too.  Yeah, it was mess.  And fined us, a lot of money, fined me like $300.00 since I was driving.  And, you know, I don't carry money like that.  They had a jail that was, had eight cells in it.  And the cells didn't run, they were, the doors within each individual cell was open.  So they put me in there as a black guy (unclear) three or four other white guys in this little town.  Everybody else-- we came up with enough money to get everybody else out.  And the guy that lived in Louisville [Kentucky] said he was going to go and get some money, and then he'd come back and get me.  You know, otherwise, I wouldn't have put my money in the pot to get everybody else out.  So I, I'm left behind and they left.  It turned dark (laughter) and I'm there with these guys that-- I got beat up pretty bad by these guys.  One guy tried to rape me in there.  It was awful.  It was awful.  It was a terrible experience.  And one of the guys in there, because I had a uniform on, you know, he had-- became a protector for me and  interceded in my behalf.  But that was a -- they didn't feed me.  And eventually, when, you know, they let me make a phone call, I called my mom, told her I was there.  And they gave us a place they could send a Western Union wire gram, money gram to.  Got the money.  They didn't give me the money till Monday.  She sent it on Saturday.  So I had to stay in this jail for those three days.  And when they finally let me out, she had sent enough money for me to catch a bus.  I left, got out of jail, asked the guy, says, "Now, how do I get to Louisville [Kentucky]?  Is that the closest town?" And he says, "There's a bus out, bus is-- bus stops out there."  So, you know, uniform is kind of tattered now, you know, that's all I had the one on.  I saw no evidence of anybody that looked like me, you know, during the whole time I was there.  And went out and kind of waited until the bus comes.  My mind started to telling me, well, I'll wait and let everybody else get on the bus.  I'll be the last one on the bus.  I'll go sit in the back.  I'll-- I've got this part in my mind real clear, didn't want to cause any trouble.  The bus came, door opened, people got on the bus.  I got on last.  The guys says, "I don't let niggers ride on my bus," closed the door.  It seems funny now, but I'm standing there out in the street, in the middle of no place.  I turned around, and I says, "Well, how do I get to Louisville [Kentucky]."  So the guy said, well, you can-- "That road will take you to Louisville."  And so I started walking, you know, I really did.  I started walking down this highway.  Had my uniform on, God bless America.  And as I'm walking down the highway, there's a group of kids, first group came, they, they were-- been at Dairy Queen or some place.  You know, and they threw all that stuff at me, you know.  I mean that was as I was walking down the highway.  And still, not even clear I'm going in the right direction, just walking, walking.  And maybe about three hours, I was walking in the sun, hot and there was this car that pulled over toward the, passed me.  There wasn't a lot of traffic.  Pulled over, passed me.  It was a white couple in it.  They pulled over and they got out of the car.  And I just figured this was gonna be it.  I started looking for stuff to protect myself with.  And it was a couple, they were from Wisconsin.  They saw me,  I was crying.  I was in, I was in pretty bad shape.  I thought that this was going to be the, the last day of my life.  And they were kind people.  They took me to Louisville [Kentucky], took me to a bus station.  And they made a difference.  And that's (unclear) story.
Story_ID: 3544
Speaker 1: You were on a ship to Germany.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, when we got to Chicago [Illinois], we got in trouble going back.  The, the guy that had driven me, the guy that owned the car, when he came back to pick me up, he was late.  And then by the time we got to Decatur [Georgia], we were two days late.  So by the time we got back down to Fort , Fort. Benning [Georgia], we were three days late, AWOL [absent without leave], on the books, you know, all of us.  They arrested us, gave us company punishment, Article 15 [from the Uniform Code of Military Justice: art. 15 - Commanding Officer's Non-judicial Punishment].  And we had missed the boat.  So I didn't go to Germany.
Story_ID: 3545
Speaker 1: So any--anything else in your military career, your military stint that you want to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the Vietnam [War] era.  I did get on a boat, and I went over there.  It's not a lot I want to talk about that.  I didn't particularly like to remember those days.
Speaker 1: So 1962. Okay, how long did you spend in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: About eight months.
Speaker 1: It was pretty bad stuff?
Speaker 2: Well--we hadn't-- he Bay of Pigs [Cuba, attempted overthrow of Castro government by U.S. government April 16, 1961] happened, and-- that was the Germany situation [ref. to the Berlin Wall crisis of August 13, 1961].  That's why we were supposedly going to Germany.  And there was the Berlin crisis and then the Bay of Pigs, you know, in Cuba.  And this, what was going on in Vietnam at the time is that they were-- they had "advisors" that went there.  You went there as an advisor.  But as an advisor, you couldn't shoot nobody, but you could see dead people.  You could, you could, you could--if you haven't been exposed to death, and suddenly you're exposed to death, I don't care if you got a uniform on or not, it's not a good thing.  It kind of leaves something in your mind. So it wasn't the, the war that others experienced, but it was, it was just a bad--
Story_ID: 3546
Speaker 1: I came back to Chicago in '63 [1963].  I was still married.  My daughter was not yet born.  My son was not yet born.  I had a son and a daughter by my first wife [Gloria].  Got out of the service.  You know, the responsibility of family was something that was going on for me, and how do I, you know, recapture that and start to try to be a head of a household.
Speaker 2: And had you learned a skill in the Army?  Some of sort of a skill that you could apply in the civilian world?
Speaker 1: Well, when I was in the service, I was a, was a wireman, a field communications crewman.  When I was in, when I was in--I was in a combat sport company.  But it was a, it was a communications wiring, the telephone, switchman, switchboard operator, those kind of skills that, you know, I had learned that I could probably apply to do other tasks.  And so when I got out of the service, you know, initially, come back home and got a job in a gas station because you could do that.  Those were quickies.  You worked in that industry, hustled.  And, and then -- that's not totally true because right before I went into the service, I'm just thinking about it, I had gotten a job at Ed Garvey Printing Company as an apprentice.  I was the first black apprentice printer.  And I was doing rewind press, collating, printing and stuff.  And because of the way the laws were structured, you'd go in the service, you come back, your job should be waiting for you.  And so I came back, and I went back to work for Garvey.  But it was a, things were changed.  They didn't want to have to take me back cause they had to let somebody else go.  They had to bring me back as foreman because of the time, and all that. It was not comfortable anymore.  And so I, I worked in the gas station to get a few bucks and then finally decided I was going to stay in the printing business.  Got a job with tab, the Tabulating Card Company [Chicago, Illinois], doing printing, IBM [International Business Machines] cards, you know, it was little computer cards (unclear).  And so setting up those and printing these punch cards.  Became a night foreman out there.  I was doing pretty good, actually.  In that same timeline, oh, we were -- in, in the community, there was this, this energy to, to become more integrated by the forces.  There was a guy named Al Raby [Chicago civil rights activist] who was a community activist.  And, you know, Al had started to get a following of folks that started to make demands on the institutions and, and they started to picket on the, the Commonwealth Edison  and Illinois Bell and the gas companies cause those were, those were companies that were subsidized by our tax base.  And so, you know, to give blacks jobs, opportunities, access.  They -- none of those companies hired people to do anything technical.  Most of the jobs that they allowed us to have were in, in the lunch rooms and, you know, little custodian kind of work.  They didn't give us sort of -- so we picketed.  At night I worked in the printing company.  During the days, and some days I was down there.  I was having fun in part, but my heart was in it too.
Story_ID: 3547
Speaker 1: And then when they finally opened the door, after six, eight months of picketing, then Illinois Bell finally says that they would interview some folks.  And they found me in that line of people that first group they tested.  I went and tested, and they'd given me this little thing, a piece of paper, says PBX Installer [Private Branch Exchange] .  Well, we didn't know at all what the jobs were they had, you know.  We didn't work there, but we had found names of jobs.  And that was the one I had.  They said, if they ask you what job you want, tell 'em this one (laughter), you know.  So he says, "What, you know, job you applying for?"  I says, PBX Installer. Didn't have a clue what it was.  And did not know at the time that it was union job, Local 134 IBEW [International Bortherhood of Electrical Workers].  And that, at the time, if I were gonna be the guy, then I would be the first African American in Local 134 as a C-apprentice [communications apprentice].  I mean that was significant too at the time.  And I passed the test, asked for the job.  Well, it took maybe eight weeks before they finally called me.  I'd call them every day.  I'd get up in the morning and call and says, "Where am I on this list?"  They just said that your name was on this magic list.  I'd call up everyday.  And says, "Where am I on the list?"  I forget this guy's name, but he thought I was the biggest pain in the butt.  Some days I'd call them four or five times a day.  "Have I moved yet?"  (laughter).  But it was part of the process.  Well, then finally, he, he called me in and they had the union folks there, a whole bunch of people and trying to get into my head, find out how I would behave, how I would act.  And, you know, was I radical or whatever, you know.  What temperature-- you know, a whole bunch of-- Today they'd go to jail for asking the questions they asked,  I'm serious.  But they did.  And in the end, you know, they made a determination that I'd be the-- that it would be me.  I was working at the Tabulating Card Company.  I was making a hundred and forty bucks a week.  This is back in 1963.  And a PBX Installer then made $63 a week.  I mean apprentice, the apprentice job paid $63 week.  I said, "You kidding!" (laughter).  I said, but I've been trying to get this job and it pays almost-- you know. I, I think my, maybe it was my dad that finally to convince me because I'd listened to all that.  I says, "I can't do this."  And my dad was trying to tell me how it was going to make a difference for other people's lives and if I could do it.  And at least take the job initially and, you know. And so I sucked it, sucked it in and decided that I would leave this job at Tabulating Card Company at $140 a week to take a job for $63 and I did it.
Story_ID: 3548
Speaker 1: It was tough.  You know, the PBX, PBX Installer  [Private Branch Exchange] an inhouse telephone switching system that interconnects telephone extensions to each other as well as to the outside telephone network back then, you know, they had the multiple position switchboards.  Large companies had switchboard operators and, you know, ten operators, fifty operators.  They had the, the rooms where all the switching gear had to be wired; the relays, the line finders, the connectors, the--it was a tube system back then.  And, you know, I had-- can remember going into a room the size of, of these combined rooms [motioning around him] empty.  And when we'd leave we'd have equipment and millions of wires that had to be connected to make it work.  You had to-- so it was very technical in that sense.  And it was always in a business, for a business customer.  Initially, when I started to work with Illinois Bell, they kept me in the [Illinois] Bell building.  They were concerned about having me out in the field.  You know, because even though I was in the trades, Local 134 [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers union] and then an apprentice, a C-apprentice [communications apprentice] at that, if I were out on a job in a building, they had no con--Illinois Bell had no control over the other journeymen from the other trades.  They didn't have any control over plumbers.  They had no control over the carpenters, the painters, you know, everybody else.  So when we got out on a job, when I got on the job for real, as a, as a trades person, there may have been a few laborers around that were black.  And there were electricians, regular electricians that were black, but I never saw one on any of the jobs I was working on.  So I was not treated-- I was not embraced by the other trade unions initially.  There were some fights and, and got thrown down some stairs, and threw through a plate glass window once.  I, I remember the first-- after, after I went out on my time and became a Journeyman, the first job I got, and this is, the first job I got was at, across the -- the first job they gave me was kitty corner from the Bell building.  I mean (unclear) I'm, I'd been in the Bell buildings.  There was a group of buildings, 212 West Washington [Street, Chicago, Illinois], 211, 225 and there were was a Bell building, complex of buildings.  And it was, you know, fairly-- and they had a building over at 318 Franklin [Street].  It was a lot of, you know, the whole telephone company piece was in there.  And I kept working just in between those buildings, which you could spend a lifetime doing that.  And the first job they gave me outside of the company was at Corn Products building at 201 West Wells [Street].  I had my tool pouch on.  I got my first order.  I'm a Journeyman.  I'm a go out here, you know, and do my first job.  I went across, went in the building, had my tools on.  And what you're supposed to do is, the -- those buildings had a starter, an elevator starter, you know, that kind of controlled the flow of traffic.  I reported to the starter and says, "Hi, I'm the telephone man.  I have a service order to put some phones in for the XYZ Company," you know, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  You know, and I need to go to the underground head-- that's, that's where all the telephone cables come into, you know, to bring the dial tone and make the wire connections and make sure the dial tone's in the building.  So I told him, can I get the key to the telephone head, and he did and showed me where it was.  And I went down and did my job.  Well, it was, it was a terminal, checking for dial tone, doing all the tests and everything else.  And I was down there maybe about forty minutes.  I come back up the stairs, walked back out into the lobby.  I got to the lobby and I was suddenly attacked by police.  They had me down on the ground, they had, they had--had their knee in my back.  They had handcuffs on me and they're just-- I mean they're punching me and everything else.  I hadn't done anything.  The, the--the starter called the police because he had never seen a black telephone man.  (laughter).  You know, he'd never seen a black telephone man nor had the police, you know.  They, they knew I had, I was up to no good.  And they just carted me, took me down to 12th Street [police precinct] at the time. You know, I mean, in a paddy wagon and I'm bleeding and everything else.  Hadn't done anything.  And we used to carry in our, on our I.D. card, it used to say that if you, you know, question this, call this number.  I mean it was part of what, you know-- they never, never took time to do that.  But that was my first job, and that was my first experience as a telephone man.  And it was like that for a while.  Every place I went, it was, it was opening the door, going into somebody else's environment.
Story_ID: 3549
Speaker 1: But the, the best thing about my apprenticeship [at Illinois Bell, Chicago, Illinois] though, clearly, was that these, these white guys that I worked with, the Journeymen, didn't want me on, where I was, I could be seen by the, by the customer.  So they would hide me in the telephone equipment room where all the stuff was built there, you know, where all the line, fibers--all the, the sophisticated stuff was.  You didn't get a chance to get in those rooms typically until you had seventeen years service.  You-- that was it.  I mean that was when you had arrived and you started to work on this side and not putting in phones out in the dust, you know, out, out that stuff.  So, but they would hide me in the rooms for eight hours a day.  I wouldn't let them catch me sleep.  They didn't know I had an IQ that was above--and I read a lot.  I'd read all the books.  I'd sit there all day.  I was reading, reading, another book (whoosh sound), another book (laughter) and, you know, for four years.  I sat there and read, I could--when I got out of, when I got out on my time, I knew more about line finders, connectors-- than anybody, clearly. (laughter)
Story_ID: 3550
Speaker 1: You said you were thrown through a plate glass window?
Speaker 2: (agreeing)
Speaker 1: What happened there?  What was that, what was that about?
Speaker 2: We were doing a job in-- 20 N. Wacker [Chicago, Illinois].  And, I forget the name of the company we were working for. But well, it's, a scuffle started over my presence.  A couple of my Journeymen wanted to defend me.  A fight started and, on the floor, twentieth floor of this building.  And a guy picked me up and threw me through the doorways of this office space plate glass.
Speaker 1: Now, the union was probably on the hot seat around all this, right?  I mean they really had--they must have felt some pressure to try to defend you, you know, on some level, I guess?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's--it's you, you'd have to--you have to actually lay what was going on in the times in general without forming those kind of opinions. Because, you know, there, during the same timeline, [Dr.] Martin Luther King Jr. had came to Chicago [Illinois],  Chicago was extremely polarized by his visits, you know. There was lines actually being drawn. But it was, it was just not that simple because we went through, we went through President [John F.] Kennedy being assassinated , which, which created a certain kind of eeriness in the, in--in the workplace, a lot of dialogue about it.
Speaker 1: Were you at [Illinois] Bell when that happened?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah.  I was, I was working for--I was underneath a desk when somebody came and says, "The President got shot."  I thought they were talking about the president of the company,  you know it was the President.  But that created a, a stir, you know, Robert
Speaker 1: ---There was the March on Washington was a, the March on Washington [D.C.] was about the same time that [August 28, 1963], just before [John F.] Kennedy got killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And all that, you know--so you got to, you got to, you know, you could cut the tension in a knife, with a knife, you know, with the black, white relationships, you know.  The Jack--[Black] Panthers, the parade, you know, people being shot.  It was a lot of stuff that was going on in the street.  I worked with a group of people that had the, had to--had to start to change, an industry that had to start to change. A city that had to start to change.  You know, people were moving from their homes with white flight and, you know, and then in '68 [1968] when we had the riots, and, you know, I was still there then.  And, you know, there were attitudes about the riots and, you know, what happened on, on the South side and the West side. And when they put the military around downtown, you know, Halsted Street and Roosevelt Road.  And the '68 [1968], we had the [Democratic National] Convention and, you know, it was just so many things that were going on that people formed opinions about.
Story_ID: 3551
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time when you first start that you wanted to quit?
Speaker 2: What, the telephone company?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  But my dad [William Sr.] made-- you know, tried to encourage me more than anybody else during that time to, you know, it was--I mean he thought it was significant that I stay.  He thought that, you know, that, if I didn't--Illinois Bell didn't hire their second PBX installer apprentice until I finished my four-year apprenticeship.  See.  I had, I had to be successful before they would declare it would be okay.  So it was four years, four-year apprenticeship.  And then after I beat--went out on my time, they did hire a guy named Fred Palmer.  And then it's, you know, they started to populate and hire us because they realized we could do the work.  But that four years was pretty tough.  And then I became the first African American Journeyman PBX [type of telephone exchange] installer .  But I was probably the sharpest guy they had in the company.  And I became, I became a guru.  I, I was the--the KCX [type of telephone exchange] that were the big jobs and the, the major jobs and the ones that were engineered.  And I became the foreman for all the KCX jobs in Franklin District which was downtown Chicago [Illinois].  And that was the place.  And during the time I was a KCX foreman was the time that the Bank One--First National Bank [of Chicago] building was being built.  All the tenants that were in there, all switches that went in there, I was responsible for.  The Civic Center was going up at that same timeline. The Brunswick Building was going up at that time, 69 West Washington.  And then the whole series of Tishman Buildings that were being built, and most of the big major companies, Weyerhauser, Bank One, all those, you know, had PBX telephone systems that, that were installed under our systems. Private Branch Exchange is what PBX stands for, so you wired a telephone system that allowed that institution to operate independent of nearly everything else.  You know, so they could dial and call within so, so, but I was, I was--
Speaker 2: That's the kind of system you had to dial nine to get out of?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure or everything was, back then it was, you know, you could set it for any number, seven, dial--I mean it was whatever you wanted, but it was all hand-wired (laughs).  I mean you couldn't go buy a box and just plug it in.  Everything was wired by hand.  Those were different times.  You had to have technical skills.  You had to know, you know, the circuitry, and if you didn't--you put a wrong wire in the wrong place.  I remember being at, when I was a building cable splicer, cable engineer, is--that's what I transferred all the time.  And you're standing there with, you know, two-2,400 pair of cables, and all the wires look exactly alike (laughter).  And you got to match them up, you know.  Had to tube them and contain them and, you know, put the sleeves and wipe them.  It was interesting work.  But I was, I was KCX foreman and, and they promoted me.  I, I took my boss's place.  He was white guy, a guy named Danny.
Speaker 2: This is around 1971?
Speaker 1: No, this is sixty--'68 [1968], I became a foreman in '68 [1968].  I was only a Journeyman for less than a year.  I was just so good, they couldn't-- they had to get me out of the field.  And then I, I was a foreman, KCX [type of telephone exchange] foreman.  I was, shoot, installation superintendent, wire chief.  As wire chief, I was responsible for Monroe [Street] District [Chicago, Illinois], all of the telephone service that, that occurred in Monroe.  There're a lot of stories I could tell about Monroe, a lot of stories I could tell about a lot of stuff.  A lot of stories I could tell about the telephone company, but, you know, it was an experience while I was with Illinois Bell, you know, at last and a lot of significant things.  In 1980--1983 the Bell system divested and by that time I was area manager for Chicago South.
Story_ID: 3552
Speaker 1: In the meantime, though, you were earning a bachelor's degree in the, in Milwaukee, at the Milwaukee, yeah--
Speaker 2: School of Engineering [Milwaukee School of Engineering, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Yeah, School of Engineering.
Speaker 2: Well, I always, I always kept going to school.  I, you know, I always had coursework here, coursework there.  My education is, is a summary of taking maybe--I probably have more classes than I listed that I have taken, but they were not accredited to a degree.  But the company always encouraged you to go to school.  They had a tuition aid program, you know.  And so I was a perpetual student until they finally told me that it made sense to get a degree.  And then I started to focus on that.
Story_ID: 3553
Speaker 1: Now, you said, off camera during one of the breaks that you, you did a lot of reading of black history and culture on your own.
Speaker 2: Well, I fell in love a series of books on, they were, they were 'Drum', 'Mandingo' [by Kyle Onstott]  There was a series of books that were written about slaves.  They were fictional and, but they were-- had some residue of truth to what occurred and some of the plights that blacks had gone through.  And I, I became intrigued with those books and those stories.  I think "Roots" [TV mini-series] had an impact when it was aired that kind of focused you on trying to find a little bit more about, about-- I started to have some concerns about my faith because of what happened when I was in the service [Army], ambulated about my faith and, you know.  I was in the, in the Methodist Church and in the Baptist Church and anybody's church.  I always believed in God.  I just stopped believing in people and God in the same breath.  But with, you know, with, that I was encouraged with my belief.  And because of that I, I--I was, I was, I was concerned about where I came from and the history of me and the history of man.  And my idle thoughts was, you know, well, how'd that happen?  You know, why does this happen?  And why am I black?  Why is that bad?  And why can't this change?  And, and so I, I read a lot on those, those topics.  As I migrated through the [Illinois] Bell [telephone] system, I think one of the, the last roles I had when I was with Illinois Bell, they started to--well, actually, it was with AT&T.  When I went to AT&T at the divestiture, Harold Washington was mayor.  And AT&T needed to establish a presence here in Chicago [Illinois] because it had been Illinois Bell, as the company.  And so at the moment I was its highest-ranking black in the company.  And so, you know, my role changed.  I became more involved with external affairs.  And, you know, they started to place me on boards and work service and utilized the experience and exposure and my awareness of Chicago.  And so I became, you know, involved with things that were, that affected the community that we all lived in.  And I started to become-- evolved and around people that could effectuate change.  And so I read more about the, the issue of society, not just, not just narrowly focused on race.  But race always comes up as an issue.  I, I don't know how it can't because it's how we live.  We this is a divided society in Chicago, it's a segregated society.  I've got stories of going out to the Museum of Science and Industry and as opposed to getting on a, on a trolley going East. I got on a trolley going West, wound up at the end of the line, out in Marquette Park in another fight, another beating I got.  I can--you know, just by winding up in the wrong neighborhood.  And, and society had to change somehow. And, and I don't know what role I thought I could play.  But I figured I had to be more aware and articulate as I got involved in external affairs for Illinois Bell and AT&T and started to play a bigger role, getting more information.  You had to have information to offer others.  Illinois Bell is one of the best managed companies.  They spend a lot of money training people.  I was, I--I was fortunate and blessed in the situation I was in that, one, they allowed me to continue my education the way I did, and the training that they exposed me to.  They sent to MIT [ Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for training stints.  They sent me, you know, places to learn specific pieces of business. But, you know, I'm (unclear) all of that with cultural experiences that I had and what was going on in the times, there was this significance that they felt I could offer by serving on these boards.
Story_ID: 3554
Speaker 1: During the time that you were with Illinois Bell, Illinois Bell increased it's profile in the black community through a radio program called--
Speaker 2: Lu Palmer's --
Speaker 1: Yeah, "Lu's Home Book."  And it ran up until the election of [Chicago mayor] Harold Washington.  Do you have any comments about that at all?
Speaker 2: It was a radio show.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: It was a little spot, you know.
Speaker 2: That's all it was, a radio show.  It really had  nothing to do-- the, the company began -- the reason, the reason that [Al] Raby and others focused on that as a target initially was because it was a government-regulated monopoly, okay.  It was a government-regulated monopoly.  Illinois Bell, Commonwealth Edison and the gas company.  So they were governed by laws that were on the books.  Things they had to do, you know. So you said this is the law, and here, read the law.  This is what you're supposed to be doing and I did it.  They were, they were getting federal money, there were federal funds.  They were getting subsidies, there were so many--so the, they were concerned about the law more than anything else.  They, the--the law came in--the government came in and looked at their hiring practices and women, how they treated them.  And there was a consent decree in 1973 that said the company had to change.  It had to find the ways to hire more minorities, you know.  There, there were quotas that were established and numbers, that, you know, that were established by departments.  And so I think the program that you were talk-- referring to was part of an outreach effort.  When, when the company came up and really made a genuine effort to hire more African Americans, they couldn't find qualified pool of African Americans to meet their standard.  And one of the things we did then was to establish the Bell-Tel Training Center out of 55th Street, 55th, adjacent to the, to the expressway.  And we would hire people who had never been hired from the community, that may have had limited--couldn't pass the reading part of their tests or they had some math skill problems or they had some social skill problems where four hours of the day was spent trying to reinforce those skills.  We taught algebra, we taught reading skills.  We taught social-ability skills.  And then part of the day, four hours of the day, they spent doing task-oriented things that had value.  And over a period of time, six months they'd stay there, they were being compensated.  But if they were successful through the process, then they migrated into, you know, regular jobs.  And I think that the Lu Palmer program was an awareness, a vehicle to peo--to make people aware of the kind of efforts that that company was, was trying to achieve, to create more jobs and try to attract more people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was just a regular show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 3555
Speaker 1: You got to understand a monopoly is a, is a--is a living thing.  You know, you're either inside or you're outside.  It was really the people inside, didn't really care that much about what was going on outside.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but do you think that, you know, people in the community speculated that [Illinois] Bell was a little upset when Harold Washington actually, you know, ran for office[of mayor of Chicago, Illinois] as a result of, I guess the, the prodding of Lu Palmer on the, from the radio show.  But, and as soon as Harold announced he'd run, this very same night, Lu Palmer's show was cancelled.  Do you have insight into that at all?  Any idea as to why?
Speaker 1: Well, you know Lu Palmer was probably the most radical guy on the radio at the time, you know.  Illinois was just a sponsor for his program.  And he didn't just, he didn't just focus on Harold Washington.  You know, he, he talked about the Black Panther raid and, you know, and that was a big deal for him for a long time--
Speaker 2: He'd been radical for a long time, I just wondered about the end of his show (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: Very radical (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: -- but I'm talking about the end of the show.  But that, he was so radical, you know, and, and--and he, he-- I think he got to a, to a tempo about Harold [Washington], you know,running, and I mean and his rhetoric and his tone and about black pride and trying to energize the community to get people focused, which he was successful in doing, by alienating another group of the population.  And like, like any business, I would, I would think that, you know, the day that O. J. Simpson was accused of doing something [murder], like, like Kobe Bryant  has been accused of doing something [rape].  The minute that happens, people that sponsor those shows have to evaluate the value of having those people represent them.  So my best guess is that the people that managed the company at the time looked at that and made a judgment that, that wasn't in the best of the company.
Story_ID: 3556
Speaker 1: Illinois Bell--they look at--I can, all kinds of stories I can tell.  I, I remember being in the telephone guy in charge of, of where the Bulls played, the--
Speaker 2: United Center [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, no, it was, what was it before that?
Speaker 2: Stadium.
Speaker 1: Stadium, at Chicago Stadium.  When it was the Chicago Stadium, I remember going to out to it with [Arthur] Wirtz [owner of the NHL Chicago Blackhawks hockey team] I mean, I'd talk to him like I'm talking to you.  And we'd talk about service, talk about this and the customer had to change the telephone set-up where they'd change to ice and the basketball.  We had, we had cables, you know, that came down, and, you know, but, but there was--any time there was a game, we had to give them service and, you know, all that stuff.  So, but I remember having a discussion with him one day.  Well, in this discus--topic of race. And he turned around and he dragged me out, took me out there where all of these, you know, the seats and there was a hockey game going on.  He says, "These are my customers."  It was very clear.  I couldn't find a black spot in the group. You know, I mean it's just reality.  So you play to your customers.  And I don't care what business you are in, and, you know, Illinois Bell at the time, their business customers were--didn't look like me.  I never went into, as an installer, a black business, not downtown.  Never, never, ever did, never did it.  None.  So, you know, here's their revenue, you know, United Airlines and all these.  But then they're broached with, with white flight.  You know, as people abandon a house and move into another community, they may keep the customer in the new community cause they're the monopoly, but they lose-- they got--it's no different than [Commenwealth] Edison.  And we've got all this devastation of all these empty houses, those are meters that aren't ticking.  I mean that's your concern is, you know, I, I want to see the meters ticking.  I'd want to  play to my customers.  So I would think that Illinois Bell played to its customers at the time.  But, you know, the--I don't know how you bifurcate a corporate sensi--sensitivity because those people that operate the corporations are the same people that live in the community. And they bring those biases and in, into the workplace.  So whatever was going on, on the outside, it was still going on inside.  And if they were offended by him outside, they were offended by him inside, you know.  And, you know, I don't think at the time--like they weren't ready to see Martin Luther King march in Marquette Park. They weren't ready to have [Mayor] Harold Washington lead Chicago, and it was obvious after he got elected, but, you know, they were opposed to him for years.
Story_ID: 3557
Speaker 1: When--when Ill--Illinois [Bell] broke up, then you, you worked for AT&T? You went with AT&T, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--at the break-up, it was American Bell first.  And when American Bell migrated, it became AT&T Information System.  But I was part of that group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at this point, you're an executive basically and you're still one of the few black executives, right, in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, in--at AT&T Information System, at the divestiture, services-- you know, we'd started to become, migrate from being a telephone company because at the divestiture, we thought that the, that the, the drama was gonna occur between IBM [International Business Machines] and, and the Bell companies.  We thought that the Bell companies were gonna try to get into the computer business and that the, you know, the computer companies were gonna get in the telephone company.  And they did.  IBM bought a company called Rohm [and Haas], you know, and they, they took a big run at being in, in the telephone business.  And AT&T developed a 3B and 3B-2 computers that were supposed to challenge IBM's mainframe [computer] and they both made mistakes in trying to do that.  But, you know, right after the divestiture, that was the focus.  That was the direction.  That was the game that they thought was gonna, was gonna be the game.  It didn't turn out that way.  But it was a wonderful time.  If you were--when, when they, when they made the decision to divest, what the company did was went through and identified every employee and gave them a rating.  And they had to come up with a list of the top 40 percent of the company, of the company, universally.  If you were in the top 40 percent of the company, as all of this churn, and that's what I'll call it, that was about to occur, you didn't have to worry about it because the company felt that the top 40 percent could make the company still work.  We needed these people to make the company work.  And if you were in that 60 percent below that, you were at risk.  It means that your job could be eliminated, a lot of things.  There was a lot of infighting in that 60 percent group.  I was in the top 10 percent of that 40 percent.  So I was never at risk as far as a job.  It had some pluses and minuses.  The minuses was that as they were making these deals to allow you to leave, I, I couldn't participate cause the 40 percent couldn't take those early retirement deals that they offered.  But you didn't have to worry about your job.  It was a turbulent time.  I mean the, the company was trying to stop being a monopoly and trying to be a entrepreneurally-driven institution. Had a lot of baggage, had a lot of people that, that needed to tread or change, couldn't change a lot, had to tread a lot.  I think it was-- attrition had, you know, if you, if you were brought up in a mon- monopoly culture, you know, where it was service at any cost.  And, you know, you grew up doing a particular job function, and you were, you were told that's how it has to be done.  And then all of a sudden to, to tell you that you were allowed to think and, and make decisions and have these--some people couldn't make that adjustment, really couldn't.  So then it was, it was a, it was a--a time when they'd start to evaluate what needed to be done, how many people were required to do it, what were the skill sets.  We, we were self-contained.  We did everything ourselves before divestiture. And after divestiture we started to contract out service, started to do things completely different.  And some people could adjust to it, and some couldn't.
Story_ID: 3558
Speaker 1: Now, in this divestiture and the different, in the, well, you saw a big opportunity in terms of wiring.  If I-- I'll just jump to that because you did, you saw AT&T was only committed to so much wiring, that they had to like, some entrepreneur had a big chance to make some money.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, at a--at a-- Wire and cable was so much of what makes the telephone system work.  You know, the thing that keeps it the way it still is, is because years and years ago, when the telephone company put a wire in your house, it's still the same wire.  I don't care what they talk to you about, you know, these fiber optic networks, everything else.  If somebody comes to your house with a piece of fiber, you still got that same twisted pair of cable that you got when that house was built.  And most places are like that.  So it's the-- they're still in the same telephone wire that's the backbone and the basis of where telephone systems work today.  It's not as bulky, it's not as thick.  You don't need as many conductors.  Most things are, are electronic and they, you know, operate on just a single pair of wires, but it's still the same wire structure.  I forgot where I was going.
Speaker 1: Well, I was talking about the opportunity that you saw in this.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and so, so the, the--at, at a--at a--Yeah, this is the, this is the epiphany that I had.  I'm working my keister off.  I'm, you know, trying to do everything that the, this new company's telling me to do.  In 1985, I was the recipient of the Keystone Award from the company.  It's the highest award they give and I'm the only African American to receive it.  And it was really a high, really a great honor as a manager to get the Keystone Award.  It starts you to think too, try to think through things.  And one of the problems that I had as a manager for the central area -- I was rea manager for Illinois, Indiana and Ohio, was wire.  Centrex was a big service vehicle and Centrex was, was wire intensive.  Other companies like Rohm [and Haas] would come in, go to our customer, under sell us and take advantage of the wire and cable that was already installed, that we had placed.  But we couldn't police, put police out to manage that.  So wire became a big problem for the company.  It owned it all, but it couldn't manage it, couldn't control it.  And there was a lot of infighting in the company on the national basis, what do we do about wire?  How do we, how do we treat wire?  Well, I had a plan that I, I presented in New York to the company about what I thought we needed to do with wire.  You know, worked very diligently to-- it was a philosophy for the business.  But, you know, you have to learn a little bit as you do the work and I realized where the value of the wire really was.  I could see other of my peers leaving the company and taking pieces of business, not particularly wire, but pieces of business with them.  It's-- and that's what the government wanted to happen, you know.  When these companies started to shoot up, you know, Sprint, MCI, and those were old telephone people, most of, most cases.  You know, all kinds of telephone operations were popping up, and guys were, my peers, they were really in charge of that.  And I realized that I could do it too.
Story_ID: 3559
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about the wire opportunity, you had an opportunity for.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then at, at a point, after I started to see-- you know, I had a boss, a guy named Jim Bishop.  One day Jim started to tell me about his business plan, you know, and I started looking, thinking.  And, and the, the way this started, it really did, again, I had been an advocate for what we did with wire.  I thought the company should bifurcate wire from its core business.  And, and that the wire should become the mundane thing and that we should just give it to the customer, give it away.  It's cheaper, which eventually they--and that's what they did.  But it was, they were still fighting to keep it back then.  And I can, I can remember going to New York, making my presentation for what I thought our region should do and what was good for the whole company.  And got some kudos for it and everything else, but they, they didn't act on it very quickly.  But Charlie Brown had been president of Illinois Bell.  I had worked on his staff, I'd worked for Charlie.  And he became the chairman of AT&T at the divestiture.  After Charlie, Jim Olsen became chairman.  Jim had also been president at Illinois Bell and I also worked on his staff.  So when Jim took over as chairman of Illinois Bell-- I mean of AT&T, what he wanted to do was to meet with as many employees as he could to talk about the change, talk about his vision.  And the first one he did, he did in New York.  And it turned into a riot.  I mean people got hurt, I, I mean the employees were just sick of the company.  You know, when people are losing their jobs, downsizing. It was awful.  I mean they had to call the police and everything else.  Olsen wanted to (unclear) detour and he decided he was going to Chicago [Illinois] anyway, you know.  And I got the short straw of putting all that together.  So I had to bring in 6,000 employees on buses from around the state.  I had the challenge of bringing all our executives from corporate here, putting them in hotels, I mean and coordinating the whole thing.  That, I was, I had the overall responsibility for all the people, but, you know, the, the reward for me for all that activity was that we had the meeting out at the Arie Crown Theater, McCormick Place [in Chicago, Illinois], and I had Olsen on a chain, you know, for a day.  We, you know, I mean he was mine.  And the rest of those, you know, the, the corporate people, we brought them all in on individual planes so if the plane crashed, we wouldn't all have a catastrophe.  And it was, it was really a, an experience for me.  But, again, like I said, I had Olsen for a day.  And I lobbied, I lobbied for my concern about the wire for our area.  And I heard from him that day that he saw wire as being a piece of mundane business, which told me that he was going to let it go.  He agreed with me.  And then we talked about me cause I'd worked for him, you know.  Why am I still here?  (laughter) You know, when the, why am I still trying to get another ticket punched cause I didn't need another ticket punched.  I'm working for a guy that lives in Mississippi, my boss did at the time.  And everybody knew I was the number one guy in the country actually.  All the-- and I'm still, you know, one step below.  And he told he thought that I should come to New York and work for him again.  I didn't think I had it in my heart to go to New York and stand in another line.  I thought if I wasn't ready now, it was never (unclear).  I had--this glass ceiling started to loom over me very large.  And that, that night after the end of that session, he had also told me that he was gonna open the door up and anybody who wanted to go cause he needed to get smaller.  Anybody who wanted to go could go.  He was gonna open the door, anybody who wanted to go could go.  I heard that before I think anybody did.  Understanding that I had an opportunity and the window to leave, he told me the date specific that he was gonna make the announcement.I left him that day, went back to an office I had at 333 N. Lake Street [Chicago, Illinois], went in the office.  I had a nice private office about the size of this, looked on the wall, realized that change occurs.  I had a, I had a business plan I had been tinkering with in a drawer.  It was about 5:30, 6:00 o'clock that night.  And I pulled it out.  And it was something I had just been doing because I was, I was on the board for the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce and Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce and business plans were something that was an issue.  And I was just getting familiar with it, and I was just going through the process.  I hadn't really taken it seriously.  And I pulled this business plan out that day and about 7:30 [p.m] I was supposed to be over at the, at the Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  The, they--they had a fundraiser or some kind of thing there, and I was supposed to be here at, you know.  I sat there at my desk, looked at the business plan, had a couple of tears in my eye, started pulling pictures off the wall in my office.  I had made up my mind.  It was time to leave.  I hadn't talked to anybody about it.  It was that, that instantaneous.  I mean it happened almost exactly like that.  Within the course of that day, I decided that it was time for me to go.
Story_ID: 3560
Speaker 1: And over that weekend, again, I came back, took more pictures off the wall.  And I did go to that event that night with tears in eyes, you know, because I had to go home and talk to the wife and family and, and I knew I wouldn't get the support.  You know, people would probably think I was crazy, you know.  You got a job like that, and you're going to do what?  Are you crazy?  (laughter).  That's really what I got too, you know, I really got that.  But I'd made up my mind.  I figured that I could start a business, you know, doing line and cabling.  I became, I became convinced in my mind that because of the divestiture and then the wiring issue, with, that, that PC's [personal computers] were becoming a device on a desktop.  See, you got to look back in time,  pc's were becoming a device on a, on a desktop.  Prior to that, it was just the telephone.  It was that old, black phone with the red hold button and those white lights and you'd push a button, the light would blink or flash.  And it just-- and you could get that same phone in gray, green or purple .  It was the same phone.  But it was about to change.  The whole industry was changing.  The kind of phone systems was changing and pc's were becoming very important.  And networking PC's together -- well, Wang [computers] started to do that, when they started to tie them together, but that means you had to have a cable from the desk back to some central port that you could interconnect the devices.  And I realized that, and I knew that the telephone companies couldn't do it.  As a monopoly, they could only run the old wire.  They could not contract the wire, I mean where (unclear) Wang's wires were.  So what the customer was, was confronted with always is, if they wanted to do something at the desktop, they'd have to call the telephone company.  Then they'd have to call the computer company.  And they'd have to call, you know, if they had some other device out there on the desktop, they'd have to call that company.  So if a company, with the divestiture allowed you to bundle wire and cable and only disrupt your office once, run the cables out there, I don't care what you put on them.  Tell me what kind of wires.  I'll run them both.  And that was the business that I saw, and in October, that weekend after that, I had written a letter, told them my intentions to leave and take the early out.  A lot of people were disappointed.  Nobody believed me, but I incorporated a company called Bonaparte Connection out of my home in Matteson, Illinois in December 1986.  And the business plan had called for, my hope at the end of the first year, to generate about $500,000, that I thought I could, I could glean $125,000 off of that and the perks and the things that go along with having a business, you know, car, vacations and those things. And I thought it was worth the jump.
Story_ID: 3561
Speaker 1: The first year-- I did leave.  The first year we did well over a million dollars in business.  Illinois Bell became my biggest customer, I had some friends there, you know, and started to provide a flow of work, a cornucopia of work.  And they had started to put in small business systems, telephone systems on the small end, seven to-- you know, five to twenty stations for small businesses.  And they had saw the wisdom in, in moving that away from their core business.  They established a different business unit.  They started to sense competition and they wanted to maintain and keep their customers too.  And so they, they started to resell all the products and made that business, you know, because of union issues, they, they--they were, they were performing most of those tasks through others, okay.  So I got in that line,  I was very fortunate.  And, you know, as I said, the first year we were extremely successful.  In the second year, we moved from my home to 322 S. Green [Chicago, Illinois].  We had did a job for CAN-TV [Chicago (Illinois) Access Network television.]  They're in the building on the first floor, when they first moved in.  And we were fortunate enough to win the work to put their phone, their phone system in, met them, met the building, and fell in love with the building; fell in love with the area; moved on the second floor.  Things were going pretty good.  We had moved up to, probably we had maybe twenty employees, a union company, focused clearly on just installing wire and cable. Didn't focus on being a minority-owned business, though it became necessary to do because of opportunity and access to opportunity.  But we were just-- you know, there were enough people that had the skill sets to do the work that were now out looking for jobs because of the divestiture and downsize and that churn.  So there were capable bodies.  I knew most of the folks.  And so trying to create the team of people that could perform was, was relatively easy.  My business plan had said that I would, I would-- a single site, wouldn't do a job more than, than $5,000, single site.  And with the work we were doing with Illinois Bell, you know, seven stations, seven cables, we're getting maybe, well, $200 a wire run.  And those were really jobs.  You could do eight wire runs in, in a day, you know, it was a thousand bucks a day for, you know, it was, it was really good.  One day, and life was going on pretty good, I got a phone call from somebody from Central Management Services for the state of Illinois.  They had-- a lot of people were aware of me as a individual because of-- you know, as, as a telephone man, as a foreman, as the, as the superintendent.  You know, if there was a customer problem, if there was a customer service issue, I was, I was the guy they saw.  I was the person they saw.  You know, and on a broader base as the manager, if there was, if there were community issues, you know, training needs and if we were gonna make a contribution to a, a field house or a community event, I was the person that came out with the check, you know.  So that, that-- I'm not a celebrity, but I had gotten to a point I had found a way to have access in a variety of communities because of my relationship there.  Does that make sense?  So when, when I started to pursue work activity, you know, I, I had a platform.  I had, I-- so the people from the state of Illinois were aware that I had left,  I had started a company.  They knew I had managed, you know, they had a real confident level of, with me individually and they knew what my company stood for.
Story_ID: 3562
Speaker 1: But they called me in and asked me if I would consider doing a job, you know.  It was for the Department of Public Aid on Monroe Street, some place, 1300 West Monroe [Chicago, Illinois].  And they were getting the pressure -- [Illinois governor Jim] Edgar was, to have minority involvement in contracts and they were trying to find a way.  And they encouraged me to negotiate with them to do this job.  When we got through and put all the prices together, it was $148,000 for this job, you know.  Well, my business plan clearly says, single site, $5,000,  and here's this opportunity $150,000.  I looked at the job and I knew in my heart, I met any kind of job.  You know, it wasn't a point, could I do it.  It would just take me outside of my business plan, way outside my business plan.  And, you know, I, I allowed these people to, allowed, you know, to suck me into that.  We did the job, you know.  We cut it over that, that Monday morning.  And I think they had one case of trouble that was complete, finished before 9:00 o'clock when the people moved in.  And it just hummed, you know.  They, they walked around and inspected.  They signed off on the job.  And I then I sent my invoice in.  And then thirty days passed and, and sixty days passed and ninety days passed.  I remember seeing Governor Edgar one day and, and says "Governor," I says, "I wonder if you could hold your breath one second for every day I had to wait for my money."  And he looked at me.  And I says, "Could you hold your, could you hold your breath one hundred and sixty days?"  He looked at me and I says, "That's what you did to me."  It killed me.  Anyway, in that timeline, I had to find investors, you know.  There was a group called Chicago Capital Fund that by Harold Washington, as his being the mayor, reached out to the business community, trying to get support for his, his administration.  And he wanted the business community support.  And, you know, he, he -- in '85 [1985] he had the set-aside ordinance [referring to a minority set-aside ordinance], 85-2, you know, that he, he was successful in implementing to encourage minority involvement in contracts, you know.  But then when he went to the well, he looked and there weren't that many minority companies that had capacity and capability.  You know, the ability to bond, ability to do things that required money to do. And so this group of businesses, and Chicago Capital Fund, that was made up of companies like Illinois Bell and BP Amoco, you know, companies like that, that put money into a pot as a consortium.  And his focus was to try to develop businesses, particularly black businesses.  And they saw an opportunity, they made promises that they never kept.  They came in and wanted to change the direction of the company.  They promised-- (phone ringing).
Story_ID: 3563
Speaker 1: Yeah, they promised they were going to make a cash infusion of $300,000, but they didn't-- when we really got into the deal, they started doing it $10,000 at a time.  Somebody says they're gonna, you know, here's $300,000 and you don't get it, you know, they could roll a marble over and you're looking for, you know.  So they didn't help me. And then at a point they started to see themselves differently.  They wanted to be a telephone company.  They wanted to be what Illinois Bell was doing.  They wanted to sell equipment and I wanted to be this supporter of those bigger companies.  They wanted to compete with those companies.  And up until that time, we had started to become very successful with companies like IBM [International Business Machines] and others.  I think our revenue stream was up around four million dollars annually when they came into the picture.  But on my birthday, on December 11th, 1990, they-- I had a, we had our leverage meetings financially and took control of the company.  They fired me on my birthday and took the business over, put me out on the street.  And I kind of knew it was coming, and like I said, the, the relationship I had with IBM had matured to a point that IBM had a great deal of trust in our ability, my ability.  We'd worked together.  And they had made me aware that there were two plugs on the back end of the computer, one for the connectivity and one for power.  And they, they wanted us to provide both.  They also wanted me to be able to do the design work, to do the layout, you know.  So all their technicians or other people had to do was come out and open boxes and load software, you know.  And that's the service.  So we had started doing that.  We did [Walter H.] Dyett [Academic Center] School [Chicago, Illinois], you know, a lot of schools for the Chicago Public Schools, with IBM.  And before the Capital Fund took control of--fired me, took control.  And so I had started to subcontract out with the, a fellow, a guy named George Spect who had a business.  And he was doing electrical work, and I was still doing low voltage work, but it was a nice team.  He's a German fellow.  And George and I started to talk about the, the consequences of what the, what the Capital Fund was about to do, you know.  We could see that.  It would have an impact on his business because they had pulled him on the side and tried to talk to him about making a deal with them to continue to do the same things, without me in the game.  And so, you know, George, you know, called me up and said, "We need to talk."  And so we developed a way that-- 'cause I was, at that time, I became George's biggest customer.  I provided him more work than he got because of my relationship with IBM.  And he saw that, saw the value of it.  And we worked out a deal where I would buy his company, if they did what they did.  And we would move on.  So I bought George's company in January [1991].  We incorporated Bonaparte Corporation on January 15th, Martin Luther King's birthday.  It was important to me, 1991.  George was a 49 percent partner.  I was 51 percent of the company.  And I don't think we lost a beat.  The company grew and grew and, and grew.  I think last year our revenues were about $20 million annually.
Story_ID: 3564
Speaker 1: Last year I bought George [Spect] out of the business completely.  In 1990-- 1997, I bought the building that we're in.  And I know Robby Smith always talks and says that, you know, between Dearborn and, and 22nd Street in Chicago [Illinois] downtown, that the only African American the last twenty-five years was [John H.] Johnny Johnson who owns Ebony [magazine].  And now there's another one, Bonaparte Corporation.  And if that's true, I'm proud of that, that we own a corporate headquarters on Michigan Avenue.  We have just about a hundred employees today.  We've done projects of the magnitude of installing the 911 system for the entire city of Chicago.  That was an experience all by itself.  We hired people, sent them down to Clearwater, Florida.  They went through thirty-two weeks of intensive training with a company called S/Con Timeplex .  And we had a big warehouse down there that we actually got cabinets that were empty and we, we had to put the chassis in the cabinets and do the black plain wiring, put "UPS" systems in, you know.  And then they had the cards and then we ran fiber around all 141--we had pallets that we had these devices on.  We ran fiber around all 41--141 pallets and connected them together, and actually, we tested the 911 system down in Clearwater, Florida in a big warehouse.  And had high school students, you know, work on it, work on it, work on it to try to get it to fail.  The city came down, accepted it and we took it apart, put it on trucks, brought it back and dropped one of at each one of the police stations, fire stations and, and then the 911 system. And then we've done projects, part of the projects we did down State Street.  We did the lighting on State Street, 134 lights between Congress and Wacker Drive [Chicago, Illinois.]  We installed that job.  We've got extensive work we do on the Green Line and the, the Red Line [particular routes on the Chicago rail transit system], with the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority].  First National Bank [of Chicago] has been a good customer for us.  Commonwealth Edison is looming to be our best customer.  Presently, we're involved in a mentoring process, actually broader, much broader than that.  It's a project that's being spearheaded by the Commercial Club of the City Committee.
Story_ID: 3565
Speaker 1: And they, everybody's trying to find solutions of how we create economic development for the entire community, you know, how do we get out of the rut that we've been in for years?  How do you development capacity and capability in a very broad sense?  How do you create wealth?  And so, you know, they've devised this concept that if you could partner a small company that has capabilities and slate them for bigger things, and then put a concerted force and focus and effort to make that happen, maybe you can grow businesses.  And the challenge that we have is that we've embarked on this relationship to try to create 200 union jobs, 200 middle-class jobs, 200 jobs, you know, that pay almost $70,000 a year, you know, from people within the community.  We've got the same union that, that I've been part of these years to agree to do the training.  It's-- it would be under a B discipline, not the C [communications electician] discipline that I trained in or the A [construction electrician] which is on the regular electricians, but in the area of energy efficiency, which is a nuance because everybody's concerned about it, you know.  You can change the ballasts and change your lighting and reduce your energy costs 30 percent.  So and that's becoming a market opportunity that we're trying to venture together with Commonwealth Edison.  A lot of good stuff.
Story_ID: 3566
Speaker 1: Okay, you've been involved in-- well, you served on a lot of boards, I know, in the city and you, from what I've read, you make it your business to be in public places when it's good to be there. I mean when it's, when it affords an opportunity to meet somebody that, that can connect to something that's good, you know, that's to an opportunity.
Speaker 2: Well, you, you have to understand the business cycle.  And our business is done.  And I think that the exposure I had in the [Illinois] Bell system and the way they trained me, the things that I was able to just observe by being in rooms as a telephone man up underneath somebody's desk (laughter), you know.  [acting out a conversation] "Who's that?  That's the telephone man.  Oh, let him--" (laughter) and you'd stay.  You know, they'd be talking about thermo-nuclear war and you're still down there punching models out because he needed that phone, you know.  And so many of those things, you just learned so many things and you learn how deals are done.  And the deals are done-- If, if-- you have to be in the room when the deal is made to be part of the deal, see.  I mean if, if you think that life is full of people putting something out on the street and the low man wins, then I don't think people get what they want.  I mean when somebody wants something, they-- this is what I want, they kind of know exactly what it is they want.  And they, they try to get the price in the range they want, but they take input from the people and places.  It's, it's like this--this camera, this JVC [electronics company] camera.  That's what he wanted when he bought it.  So, you know, somebody with a Sony [Corporation] couldn't-- didn't have a chance.  You have to be in the room when that, when the thoughts about it start to materialize and, and try to find a way to find a friendly voice that, that listens and allows you to have some input.  Nobody wants a stranger to do anything for them. Do you?  I mean generally.  I mean sometimes we, we--we, we--we cloud this thing called racism with something else.  There's a comfort level about, having a comfort level with somebody I know.  You know, I'm going to see this guy next week.  I'm going to see this guy in church, you know.  He's going to be at my Bar Mitzvah [traditional Jewish ceremony to mark the transition from childhood to manhood], he's going to be at my picnic.  I'm not, I'm not privy to all of those situations, but there are other social venues, you know, that-- that civic-minded people that have power and clout involve themselves in.  And so, it's important to be in those rooms. It's important to demonstrate that you do have a concern about the community and that you stand for something and that you have values and high integrity and, you know, putting an ad in the paper doesn't convince people of that.  People start to know because they see you.  I, I normally plan why I'm going to be in a room, you know.  If I'm trying to get a deal with Walgreen's [regional pharmacy chain], so I find out where the people are going to be at Walgreen's and where they're going to be and what they-- what interests they have.  And try to find a way to be in a room of an event there.  And then through relationships and associations, maybe I know somebody from Jewel's  that can take me in the room of Walgreen's. Or somebody at Commonwealth Edison  that can take me into Jewel's to get me to Walgreen's or however that might work.  But it's very important that you network and, and that people know you and that people become-- get a comfort level, and that you stand for something.  You have to-- you could be the best, I mean the best at anything, but if somebody doesn't like you, so what?  You got the best stuff in the box, if nobody buys it, so what?  So those, it's, it's important that you have something that somebody feels good about as well.
Story_ID: 3567
Speaker 1: You've done some work, you've gone back to your community, the community you were raised in and tried to help with some of the--There's a Gillespie School Computerland and Library is an example.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, well, yeah, I, I'm involved in the work in the schools, "Principal for a Day" for the last six years and we've had--I, I encourage--I think it's a great program.  But I was initially involved with, with John Marsh School [elementary school] and I was out at Scott Joplin [elementary school.]  And the last three years, four years I've been out at Gillespie.  The wonderful thing about being "Principal for a Day" at Gillespie is that I'm an alumnus of Gillespie.  I went to Gillespie.  And so when I was given an opportunity to go out and, and be 'big cheese' for a day, and meet with the Principal, I was excited about it.  The second year I was out there, I got to know the teachers a little bit better, started to break down some barriers, started to talk openly.  And we as a, as a company decided that we'd adopt Gillespie.  And what we thought we could provide for them was computer literacy.  At the time, the teachers, they were on this side of the digital divide.  The teachers didn't have computer skills.  And so that part of, of education wasn't current in the building.  So we went out and I had people from my staff.  But they kept saying, let's do this, let's go back to the library.  Well, if you hear me tell them my story, that reading was, I think the most important thing that a person can do, and, you know, a child can do.  And so we started meeting in the library.  The first time I went in the library, it was the most drab dingy place I had seen. I mean, the carpet was ragged, torn, discolored.  The furniture was in abysmal (unclear) shape.  The wall --
Story_ID: 3568
Speaker 1: Had they changed anything from when you were at Gillespie?
Speaker 2: It was like they hadn't done anything in the 30-some odd years since I left (laughter), you know.  Same books were on the shelves.  So, you know, we, we started to look at it, started to do some estimates of what we could do and came back with a ballpark number of about $240,000 to, to put new shelving in, put computers in and to wire the computers to the Internet, to, to put new furniture in and new carpeting, new lights, paint the walls.  And 4,000 new books.  It became a challenge for us.  But, you know, with, with the help and support of some of the business partners I have, we had a fundraiser.  And Commonwealth Edison was very generous in helping us.  And the Infinity, the outdoor, the sign company, did our campaign.  We had signs up along I-57 [highway] with billboard signs on I-57 and the, and the Bishop Ford highways.  As you came right off on Stony Island, they had a big sign up about Gillespie [elementary school] and, you know, asking the community to support it.  Part of, part of the whole process was to get the community to focus on the Gillespie and the need for reading.  And so we sensitized to that, but we were successful in raising the money and to getting to get other contractors that I worked with to perform some services.  And on December 4th, they were succ--they were successful in opening up the, the library with all the new desks and all the new computers.  And they had a dedication and they named the library or renamed the library the Bill Bonaparte Library and Media Center at Gillespie.  And that's probably one of the proudest days in my life.  It was really good, really good.
Story_ID: 3569
Speaker 1: Now, in 1999, you founded another business out of here, 1455 S. Michigan, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the--well 1455 Michigan was the parent company of the building, 1455 Michigan.  And that company has migrated and become Bonaparte Properties, LLC.  I own it completely.  Back when it was 1455 Michigan, I--my partner [ George Spect]was associated with it.  But it's--now that I own 100 percent, I've renamed it.  But it's, it's the management of this building which is about 26,000 square feet.  And we've got nine tenants in the building.
Story_ID: 3570
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: If, if--if you look at real-time, you know, what's going on right now in this country.  And, and--and look at what' going on in the world.  You know, I think that African Americans, black Americans need to pay more attention to how the world is changing around them.  I think that we get--spend too much time studying the past.  We've got this, this new immigration flow from South America and Mexico and the Hispanics are coming into this country en masse.  If, if you look at the, the census report, most rec- recent, 90 percent of all the new jobs in Chicago in the last ten years were, were filled by Hispanics.  And, and they, they find a willingness to take jobs in the, in the service industry and restaurants industry, cooks and shelves--chefs, jobs that, that--that Blacks used to dominate and populate.  I, I think that there's a--this, this magic that people believe that everybody has to go to college now.  And if you don't go to college, you're not going to be on the right side of things.  And, you know, there's still jobs that need to be performed, the skill--skills and, you know, the basic lesson is that you need to find a way to take care of yourself.  That's, that's the primary lesson that, you know, that African Americans and anybody has to focus on, is how do I take care of me?  I mean ther broader things out there, but if you start to focus on what I need to do to prepare myself, you, you stand a better chance than doing it some other way.  I think the Hispanics have started to come with the, with the will to say that, you know, this is better than where I was.  This is, this is better than Mexico.  And, and folks are coming here, illiterate by the standards because they don't have the--they're illiterate because they have the, the language barrier, but they're able to come in, roll up theirs sleeves, stop looking in the past, work diligently toward the forward at something.  And I think that, that's--they know the, the world has been expanded with Internet just like the telephone did.  I mean it's not the same labor pool that we draw from.  You know, they've got companies in India that are doing this telemarketing stuff.  They got people coming in boxes from China that come in here with, with degrees and mass skills that can come and do--people need to believe in themselves, number one.  Stop looking so, so hard at the past.  I can't change anything that happened to my father or in his lifetime.  I can't do anything about slavery, can't change that.  I can't change anything about how people think about that, the past, see.  But what I have to be concerned about is what my grandchildren and my children, what their lives are going to be like, how they're going to have food, clothing and shelter, those basic things.  I mean--and, and stop looking to be subsidized by governments and institutions.  If you keep waiting for that and keep expecting that, you, you're sitting on your hands while other people are moving farther and farther up the road.  I don't have anything against what the Hispanics are doing.  I think they, they should be doing that.  I think we should be doing the same thing.  Not to say that they're weren't harms and thoughts and flaws and wrongs that have occurred by men and people.  But thoughts and wrongs and things have occurred through history always, always.  We go back in the Bible, you know, there were, there were the Jews and how they were treated.  But--and so we went through something.  You got to get over it.  You know, the Supreme Court just ruled that affirmative action is--they didn't say it was a good thing.  They say it's a necessary thing.
Story_ID: 3571
Speaker 1: They say it should end [referring to affirmative action].  They've given us kind of a window and so it's twenty-five years, somebody said that.  We've got twenty-five years to try to find a way to bring this together, to become part of the whole culture, to, to take a place in the society because, you know, I was, I was down in Santa Monica [California] a few weeks ago.  That's the way the world is, is about to be--this world.  And they're, they're Koreans in Santa Monica.  They're Chinese, they're Hispanics, they're blacks, they're blacks from Africa, they're West Indies. It's the way the world is going to be.  And you can't tell who's with who. Seriously, I mean it's, it's amazing.  You can't tell who's with who.  You can't tell whose baby is whose baby.  And that's the way it's starting to churn, and it's the way it will become.  And we need to accept that.  When you walk through life now, you see more people with other people, whites with blacks.  I see more white men with black women today than I've ever seen in my life, and it's become a, kind of a common thing.  We're starting to blend the races.  We have to start to get off our hands, you know, this--the Mayor's done a wonderful thing taking down the housing projects here in Chicago.  I think it gives us a new start.  I think it gives us a window of opportunity to make change.  I'm going to get emotional here (laughter).  I don't know if those were the answers you're looking for.  What do-- It's not what I'm looking for, it's what you want to say about it.  But--I think, I think we need to work harder.  And, you know, my father always wanted me to work hard.  And I don't have any magic in my life. I, I really don't, you know.  I can remember sitting down and not having any food to eat.  I think the magic is, is that I'm--I've always known I got to take care of myself.  And I know if I get up today and didn't die, it had to be something tomorrow, you know.  You got to keep doing something.  And you have to put goals in front of yourself and you have to challenge yourself to, to meet those goals.  I don't think there're any real simple answers, but, you know, you got to get out of the cheese lines, you know [referring to the 1980's-Reagan Administration phenomenon of people lining up to receive government food handouts].  Then you got to stop blaming somebody else for your mistakes.  You know, education is important.  I think that as a, as a community, I think black men need to take responsibility for the children that they're having.  I think the sense of family needs to find its way back into a central thought so that we don't leave anybody behind.  Those are my feelings.
Story_ID: 3572
Speaker 1: Okay, what's next for your, your business or for you?  What do, what do you plan to do next in the future?  Do you have any big plans for the future?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at a, at a point succession has to start to play a role if you've got a business.  I've got two--my two sons are in the business.  I've got a daughter and another son that, you know, are not, but I'm starting to try to find a place for them if this is what they want to do.  They can take this to another level and, you know, we meet constantly.  They've got some different ideas about what the business could be.  I hope they're right.  But I guess the next--the challenge I have is--let's see.  I retired from AT&T in 19--(laughter).  It's, it's time for another retirement pretty soon, I would think, you know.
Story_ID: 3573
Speaker 1: What would you see at this stage as your legacy?
Speaker 2: (long pause) I, I remember when I was with the [Illinois] Bell system and was promoted into management.  I have a picture on the wall, I'll show you.  But, but there was, there was all of us, all the black managers, you know.  All the black managers, you know, in a room.  And we started to, started to meet at a place called Kona Kai on 95th and Stony Island [in Chicago, Illinois] on Friday nights.  And it was a way for us to network.  We--blacks that were in different departments, four or five of us, that worked different departments.  And that evolved as the number of managers in the company grew.  And then a couple years ago I spoke at this--that was the embryonic organization that now has over two thousand members nationally.  And that was, I was a part of that.  What's it called now?  I don't know what the name of it is now.  We didn't have a name for it.  It was the Black Bell System Managers Association.  I'm not sure what it is.  But that I, I played a role in, in how I was, I was a part of that, that first group of African Americans that had exposure to corporate life.  You know, maybe my father's [William Sr.] life would have been different had he had that same exposure.  Maybe a lot of things would have been--but I was, I was there.  I had exposure to it.  And I tried to do the best I could with that exposure.  Being the front runner, I was always, I'm always part of this community.  I'm part of the total community, but I was, I'm always black.  I always, I always felt that it was important that I do the best I could in all situations to perpetuate the fact that we can do it.  And then there were black folks that I met along the way, and I remember Jesse Owens [famed Olympian, won four gold medals at 1936 Berlin games] working at a radio station, and he and I sharing a sandwich, you know.  I mean here's this guy that had greatness, and in the, the back part of his life, he's working for a radio station, spinning records and having lunch in a building, you know, with thousands of people and nobody even knowing who he was.  And there's so many stories like that, that I could tell.  I don't know if there's a legacy I would like to have except that I tried real hard, I worked.  It tried to help others.  I believed in mentoring when I could and promoting other, other people of color, taking risks and trying my best not to have biases.
Story_ID: 3574
Speaker 1: Okay, this is another question.  It's a little bit different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As somebody who cared about life, about the world, about everybody.  I love God.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 3575
Speaker 1: This is the first one?  Yes.  This is a picture of my back porch in Princeton Park.  The picture on the left is my brother, Matthew and then that's Carla Taylor, one of the people that lived in our house.  And that's me with my hat all cocked to one side.  It was about 1949 or 1950.  You're about--About eight years.  Eight years old.
Speaker 2: William Bonaparte , right, with family friend Carla Taylor, middle and older brother Matthew Bonaparte, left, at the family home in Princeton Park neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of William Bonaparte.
Story_ID: 3576
Speaker 1: This is a--I received a, a certificate in Computer Sciences from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this is the day we received our certificates.  This is the class at MIT.  Okay, the year?  I believe this was 1982.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte during a certificate completion ceremony at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1982. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3577
Speaker 1: This is a family gathering of uncles and aunts from Detroit at our house out in Princeton Park here in Chicago [Illinois].  My dad [William Sr.] is, is in the--seated with glasses on.  And--in the center of the picture, next to woman with the earrings.  And there's cousins and other people.
Speaker 2: [Family photo, William Bonaparte Sr., seated with glasses and other family members. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3578
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.  This is one Sunday morning at Reverend Blackshear's church.  I don't see me as I can identify me in the picture, but Reverend Blacksher used to pick us all up in that car and bring us to church on Sunday mornings for Sunday School.  And it was about 1947, '48 [1948].  Where did this take place?  It was in Chicago, at a church.  He had a storefront church over on 93rd and Wabash.
Story_ID: 3579
Speaker 1: Is his, is he related to the artist, Thomas Blacksher?  I collect all of Thomas Blackshear's stuff, but I don't think he's related.  You got that sideways.  Yeah, we do that for--We'll flip, flip the shot later.  It gives us bigger image to work with.  That's my big brother Matthew, when he was--I think Matthew was nine years old then so this had to be some place around 1940--'47, '48 [1947, 1948].
Story_ID: 3580
Speaker 1: This is more recent picture of me, my sister, Bennie Marie, my brother, Joel and my sister, Mattie.  And this picture was taken in my sister's home in, in Houston, Texas.  And it was about 1992, '93 [1993.]
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte, front, with from the left, sister Bennie Marie, brother Joel and sister Mattie  in 1992-1993. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3581
Speaker 1: This is my earliest childhood picture that I have, have access to.  I was 2 years old.  So this had to be 1944 at some photography studio.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte, age 2 in 1944. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3582
Speaker 1: There's a year that's on there at the bottom.  There's a year on the picture.  Can you see it?  That could be real accurate.  If you lift it up, you can see the year.  '49 [1949].  Okay.  April 13th, 1949.  This is 1949.  I had to be seven years old, probably was in the first grade or second grade.  This is all the people that I grew up through most of my grammar school life with.  I know most of these folks.  We stayed in the same class throughout most of our years.  That's me in the, up underneath the girl with the ribbon in her hair, the third--I'm the fourth person from the end in the second row on the right.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte in  his first or second grade class photo. He is fourth  from the end, second row. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3583
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a very special lady in my life.  This is my mother, very beautiful woman.  I'm not sure what year this was.  I would speculate it's probably about 1965, 1966.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Lucy Bonaparte, William's mother, 1965-1966. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3584
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself, Senator Dick Durkin and President Clinton.  The year was 1999.  That was an occasion when I was in Washington for some conference.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte, center with President Bill Clinton, right and Illinois U.S. Senator, Dick Durbin in 1999. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3585
Speaker 1: Why, why am I forgetting his name?  I know he's with the-- That's Lerone Bennett.  Yeah, Lerone Bennett.  I know who he is, but I-- That's one of those moments.  We all have them.  Yeah, this Lerone Bennett.  He's, he's chief editor for Ebony and Jet [magazines] and he's written a couple of books.  This is a picture that was taken last year [2002].  The occasion was when Vernon Jordan was in town to, to market his new book
Story_ID: 3586
Speaker 1: This is, this is 1951, September.  I was in third grade. I am the second from the end on the right with my bush haircut then.These are still some of the kids that I was in school with through most of the grammar school at Gillespie.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte in elementary scchool, 1951. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3587
Speaker 1: While I was with Illinois Bell, I got involved in the Junior Achievement.  And this is my first Junior Achievement company that I led.  The white guy was the vice president of the company.  It was a graduation day for this Junior Achievement group.  We were rated number one in the city that year, our company did.  We made, we made and marketed magazine racks and the kids all made a profit that year.  I, I think that's one of the things that also got me involved in, in becoming an entrepreneur, being able to teach it.  I learned how to do it through Junior Achievement.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with members of the Chicago-area Junior Acheivement group. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3588
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Guion Bluford.  Guion was the first black astronaut in space and the other gentleman is Howard Brookins.  He was one of the first senators, black senators from the state of Illinois.  Okay.  The year was probably 1979, 1980.  And what brought the three of you together?  Bluford was a keynote speaker at the Univers--at the Chicago State University.  He spoke and I also spoke.  I was honored to be on the same platform that he was.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with NASA astronaut Guion Bluford, center and Illinois state senator, Howard Brookins in 1979-1980. From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3589
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me and [Chicago] Mayor Daley.  The occasion was--Inc. Magazine had named our company to their Inner City 100 List.  We were ranked number seventh, the sixtieth--sixty-seventh fastest growing African American business in, in the United States.  And that was in 2001.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte and Mayor Richard M. Daley pose at an event thrown by Inc. Magazine in 2001. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3590
Speaker 1: How many from Chicago were in that group?  Do you remember?  I've got a letter out there from the Mayor, and actually--I forget, but I can tell you.  I was just curious.  I think there were six companies from Chicago.  All right, go ahead.  That's me in the good old U.S. Army.  I think I was eighteen years old.  It was my first uniform.  It was probably 1961--If you can flatten it out a little, Larry.  Can you pull that corner in?  There we go.  1961.  Handsome devil (laughter).
Story_ID: 3591
Speaker 1: That's George Spect.  That was my business partner when I started this company, Bonaparte Corporation.  That picture was taken probably in 1992.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte and his former business partner, George Spect in 1992. From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3592
Speaker 1: This is one of probably eight occasions that I was, I was with President Clinton.  I had gotten cited for my involvement in civic affairs or some such thing.  I got a box over there he gave me.  But that was probably 1999.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with President Bill Clinton in 1999.  From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3593
Speaker 1: This is my high school graduation picture from Harlan High School.  It was 1960.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte's high school graduation photo in 1960. From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3594
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in, let me see, 1969.  And the occasion of this picture, these were the Black managers of Illinois Bell at the time.  It was highlighting the fact that they had Blacks in management, and that cute little (unclear) in the background with a small head is me.  It's hard to believe.
Speaker 2: Is there anyone else we should identify by name or just leave it as it is?  Leave it as it is.  Okay.  I didn't like any of the people.  (laughter)  All right.
Speaker 1: [William Bonaparte at an event for Illinois Bell's black managers in 1969.  From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3595
Speaker 1: All right.  I, I believe this is 1983.  It's a picture of me and [Mayor] Harold Washington with--while I was with Illinois--or AT&T. I served on several committees and finance committee, several committees for the mayor.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with Chicago Mayor, Harold Washington in 1983. From the collection of William Bonaparte. ]
Story_ID: 3596
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Napoleon Bonaparte when he was in office.  He looks a little bit like me there.  That's, that's his -- actually, a strategic point of trying to capitalize the name Bonaparte.  Actually, it was part of a, a Rotary roast.  We roasted the president [of the rotary.]  I think that was in 1994.  Okay, that's great.  Good costume.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses at Napoleon in his office in 1994 as part of a Rotary Club roast.  From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3597
Speaker 1: That's just a picture of Jerry Butler, one of my favorite entertainers and myself.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with famed singer, Jerry Butler.  From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3598
Speaker 1: That's me on the left, the fish I caught by a honky tonk down in Augusta, Arkansas.  That's, that's what we did for entertainment.  We'd go in there and drink beers and drink cokes.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: It was probably about 1964 or 5 [1965].
Speaker 2: Go ahead, next.  I'm sure you caught that bad boy up on the wall there too, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I do.  I love to fish.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte after a day of fishing at an Augusta Arkansas honky tonk in 1964/1965. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3599
Speaker 1: It's a picture of -- he was then the leader of the House, Dick Gephardt.  I believe that was 2 years ago, so it had to be 2001.
Speaker 2: [William Campbell poses with U.S. Representative, Dick Gephardt in 2001. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3600
Speaker 1: I forget this mayor's name.  What--
Speaker 2: This Morial's son-- this is Morial-- Mark Morial?
Speaker 1: Mark Morial.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And this is Mark Morial.  He's the, the Mayor of [New Orleans] Louisiana. And that was an occasion that he fed me free (laughter).
Speaker 1: Mayor of New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Mayor of New Orleans, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: [William Bonaparte with New Orleans, LA Mayor, Mark Morial. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3601
Speaker 1: This is Jesse Jackson, Sr. and I.  I'm not sure what the occasion was.  And I have several pictures with Mr. Jackson, some event that we shook hands and people took pictures.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with Jesse Jackson Sr. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3602
Speaker 1: This is a picture of [Cook] County president, John Stroger.  This is shortly after he was elected to serve as president of the County Board.  I've known John for a number of years.  This is 1995.
Speaker 2: But he's a Helena, Arkansas man, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah --
Speaker 2: That Arkansas (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we have, we have our Arkansas contingency here.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with Cook County Illinois Board president , John Stroger. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3603
Speaker 1: This is Vernon Jordan of [President Bill] Clinton fame.  This is the occasion that he was in Chicago marketing his book.  This picture was taken by Jamie Diamond, president of Bank One.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Ah, he takes a good picture.
Speaker 1: [William Bonaparte poses with Clinton presidential advisor,Vernon Jordan, at his Chicago book signing. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3604
Speaker 1: This is an event that I was at in  Washington, D.C. during the Black Caucus and Smokey Robinson was there.  We had a picture taken together, shared some moments.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with singer Smokey Robinson at a Congressional Black Caucus event in Washington D.C. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3605
Speaker 1: This picture is in Washington, D.C.  On Thursdays, the Senators from Illinois met with the constituents and they met with me that Thursday morning.  Carol Mosely-Braun, U.S. Senator [and HistoryMaker] and Dick Durbin [U.S. Senator] and we had this picture taken.  Actually, I was there in Washington [D.C.] doing some lobbying.  I think the year was, was 1998, 1999.
Speaker 2: [Illinois Sentors Carol Moseley-Braun and Dick Durbin pose with William Bonaparte in 1998-1999 in Washington D.C. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3606
Speaker 1: This is Congressman Bobby Rush, the actress, Kim Fields and, and I who were at a gala event at the [Congressional] Black Caucus.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte, actress Kim Fields (and Historymaker) and U.S. Congressman from Illinois, Bobby Rush. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3607
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Carol Mosely, Senator Carol Mosely Braun, and then First Lady, Hilary Clinton and myself at a social function.  I believe it was 19-- or 2000, maybe 1999.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte with First Lady, Hillary Clinton and Illinois U.S. Sentator Carol Moseley-Braun in 1999. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3608
Speaker 1: Senator Paul Simon.  The year was probably 1994, '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: [U.S. Senator Paul Simon and William Bonaparte in 1994 or 1995. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3609
Speaker 1: This was an event that I hosted here in my office, during the Democratic National Committee.  John Stroger and Mike Madigan were a couple of people that were in attendance.
Speaker 2: Year?  1998 -- '99 [1999.]
Speaker 1: [William Bonaparte, Cook County Board President John Stroger and Illinois House leader, Michael Madigan in Bonaparte's office. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3610
Speaker 1: This is a picture with then Vice President, Al Gore in Washington, D.C., a social function.  We had a, had a couple of words of dialogue early in the day and just got together to kind of, for closure.  I believe it was 1999.
Speaker 2: [Vice President, Al Gore, poses with William Bonaparte at a Washington D.C. event in 1999. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3611
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Julian Bond and, and I-- boy I look young then.  I would have to say this is probably 1984, 1985.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with fellow HistoryMaker, Julian Bond in 1984 or 1985. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3612
Speaker 1: I was chairman of Black Star project and we had a group of kids in the building, and [ actor] Danny Glover volunteered to come and talk with those children, (unclear).  Here is a picture of Danny Glover in my office at my desk.  He at my food that day.  (Unclear).  That was, that was 2002.
Speaker 2: [Danny Glover visits William Bonaparte as part of a volunteer effort for the Black Star Project in 2002. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3613
Speaker 1: This is my second favorite Lady.  This is Barbara Sizemore, my seventh grade teacher at Gillespie School.  This was a picture on her retirement day when she retired from DePaul [University].  That year's 2002, I believe.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte with his favorite 7th grade teacher, Barbara Sizemore at her retirement party in 2002. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3614
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Mayor [Richard M.] Daley and I.  I'm not sure what the occasion was.  I think somebody just walked up and says, let us take a picture.  It was at some, some situation and we were talking.  I'm not sure where that picture was.
Speaker 2: [Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley and William Bonaparte pose for another picture. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3615
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, [U.S.] Congressman Danny Davis, Larry Huggins, who has Whiteway Construction Company, Mike Lito whose a business external affairs director for Ameritech and Cedric the Entertainer [ it is not Cedric the Entertainer] , I think that's who that is.  And the leader of the [Illinois state senate, also a HistoryMaker] Emil Jones.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte poses with U.S. Congressman Danny Davis, Larry Huggins, of Whiteway Construction Company, Mike Lito whose a business external affairs director for Ameritech, an unnamed person and majority leader of the Illinois state senate Emil Jones. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3616
Speaker 1: These are two of my grand children, Donald and Lolita-- not Lolita, Dominique.  Lolita is the mother.  And these were Easter pictures and I got these-- this was about two years ago.  So 2001.
Speaker 2: [William Bonaparte's grandchildren, Donald and Dominique during Easter 2001. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
Story_ID: 3617
Speaker 1: This is Dempsey Travis.  He wrote a book, Racism Round and Round It Goes, and he devoted a, a chapter to me.  And this picture was taken probably 1998, '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: [Dempsey Travis and William Bonaparte in 1999. From the collection of William Bonaparte.]
