Story_ID: 531477
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Nancy Bowlin, N-A-N-C-Y, B-O-W-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Couldn't--they couldn't decide on a middle name.
Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: No, I would've and you would (laughter)--no, I would have if it was up to my father [Philip Douglas].  My mother [Harriet Worghs Douglas] said, "No way," so that's how I'm named Nancy Bow- Nancy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, my place--my date of birth is August the 8th, 1927.  My place of birth is Harlem, New York City; Harlem, New York--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or New York, New York.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Let's see now.  I started off as an RN [registered nurse], and I worked in several job as a nurse and then I ended up as a teacher of biology, medical biology and nursing, teacher, a biomed [biomedical] teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's with, with the school board here?
Speaker 2: Board of education.
Speaker 1: Board of education.
Speaker 2: New York City Board of Education [New York City Department of Education].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 17th of April, ni- two, two thousand and--I was gonna say 19--2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my apartment, 120 Co Op City Boulevard, Apartment 13G, New York--Bronx, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531478
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask that only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm not a food person, so I really don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd say you really love it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess, sun person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've been to so many places.  I used to go to St. Croix.  If I couldn't think of any place to go, I used to always go over to St. Croix.  I find it's very--St. Croix, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If you don't use it you lose it.
Story_ID: 531479
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Philip Douglas] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's first name was Harriet, H-A-R-R-I-E-T.  Her middle name was--I can't pronounce it, S- well, forget it.  Saphina, Saphri- well, anyhow, I wrote--I will look at it.
Speaker 1: Sophrina or?
Speaker 2: Sophrin- it's, it's S-E-P-H-R-I-M-A, something like that.  I will look it up and I will let you know.  It's an odd--
Speaker 1: Is it Seraphina [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Seraphina, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worghs, W-O-R-G-H-S [Harriet Worghs Douglas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's an unusual name, Worghs.  I don't think I've heard of that.
Speaker 2: He may know.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: You ever heard of Worghs?  Yes, see I know he would know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where, where, where is it from?
Speaker 2: Where do you think it's from?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What, Seraphina?
Speaker 2: No.  Worghs?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Worghs is the--
Speaker 2: A city?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Worghs?
Speaker 2: W-O-R-G-H-S.  Anyhow, I--some--my, my cousin's children look- they said it's--there's a Worghs in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, quite possibly, you know, there's some relationship--
Speaker 2: So, I, I--
Speaker 1: --to some German people.
Speaker 2: No, I think--I was--my idea, my conclusion was that maybe my grandfather [Arthur Worghs] was ancestors with German Jews.  That's my conclusion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, now, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly my mother's date of birth.  I've been trying to find that out, but I think she was like January 28th, something like that, but I don't know her year.  I had no idea.  She died when I was ten years of age.  I only knew her for a year.
Speaker 1: Was--do you think she was born around 1900 or so or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, eight- yeah, 'cause let me see.  Let's put it this way, she died in nineteen thirty (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, now--so, we assume your mother was born around nineteen hun- you said she was--she, she--
Speaker 1: Let's say--when she died in 1938 she had been in the country fifteen years and I'm thinking about that time she, she--when she, when she died in 1938, she was thirty-two years old, something like that.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So, she came here in 1906, I guess?
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Maybe 1906, yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think when she came here, she was about eighteen or nineteen, eighteen--or fifteen.  She was a teenager.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So yeah, 1913 would put her at about thirteen years old or so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, something around there.
Speaker 2: No, no, really--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, she was--
Speaker 2: No, she'd be seven then.
Speaker 1: No, she would be seven.
Speaker 2: She would be about seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, seven.
Speaker 2: Seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, seven.  Okay.  Well, so what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace the ancestors?
Speaker 1: Well, grandfather was as they say a tax collector, a farmer.  We were up in the country.  He hired people to--he shipped bananas as a business.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in--
Speaker 1: In Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Jamaica, okay.  She was--I'm sorry, I didn't ask you where she was born.  She was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, born in Jamaica--
Speaker 2: --born in Jamaica, okay.
Speaker 1: And I was raised in Jamaica, my, my--okay.  And he used to--they used to collect coconut and make coconut, make coconut oil and ship the, the five gallon cans.  I remember seeing.  And the reason I remember the coconut because they used the shell of the coconut as fire--as, as--not fire, what do you call--
Speaker 2: The kindling?
Speaker 1: Kindling, yes.  And as a little child, I went and stepped on that and I still remember the pain.
Speaker 2: What, a hot--
Speaker 1: The hot.
Speaker 2: --coconut?
Speaker 1: Yes, I remember the burn, right.  And that, that (laughter) put an imprint in my brain.
Story_ID: 531480
Speaker 1: So grandfather [Arthur Worghs] from what I understand was a tax collector, a farmer, and a man about town.
Speaker 2: A man about town?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  All right.  Well, all right, do you wanna talk about that?
Speaker 1: As a tax collector, you go from (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Right.  Don't remember him.  He had a stroke from what I understand and--but he kept tab of his expenses and his bills and everything.  Grandmother [Nancy Worghs], I don't remember her at all--I just remember her taking care of me.  Because, you know, that's why sometimes we say to you that if you have children or grandchildren, get down to their level so that they can see your face.  Because if they have to look up to you, all they're gonna see is this and, therefore, they won't--you know, unless, unless you live long enough so that they can look you eyeball to eyeball.  So I don't remember grandma, but I remember the care that she gave me; that I still feel, the care.  And when she died, I remember when she died.  I don't know what year.  I came here in 1936, so she must've died in thir- yes, she must've died in 1936.  And I remember as a child, they picked me which is an African thing and put me back and forth over the casket.  I don't know what it means and I have tried to ask.  And, and several other people that I know from there, they said that the same thing happened to them.  They would put the child back and forth over the casket, and I remember they did that to me.  And then I came back to the United States in 1936, and my mother [Harriet Worghs Douglas] died in 1938.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you said came back.  Now, you went to visit?
Speaker 1: I was--I was born in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: My mother sent me to Jamaica as a child just like, you know, you're born here and your parents send you down south to be raised by your--the grandparent (background noise), so that was what happened to me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did your ancestors in Jam- did your grandmother and, and grandfather in Jamaica ever talk about or other relatives talk about like the, the far past in Jamaica?  Do they have a, any kind of a--
Speaker 1: No, that, that is--that is something completely--no.  'Cause I--see, as a young child, you're a child, so they didn't go into that.  Not only that, in my time, you know when you see a little child, you always say, you say, "Oh, how old are you?"  Do you say that to a child?  You didn't say that in my time because you're a child and so, therefore, I didn't know my age.  You're a child.  You're a baby.  You're a child.  And you're a child up until--.  The boys, they wore short pants until they--you didn't wear long pants until they felt you're over fourteen or thereabouts.  That's when you can wear.  So, you're a child until a certain age and that was it, so--
Speaker 2: Did they, they, did they practice you're better seen rather than heard or (unclear)?
Speaker 1: They would--there, there were things that went on that I kind of remember.  (Laughter) And like maybe you may call it witchcraft or whatever, but that was something that we were talk- I was talking about the, the other day.  'Cause if you say it people think you're a little crazy, but I lived it, and what can I tell you?  I remember my grandmother, she--I don't know whether it was an egg.  I don't know what it is, but it was a glass of water and she put something in it and she put it out into the sun and whatever transpired, she says, "You're gonna travel."  And she--you could look at it and you could see whatever.  I guess--I don't know if whether she implanted in my mind, but she said that I was going to travel and I have been traveling ever since.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right and what can I say?
Story_ID: 531481
Speaker 1: Now you went to Jamaica as a baby?
Speaker 2: As a baby (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They sent--they sent you--
Speaker 2: I, I, I must've been around--I'll, I'll show you the picture.  I may have been around eighteen months thereabout or two years of age, around that time.  And I stayed there until I was about nine or ten, so I was there for maybe six, seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How is Jamaica different from New York [New York]?  Well, there's probably a lot of differences, but--
Speaker 2: Well, number one, being a grandchild from America that must've been a prize to them [Bowlin's maternal grandparents, Nancy Worghs and Arthur Worghs].  That's like having a diamond or a piece of gold, so I was pampered.  I never knew where the outhouse was.  I never went to it.  They bathed me.  I--they took care of me.  So, as I said, like some parents here do to their grandchildren, so I was pampered.  So all the things that the typical person--never went without--I always had shoes, always had clothes.  I didn't know what it was not to have clothes.  So, I can't, you know, relate to the things--
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your mother [Harriet Worghs Douglas] ever tell you about growing up herself in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: I only knew her for one year.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, she died in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I only knew her for--
Speaker 1: --nineteen thirty.
Speaker 2: --one year.  When I--yeah, I came here in 19- I came here in October 1936, and she died in February 1938.  So, (laughter) we didn't have much conversation of--she didn't even get a chance to know me and I didn't get a chance to know her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She died in 1938.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: February 22nd--26th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, anything else about your, your mother's family?  What, what--did, did she have relatives in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's sister and--oh, yeah, she had brothers.  They--and see in Jamaica in those days, like we talk about New York, you talk about Havana, Cuba, so a lot of them, the best place to go was to Cuba.  And so, therefore, she went to Cuba.  She learned Spanish and her brothers, they also went to Cuba, and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she had two sisters.  It was the three girls and the rest of them were fellows.  I don't know how many brothers because they all went different places.  It's amazing in those days, seems like the children as they get to a certain age they travel.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your mother have a chance to go to school in, in Jamaica or here?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no idea what her education was.  I have no idea what the educational system was.  I have no idea.  But I knew she could--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I have no idea what the educational system was.
Speaker 2: And do you know what she did for a living in--
Speaker 1: In Jamaica?
Speaker 2: --New York?
Speaker 1: She did--well, she was a young girl, but when she came here, what else could she do but do housework or take care of a child or--just like what they do now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Basically.  Nothing really has changed that much.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  And I was asking you earlier if, if your, if your mother--was your, your mother a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] or Garvey's [Marcus Garvey] movement at all that you, you know?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) We weren't, we weren't into--my family as a whole, we weren't into organizations.  We know about, we knew about, we support, but weren't actively into any- anything.
Story_ID: 531482
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father was Philip Worrel Douglas [Philip Douglas].
Speaker 1: And can you spell that, Philip--?
Speaker 2: W-O-R-R-E-L, Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, one S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was--I have to look it up.  I don't remember right off--.  He, he was born in Guyana.  At that time, it was called British Guiana.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Did you know--was he born in, in the town of--
Speaker 2: He was born in--oh, it's--I have his birth certificate, so you'll see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have his birth certificate.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, what do you know about the ancestors in, your father--
Speaker 2: My father was very--it's too bad I didn't pay attention.  It's, it's too bad I didn't pay attention because he even knew the--many of the African words, phrases and whatever, but I did not pay attention.  He would say it over and over, and the more he said it, the less attention I would pay.
Speaker 1: He knew African words and phrases?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Because his grandmother was the African lady, so he, he, he knew the phraseology and in Guy- the old-fa- the old- not the today Guyanese, the Guyanese of the--his age and up to the '50s [1950s], they still celebrate their African heritage, you see, from wherever, whatever they can remember, like I don't know whether I'm from the Igbo or Yoruba tribe, but I remember--and I, for the life of me, I don't--and I haven't had--I haven't had the time to do the research.  But I like I said, that's where I got the story about my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Now, tell, tell us about her.  Now, this is your great-grandmother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my great-grandmother.  My father's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --grandmother.  She, my fa- I, I understand--I guess my great-great, her father was the tribal chief, and I don't know wherever they went by the lake to bathe, she and her brothers, and that's when they captured them and brought them over on the slave ship to Guyana, South America--British Guiana.
Speaker 1: Now, did she--
Speaker 2: And she was in--at that time, they--we had--in the United States, we have plantation.  In those places, they have estate, so I think she was, she was in the Fraser estate, or something like that.  And then she met the Lindo, and then she married a Lindo.  I think her name--her Anglo-Saxon name may have been either Fraser or Henry.  I think it's Henry from what--and they--and I--her first name may have been Sarah Henry [Sarah Henry Lindo (ph.)] 'cause they called her Sama.
Speaker 1: What, what do they call her?
Speaker 2: Sama, Sa- S-A, Sa- ma, M-A, Sama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is, is that an African name?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it certainly could be, doesn't it?
Speaker 2: Could be, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but you think her, her slave name was--
Speaker 2: Name--it was--it was--yeah, it was slave--
Speaker 1: Slave name was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sar-
Speaker 1: Sarah Henry?
Speaker 2: Sarah Henry, yeah.
Speaker 1: And she married Lindo.
Speaker 2: Lindo.
Speaker 1: And that's the same spelling as Delroy Lindo.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all--L-I-N-D-O (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we don't know if he's related at all.
Speaker 2: Right, have no idea.
Speaker 1: But, but that's Lindo, L-I-N-D-O.
Speaker 2: D-O, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 531483
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your grandmother [sic. Bowlin's paternal great-grandmother, Sarah Henry Lindo (ph.)] that have been passed down?
Speaker 2: No, that's about the only thing.  Just, like I look at her fingers and my father have the fingers and my oldest son [Ancel Bowlin, Jr.] have the same fingers.  You know, when a baby is born, believe it not, I don't know--I don't know about today, but one of the thing a mother looks at is to look to see what resemblance, or the grandmother looks to see what resemblance there in the family and the lo- the long fingers.  And, but I, I don't have any story about her.  My father, he said that his father [Fredrick Douglas] also I guess came on the slave ship.  And I don't, I don't--the stories is all mixed up.  And his friend he met--he--because they were all from different tribes, I guess, or different areas on the ship and so when they landed in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana], he befriended this man, Mr. Gray [ph.], and Mr. Gray got married and he didn't have any children.  But my grandfather, my father's father had his sons and daughter--and, and (gesture) daughter.  So, my father said to his friend, "The next son that I have, I will give him to you."  So, my father was the son that was given to Mr. and Mrs. Gray.  And my father was their only child, and you should see his handwriting and whatever.  His--he did not have the lingo of the, the people from--you know how you have an accent or whatever.  He was like really the British sir and whatever and, so they gave him the best of everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a carpenter.  And he came to America in 1924 by way of his uncle, Charles Lindo, so Uncle Charles Lindo, who came here and he worked for the transit as a porter.  So, he sent for his nephew, which was Philip Douglas, and--to introduce him to work in the transit.  My father said he wasn't doing that kind of work.  He wasn't cleaning no toilet.  So, he made up his toolbox and he went around and he worked on his own, so he never worked for anyone in this.  He was--he was his own businessperson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by doing, working, he was able to--at that time just like you rent a house, in those days, you could lease a house, lease a house and eventually you could buy it, and that's what a--that's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531484
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My parents?  Yeah.  I don't wanna say it 'cause then--I can't say it.  Well, let's say for instance you come into a house and you see two girls.  One girl is after you, but the other girl, the younger girl you have an attraction for.  My mother [Harriet Worghs Douglas] was the younger girl.  See the two sisters?  Those were the two sisters.  The, the, the one--the darker one, the one with the black hat; that was my mom.  The one in the--that was my aunt.  My aunt was attracted to my father [Philip Douglas].  My father was attracted to my mother.  What can I say?
Speaker 1: They--so, they sorted it out (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so did they live in--so they, they, they were living in Harlem [New York, New York] then you're saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In separate, separate--we all had separate units, separate--didn't live together, separate.  When they--I think when they came here, when my mom and my aunt--.  I don't, I don't know which, I think my aunt came here first.  They--you know, you live together until you get on your own, until you get a job and you can pay your own rent, and then they went their separate ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they kept con- in contact with each other 'cause I knew my aunt--my aunts, 'cause she has another sister.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 531485
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities--now, I know you didn't know your mother [Harriet Worghs Douglas] that, that much, but who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My father [Philip Douglas] used to say my mo- I did some and said some of the things that my mother--yeah, you know, because I wouldn't know.  And I don't know anyone who knew my mother.  And I was--after my mother died, I was raised by my aunt.  And so I kept--.  Between my aunt and my--I was influenced by my aunt and my father.  And my aunt realized that I was very bright, according to her.  And I started to be a business lady when I was twelve.  I used to do hair.  I got a straightening comb and I charged twenty-five cents.  You wash your hair, you come to the house, twenty-five cents I will straighten and curl your hair, which was a lot of money.  And I used to--they used to line up to get their hair straightened and curled.  And my aunt says, "Enough of this.  You're not gonna do--you're not gonna be no hairdresser.  You're gonna go on to medical school," or something like that.  And that was the end of my first business.
Speaker 1: Now, now had your aunt gone to school herself?
Speaker 2: No, my aunt did not go to school.  She came here, she worked as a housekeeper.  And from the family that she worked, she saved her money and she ended up with multi- she was, she's a million- she was a millionaire, okay.  She owned several, several brownstones.  She had chauffer, she had a Packard.  We had car.  Nobody else had a car in tho- in 1930, '40s [1940s], she had a car, she had a chauffeur.  We had refrigerator.  Nobody else--everybody was buying ice--
Speaker 1: Ice.
Speaker 2: --for ten cents and twenty-five cents.  So that was what--how she--that's why I said, I'm not gonna touch anymore.  I'll let her--let her, her daughter or her--
Speaker 1: What, what was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Adina--
Speaker 1: Dina?
Speaker 2: Adina.
Speaker 1: Adina, okay.
Speaker 2: Adina, A-D-I-N-A, Worghs, let's say, Adina Worghs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she's--she did pretty well.
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Did fine.
Speaker 2: And my--I have another si- I have, you know, others that, that did quite well.
Story_ID: 531486
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of anything.  I mean, what's your earliest childhood memory (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My earliest childhood memory, and I think it was my [maternal] grandfather [Arthur Worghs], and I still have it in my bonds of ownership.  My grandfather gave me a little piece of land and he says, "This is yours."  He gave me the piece of land.  It's probably maybe as big as this room plus I had my own chicken and rooster and hen.  I had a pig and it was mine.  He said I could plant anything that I wanted to and the first thing as I remember that I planted was sweet potatoes.  And when the potato thing came up and the leaves run all over, I thought I had potatoes and I remember pulling it up, thought I was gonna have a big--and that is my childhood memory.
Speaker 1: Well, that's beautiful.
Speaker 2: And to ownership.  And so when grandmother [Nancy Worghs] died and I was coming, they wanted to know should they kill the, the, the, the chicken and whatever and send it over with me and I told them, "No," or the pig, I told them, "No."  So, that is my childhood memory.
Story_ID: 531487
Speaker 1: You grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], right, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was it in the same neighborhood basically or--?
Speaker 2: A hundred--yes, very old, lovely, lovely, lovely community.  My neighbors--my aunt's neighbors 'cause I lived with my [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs], 119 Street [119th Street] which is cen- cen- basically I guess you call it Central Harlem [New York, New York]?  It was ideal.  We had two doctors lived in the block, lawyers lived in the block.  We had Jewish people, Irish people.  It was a mixed neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, in, in Harlem?
Speaker 2: In Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in the, in the 1930s and '40s [1940s].  After '47 [1947], things just changed.
Story_ID: 531488
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up in Jamaica, you smell the, the, the animals and you smell the plants.  Because when I--re- remember when I went back in the '60s [1960s] and I went up and once I got there, I says, yes, you know, you remember.  And in Harlem [New York, New York], my [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs]--.  I never played out in the street.  We never played out in the street.  I knew about Carnegie Hall [New York, New York].  We went to the museum.  We had piano lessons.  We knew about plays, all the various plays.  We had after school programs that we went to, various church functions, so that was my, my, my, my childhood basically.  I worked, I worked hard.  Sh- I mean, I knew how to clean and this and whatever.  I knew how to cook, so I didn't need to go to school to get home ec [home economics] or whatever to learn how to cook.  I already knew how to do all of that.  And that was basically it.  And they were very strict and I--we were kept very busy, so we didn't have time to get into trouble.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what kind of activities did you do to stay busy?
Speaker 2: To stay busy, we cleaned the house.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Cleaned the house.  If you're not going to--if you're not going to a concert, if you're not going to a play, like the Carn- oh, to see the, the--like right now, the circus, the, the, the Jewish lady or whatever in the block, to see the circus--let's say the circus was about twenty-five cents to go for a child and that--twenty-five cents was a lot of money for a lot of people, but if you go as a group, you pay ten cents.  So, she would go around and collect for--ask if you want your child to go and, naturally, everybody in the block, ten cents, and therefore we went as a group and you saw--went to the circus.  So in all--I've learned from that in all the days that are--and all the places that I have traveled--.  Let's say if I want to go to South Africa, and I pick next June something, something.  I will go through my address book, write to my friends, everybody, "I want to go to South Africa, are you interested?  June so, so, so, so, so.  This is how much--."  I do my research first, "This is how much it's gonna cost."  And we went as a group and you get a group rate.  So I learned something from my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's the Jewish lady in the neighborhood that started doing that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jewish lady in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531489
Speaker 1: Was music a part of growing up?  Did you take any music lessons or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, piano lessons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have my music book.  I, I just gave some away.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your teacher?  Was--
Speaker 2: Don't remember.  It was a man and if you didn't--if you missed, boom, he would hit you on your fingers.
Speaker 1: Was it a German fellow or was--
Speaker 2: No, it was a black guy.
Speaker 1: Black man?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter) Now, I hate to stereotype them, but I--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  German people.
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: I really--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: No, but I have interviewed several people in just the last couple weeks that all had piano lessons and it's usually a German woman--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --that goes around to--
Speaker 1: I had a man--a black, black man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a black man.  I think he may have been West Indian, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a black man.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And he used to come to the house, used to come to the house.  We didn't go to his place.  He came to the house and he taught--I got piano lesson and my cousin, my [maternal] aunt's daughter, she got piano.  Plus, she also got singing lesson.  She used to go down to 72nd Street [New York, New York] to get, (singing), all right.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --so classical singing lessons, I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, classical singing lessons.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 531490
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, church was a very big part of my [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs].  She was in the Pentecostal, Pentecostal church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, 133rd Street.  Bishop Lawson [Robert C. Lawson] was the big wheel then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Refuge Temple [Greater Refuge Temple, New York, New York].  They have one 125th Street off of 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].  That's where he moved from 133rd.  He's on a hundred and- between 125h or 126th [Street], 127th Street, Refuge Temple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now did that--being a Pentecostal, I mean they, they have a lot of restrictions from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Well, the restriction as far as movies, dancing and whatever, like, I never went to the Renny [Renaissance Ballroom, New York, New York], never went to the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, New York, New York].  I was not a party girl; those are the things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And any kind of party, we had it in the house.  We had parties in the house.  Like Halloween party, we had in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't--
Speaker 1: So, they let you have fun, but you had to have it within--
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was controlled.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, no mo- no movies, though?  So you couldn't go to the movies when you were--
Speaker 2: There wasn't--I--it was not that there was no movies, it was no image that we--it was, we just didn't go to the movies.
Speaker 1: Now, now there were some black films made and shown in Harlem [New York, New York] from--
Speaker 2: I saw the one with--but they, they were, they were maids.
Speaker 1: Oh, the black people in the movies?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  But I was talking about maybe some of the movies of some of the black filmmakers.
Speaker 2: No, we didn't--
Speaker 1: There was--
Speaker 2: --don't--we, we--wasn't around then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's your time.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, Oscar Micheaux who's actually--
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: --related to the man [Lewis H. Michaux] that ran the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York].  He used to produce black movies out of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: No, but it wasn't--yeah.
Speaker 1: And they would, and they were like shown around the country.
Speaker 2: Around--no, we weren't--we, we weren't--
Speaker 1: But you didn't have a theater that--
Speaker 2: We weren't in--no, we weren't in the in-group.  We weren't in that in-group.  My aunt, my aunt was not in that in-group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, you have to be in the group, or invited in, or even invited into a society.  We were very social conscious, and you couldn't just say, well, I want to join your organization.  No, you had to be invited into an organization.
Speaker 1: So, Harlem was very organized then.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was organized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was organized.  It was organized.
Speaker 1: And what--well, was it organized--I know some of the organizations probably had to do with money, some with, with--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --with professions.
Speaker 2: Well since--
Speaker 1: Some maybe from point of origin, I guess, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  Growing up, as I said, that was just my chil- as a child.  Once I got to be a teenager or whatever, I was out of there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  Because once I graduated from elementary school [St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York], we went to Jersey [Neptune, New Jersey], and so that broke us up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now did your--was your aunt--well, she was very much involved in the church, I guess.
Speaker 2: In the church, basically in the church.
Speaker 1: So, how much time would you spend in the church?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, you go to Pentecostal church, you stay there for four or six hours or you s- as a child, you sit there and you go to sleep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are the services--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --on Sunday?  Or--
Speaker 2: On Sunday.  And what happens is, I went to Catholic school.  I was the only one that went to Catholic school.  I had to go to nine o'clock Mass.  So that meant I went to nine o'clock Mass, came home, had breakfast, and went to Pentecostal service.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: That was my Sunday.
Speaker 1: So you get back home at four o'clock or something?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Oh, so, so that was a--.  Did you look forward to Sundays (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they give you assignments in church, or, or things to do?  You know, did they give you things to do that would--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, you sing and--sing and you listen to whatever the minister had to say.
Speaker 1: So no youth responsibilities or that kind of thing where you--
Speaker 2: No, no.  I didn't belong to any, any--.  I never belonged--I never joined any organ- we were not a joiner of organizations.  That's one thing I will say about--
Speaker 1: No, no, I mean within the context of church.
Speaker 2: No, not even--no, not even that.
Speaker 1: Usually, you know--
Speaker 2: Just go--
Speaker 1: --most churches try to give the youth--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --something to do that--
Speaker 2: No.  We just, we just went.  And if my aunt give her donation or she wants to give special, she does it, but she was not a active member, not a quote unquote president of this, this or--no, she did not do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you think about--going to Catholic school, did that make you--did it--or going to Pentecostal church, did it make you question either of the doctrines or?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I, I learned I guess in later years because they just--I guess maybe too it, it, it stemmed maybe, maybe from my [maternal] grandmother [Nancy Worghs] is that once you believe in God, it doesn't matter what your denomination is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know the Catholics have a different i- (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I know.  I know.
Speaker 1: --right--
Speaker 2: But I--that's why--
Speaker 1: --idea.
Speaker 2: And even, even though I went to Catholic school for all those years, I never took it on.
Story_ID: 531491
Speaker 1: Now, was the radio played a lot at home?  Did they listen--did your [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs] listen to the radio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I listened to the radio.  They used to have the soap operas or whatever you call.  And there was one I used to listen to after school.  I don't remember--I can't remember now.  But I wasn't into radios.  I, I was a reader.  Oh, I always liked to read.  Get a book, give me a book.  Forget about the radio.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to the Countee Cullen Library there [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I went to the public s- library.  Public library was 124th Street [Harlem Library, New York, New York].  It's still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dif- okay.
Speaker 2: Still there.
Speaker 1: 124th and--
Speaker 2: 124th Street between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and 5th [Avenue], right b- right across from Morris Park [Mount Morris Park, New York, New York], right.  Just come down the block and whatever the--and right across the library, and I lived in the library.
Story_ID: 531492
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I know I went to a little private school in Jamaica, don't remember that.  But when I came in 1936, the--I was registered in P.S. 10 [New York, New York], which was down the block from St. Thomas the Apostle [St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York], P.S. 10.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And passing the Catholic school to go to P.S. 10, I decided to go into the Catholic school and I says, I like this school and I want to be here, and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there.  Now, if my [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs] or whoever paid, if they paid or what, I have no idea.  All I know, I put myself there and I was--and that, that's where I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that, that was St. Thomas--
Speaker 2: That was St. Thomas--
Speaker 1: --the Apostle, okay.
Speaker 2: --the Apostle.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, how did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  It was an escape because--escape from housework (laughter) and loved the books, asked a lot of questions, still do.  I had problems in college [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York] 'cause I asked too many questions, still do, even to my doctors up to this day.  They get upset because I ask questions.
Speaker 1: What kind of questions?  What--give us an example, what, what would you--
Speaker 2: My husband [Ancel Bowlin, Sr.] has a pacemaker and I have--I've always--I have a heart condition since I was ten from rheumatic fever, so any time I go to the dentist I have to take antibiotics.  So, I took my husband to the doctor, and since he had a pacemaker and he had to go to the dentist, I said to my doctor, "May I have my prescription for antibiotics for--'cause I'm going to the dentist."  I said, "By the way, my husband has a pacemaker, should he be taking antibiotics?"  And you know what she said to me?  She didn't know.  She had to call up and do research to find out what--the question.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's--.  Now, now were you criticized for asking too many questions in school?
Speaker 2: When I was coming up.  In college, professor wrote a formula on the board and whatever, he got the answer, and I raised my hand and I said to him, "Couldn't you get the answer another way?"  He was very upset.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, you said you liked to read in school.  Was read- was--what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, I used to read about menopausal women when I was (unclear) (laughter).  And at that time, when a woman got forty, that was menopause.  And it was very interesting to--and all the symptoms and whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, now you say at that time--
Speaker 2: Well, at that time because--
Speaker 1: --is it--have things changed?
Speaker 2: --I was young.  Yes, it has changed.  I, I wish I had my bo- my medical book.  In my medical nursing textbook, the book, obstetrics, all babies are born pink.  All babies are not born pink.  It's in the text.  All babies are not born pink.  And when babies are born pink, if you look at their ears and you know the, the--how you could tell a black child?  Look at the ears and look at right there, there's a dark spot.  You can tell that's a black child even though he's born pink.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So even if they're light, real light--
Speaker 2: You, you can tell (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you can tell.
Speaker 2: You can tell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531493
Speaker 1: So you're an inquisitive child coming up.
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: And did you like science?
Speaker 2: Loved science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved science and--yeah, just loved science.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school?  In grade school?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, yes, my sixth grade teacher [at St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York] in the--nun, Sister Letisha [ph.], she was favorite teacher.  She was the teacher that known to beat up the kids.  When I say beat up the kids, you know, hit them on their fingers and whatever, so all my classmates, they were-- couldn't wait for me to get to the sixth grade 'cause I was such a wiggly--I wasn't fresh, but I was--couldn't keep still.  I was very talkative and whatever.  So, Sister Letisha, sixth grade.  The kids--my classmates, they were just waiting for me to get there.  I sat next to every one of my classmate and I talked to every one of them.  And Sister Letisha would say to me, "If I put you next to the wall, you'll have the wall talking to you."  So she put, put me up front and she would stand here and, you know, she and I would have a conversation (laughter).  And I remember her asking, I was in the sixth grade, Sister Letisha, and she went around the room and asked, "What do you want to be?"  And I said I wanted to be a nurse.  And that was the first time I verbalized anything, and that was in the sixth grade.  And I never thought after that that I would follow or pursue that, but that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was my sixth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have an idea then of what a nurse does and what a nurse was like?
Speaker 2: No, I had no idea.  And another teacher, was my eighth grade teacher, she said to me that I was bold.  She says, "You are so bold."  And I says, "Sister that is your opinion."  And she did not--she just looked at me and just shook her head.  There was nothing else she could say.
Speaker 1: Now, so, she was saying--now, now today, being bold might be considered--
Speaker 2: I was rude.
Speaker 1: --a compliment.
Speaker 2: Yes.  No, no, today, if I was in a classroom today, I think the teacher--depends on the teacher--would have a problem with me because I would ask too many questions that she did not know how to answer.  And when a child asks you a question that you don't know how to answer, you give that as a homework to that child.  You go look that up and find out and you come back with the answer.  That's what I did when I was teaching 'cause a lot of the kids would ask you things that you don't know nothing about, aerospace and whatever, which I know nothing about.  Kids would ask me, and I would give them that as a homework assignment.  You're curious about that?  Now, you go ho- you go home and you go to the library and you do your research and you bring the information back to me.
Speaker 1: Gi- would you give them extra credit?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, so, so you liked science in school and you liked--
Speaker 2: Liked science and--
Speaker 1: --to read.  I, I neglected--okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I liked science very much so, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Biology.  Chemistry, physics, eh, but biology was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I didn't ask you what kind of books you were reading when you said you liked to read, but--
Speaker 2: I, well--
Speaker 1: --you said--you, you mentioned the menopausal books, but are there any, any other kind?
Speaker 2: When I was--as a, as a preteen, beside the menopause books, I would read the love stories in magazines.  They were five cents and ten cents.  I would buy them and read them.  So by the time I got to be a teenagers, I didn't need to listen to the soap opera.  I don't look at soap operas now because I, I went through all those book- those magazines.  You know, he loves me and I lose him and all that.  I, I used to read that.
Story_ID: 531494
Speaker 1: In high school, now did--what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Okay.  After j- after elementary school [St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York], we were--we moved to Jersey--as we're--Neptune, New Jersey.  And then I went to the high school there, which, which here would've been like junior high school, ninth grade, ninth to the tenth.  I left my [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs] and came to New York [New York] to stay with my father [Philip Douglas].
Speaker 1: Now, now you, you started high school in New Jersey you're saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah, started high school in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Don't remember.  It's, it's a high school in Asbury Pa-
Speaker 1: It's in Neptune.
Speaker 2: It's--oh, it's Asbury Park High School [Asbury Park, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Asbury Park, okay.  Yeah--
Speaker 2: Asbury Park 'cause I had to walk from Neptune to Asbury Park [New Jersey].  I did one year in Asbury Park High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You--did you like it?
Speaker 2: I didn't stay there long enough.
Speaker 1: Did you leave because you didn't like the school or did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left because my aunt and I, I just--I wanted, I wanted--my aunt was very, how shall I put it?  I was like the housemate to my s- to my cousin, to her daughter, okay, and I had enough of it.  So therefore, I decided to go on my own.  I was going on my own.  I packed my bag.  Here is my cousin, Laura [ph.], I think--no, that's not her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you're--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --when you packed your bags?
Speaker 2: --thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: Thirteen, okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: At thirteen, I got on the train from Asbury Park.  I got off at Red Bank, New Jersey.  And I walked around and I saw a lady sitting on the porch, and I asked her, do she--would she hire me to clean her house?  She says, "Come here, little girl.  You ran away from home."  And so I told her my story.  She said, "You should go back to your aunt."  I didn't say anything.  Oh, by the way, I always saved m- I always had money.  I always saved.  That's something, I always have--I always saved.  So she, so she, she--I stayed in her--I stayed--I slept on her porch that night, and the next day got on the train and I came to New York.  And lo and behold, rang my father's bell and I said, "Here I am."  And lord (laughter) what could he do?  So, he gave me a place to stay, and that's where I stayed until I, I w- I, I had to go to high school.
Story_ID: 531495
Speaker 1: And so I went to George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] to register.  And they told me that I could not attend that school, or if I did attend, I would get the--I would not get an academic diploma, I would get a--I forgot.  I would take household science.  So, I asked them, "What is household science?"  They says, "That's learning how to clean and cook."  I told them, "I know how to do that already.  I did not need to come to school to learn that."  And I had already written down, believe it or not, the subjects that I wanted.  So I gave the guidance counselor--she says, "Hm."  She says, "You can't do nothing with this," she says, "but I'll give it to you anyway."  And so she gave me, and that's how I graduated with an academic diploma.  Took the Regents [Regents Examinations], Latin Regents, three years of Latin, took French in college [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York].  I did my trig [trigonometry], I did my geometry, I did my algebra, and that's it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So was, was, was George Washington High School an integrated high school?
Speaker 1: Was very few of us in George Washington High School at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Very, very few.  I was in--in almost all my class, I don't think I had a classmate.  I was the only one in the class.
Speaker 2: Now, where, where is George Washington?  What borough is it?
Speaker 1: It's 191st Street [sic.] on Audubon Avenue.
Speaker 2: 191st on Audubon.
Speaker 1: Audubon.
Speaker 2: What do they call that neighborhood?
Speaker 1: What do they call it now?  See, they have neighborhoods now that they did--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Washington Heights [New York, New York].  Washington Heights.
Speaker 1: Washington Heights?
Speaker 2: Washington Heights.
Speaker 1: That's what they probably--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --call it now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess so.  Or maybe it's higher up than Washington Heights.  Washington Heights is around 168 [168th Street]--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Inwood [New York, New York].  Inwood.
Speaker 1: Inwood, yes.  I think it's more Inwood, yes [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  I-N-W-O-O-D?
Speaker 1: O-D, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Now, did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 1: And I don't remember her name.  She was my science teacher.  And my English teacher--oh, I have to tell you this about English.  When you have to read a book, I would read the, the front, I would read paragraphs, the first sentence in each paragraphs, and finish the book.  That's how I read a book.  I--
Speaker 2: Well, that's the shortcut, isn't it?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And when you go to school, the teacher would ask you questions, naturally, I fill in the blanks.  That's one of the reasons I guess I don't go to the movie 'cause if I start seeing it, I know what the ending should be and, therefore, I go to sleep, so I don't go to movies.
Speaker 2: Well, were you right when--most of the time about the books when you--
Speaker 1: Most of the times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or maybe we get a opposite ending.  Yeah, and so, therefore, my favorite teacher, I don't remember her name, she says, "If you would only put a little bit more effort, you would be surprised how bright you are."  But I just--
Speaker 2: But, you're trying to shortcut it (unclear).
Speaker 1: No, I just--I don't know.  I just--I got bored and find--I just--somebody just gave me a book.  It's the worst book I ever had, the worst book this lady--.  It's all so negative, it's the worst book.  And I just skimmed right through it because it--it's just--it was just wasting my time.  It was just--you know.  And if I find there's interest, then I will go back and read, but if I find that it's something that--it's all--it's understandable, you know, that--just like even making a movie.  Sometime it could be a short thing but they wanna fill it in like fillers, who needs to go through the fillers?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Now, were you a, a member of any clubs in high school or any of that?  Any of the social activities?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) Never.  Never joined anything.
Story_ID: 531496
Speaker 1: At home in the neighborhood, now was your father [Philip Douglas] living in Harlem [New York, New York] then?
Speaker 2: My father lived in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was--he belonged to--his, his--oh, I have to show you.  I don't know what group he belonged to, but they, they were all business people, black business people they were.
Speaker 1: So, it was a business--chamber of commerce in Harlem or something or?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a business chamber, just a group of people.  No, quote unquote, no name, just a group of people that got together.  Mr. Bend [ph.] like, you know, the oil comp- not the--let's say a oil company sh- I don't know where, where--what--just name a oil company that you have in your town.  Mr. Bend had an oil--coal company.  We had I think the first black judge or whatever was part of that group.  There was a group.  It was no organization, just group of people that knew each other.  Whether they were from Jamaica, Guyana, North Carolina or whatever, but it was a group of people, men and women, that hung out together and they were able to touch base and help each other.
Speaker 1: It's some kind of a West Indian association?
Speaker 2: No, West In- it was a group.  It wasn't Wes- wasn't a West Indian--
Speaker 1: Wasn't just West Indians?
Speaker 2: --it wasn't West Indian, it was American, southerners, and whatever, but just a group of people who had a common interest and they helped each other, not financially, but tell them which way, which block to go down and which block not to go down.
Speaker 1: Now, now you were a teenager then in Harlem in those days.  And did you have--what, what was your social life like in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Very restrictive.  My father timed me when I went to school [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York], and timed me when I got home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he as strict as your [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs]?
Speaker 2: Worse (laughter).
Speaker 1: So then, it--well, but at least you didn't have to be the maid for another teenager, right?
Speaker 2: Whatever I did, I did for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whatever I did, I did for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531497
Speaker 1: Harlem [New York, New York] was really vibrant in those days and it's kind of declined somewhat since, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know what happened?  I saw, I saw when drugs was brought into Harlem.  'Cause like I said, I was never one of the ones that went to the Renny [Renaissance Ballroom, New York, New York] or the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, New York, New York] 'cause I go to the senior center now and we--they talk about it and whatever, they went to the Ren- every Friday, like Friday nights and whatever, they went partying and whatever.  I, I just didn't; I was not part of that.  So, but Harlem, the drugs came in, it came in just like, I don't know how--like, if you went to a dance or you went to a function, they used to have the cigarettes.  I don't know if you ever remember, maybe in your time I don't know if they did that.  If you go to a, a function, a luncheon or whatever, Lucky Strikes was on the thing, Camels was free.  They would entice you to, to smoke.  It was there free.  And so, therefore, drugs came into Harlem like that.  Drugs came in.  They, they--it came in free first.  And then once you got hooked, you had to pay for it, you see.  And then I saw the downfall of Harlem as a public health nurse where I had to go into the home and that's where--and not only that, not even going to the home.  You used to see men and women stand up like statues because they were frozen because of what the drugs did.  They were (poses)--
Speaker 1: Actually, actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--they were fro-
Speaker 1: --dead--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Frozen (unclear)--
Speaker 2: You--I would go in for a newborn inspection of a baby, and the mother would be out because of the drugs.  So that was, that was basically in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] when drugs--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --came into Harlem and it was decline.
Story_ID: 531498
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was it like in the '40s [1940s] when you were, when you were a teenager [in Harlem, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In, in--when I was--well, as I said, since I wasn't street--out in the street, I had nothing to do--as I said, there's homework, go to school, stay in the house.  And staying in the house, I'd play the piano quite a bit; I'd sew; I'd crochet; I knit.  I can even s- I, I have something, I have a jacket that I knitted.  I will show you, I made when I was sixteen.  I still wear it, still wear it.  And you know how I got the pattern?  The Daily News [New York Daily News] used to put the pattern free of charge, you could get the pattern.  The whole thing was listed there free of charge.  All you had to do, just clip it out and you could knit according to that.  Those were the things that were around in those days.  So a lot of things, if you bought--if you bought the paper, you could get information, you could get free things, whereas now, you have to buy patterns and if--to, to get a pattern nowadays is very hard 'cause hardly anybody sews.  I realized that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were a senior in high school [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] in '45 [1945], right?  Am I right?
Speaker 2: When I was what?
Speaker 1: A senior in high school?  Was it 1945?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 1: Was it towards the end of the--
Speaker 2: Nine- yeah, '45 [1945], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In '45 [1945] when the war, World War--yeah, when the war, World War II [WWII], when FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], did he die in '42 [1942]?
Speaker 1: No, he died in '44 [sic. 1945], I think.
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944].
Speaker 2: Well, '42 [1942] is when we had the war, right?  World War--
Speaker 1: It started in '41 [1941]--
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941], '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: --that's when the U.S. got into it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, U.S. got in, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--Pearl Harbor.  That's one of the reasons, too, I think we moved to Jersey [Neptune, New Jersey] right after I graduate [from St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York].  I graduate in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, as I said, we weren't--we, we, we didn't get into any organization or any- any- anything like that.
Story_ID: 531499
Speaker 1: Ma'am, you missed the riot of 1943 here in Harlem [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, '43 [1943], I was in Asbury--well, I was in Neptune, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your father [Philip Douglas] talk about it?  'Cause he was here.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't talk about it.  It was no big deal.  It's a riot, right.
Speaker 1: A lot of windows broken out and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's, that's (shrugs shoulders)--
Speaker 1: --a lot of--.  Now, now during the '40s [1940s] I know Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. was leading demonstrations in front of some of the department stores.
Speaker 2: Oh, not only that.
Speaker 1: Other people--
Speaker 2: In, in those days, if you wanted to have something to say, you stand on the corner of 125th Street and you get up and you say it.  And you get a crowd of people stand around and they listen to you.
Speaker 1: Now, these are stepladder guys we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Anybody.
Speaker 1: Or the soapbox--
Speaker 2: I mean, you didn't need a stepladder, if you had a stepladder.  You didn't have to carry no stepladder.  You get a box or whatever, stand up there, and you start talking.  You st- whatever your political or whatever your--Garveyites or whatever you are, you get up there.  And not only that, a hundred and--120-something street was Father Divine [Reverend Major Jealous Divine].  He was very popular in that time around there, Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard].  And if you want a good worker, get somebody who belonged to--who was recommended by the Father, Father Divine organi- they did beautiful work, and they were honest.  You didn't have to worry about them stealing from you.
Speaker 1: Just, now I--I've, I've heard that Father Divine's organization [International Peace Mission Movement], you know, people think about it and think, well, he's, you know, this flamboyant showman, he's enriching himself.  But, but people here in Harlem have told me that Father Divine fed a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Yes they did.  Yes they did.
Speaker 1: --during the Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 2: Like you see the--like I talk about senior centers here [Bronx, New York], they had--he had places where you could go and eat.  He took care of the people in the community, yes he did.  Father Divine organization was--
Speaker 1: What do they, they call his workers Angels, right?
Speaker 2: I mean, they were--you hire one, if they say they're a carpenter or whatever they, they say they--.  I don't know where the money went to or whatever 'cause I wasn't in that category to hire them, but I--from what my family said, you hire or you get one of the women to come to clean, you didn't have to worry.  You didn't have to worry that she's gonna take your jewelry or she's gonna--.  You just didn't have to worry.  I don't know what he did, how he brainwashed them or whatev- what religious things they had to go through, but they're workers were--.  And he did feed them and Father Divine building is still there.  And I don't know who owns it now, but I still--every time I, I go by, I say, that's, that's the building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said the--some of the Garveyites spoke out there on the street corners and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I'm, I'm telling you, if you, if you--whatever you are--your--you wanted to say, you got up on the corner and you talked.  Nobody, nobody, no policeman was gonna come and arrest you.  You could say anything you wanted to say.  You want to talk about Bush [President George Walker Bush]?  Get up there and talk about it.  Nobody was gonna bother you.  You said, they stayed--you stand around, you listen and you listen, and once you got enough, you walk off.  But, that was the way--I--that was freedom, freedom of speech.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any favorite people that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --spoke or?
Speaker 2: No, no.  'Cause you walk in the street, you don't know half the time who they are, whoever, like Garveyites or whatever.  Let's go back to Africa, get to do, you know what- whatever.  You, you know, you, you had your own thing.  You had your own agenda so therefore you didn't have that much to--.  At least with me, they made sure that we had enough to do so we didn't have all that extra time to fool around, we didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531500
Speaker 1: Did you make good grades in school?
Speaker 2: C for colored.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you, but--
Speaker 2: That was, that was--I did not know--.  Let's say if I wrote a paper and I gave it to my colleague, white colleague, she would get an A, I would get a C.  And I did not know, I felt bad about my grades, and when I showed my--I was going to--I applied somewhere, and this professor looked, it was a white professor, he said, "Ooh, you got good grades."  I only got Cs, but he said they were good because he knew what the Cs meant.
Speaker 1: So in that all-white high school, Washington High School [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Washington High School, I don't have hardly any of my grades.
Speaker 1: But a C was what--
Speaker 2: C, C for college.  C for--I went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].  C for college was, was, was the norm.  I--and I got--where I would get B, physical ed [physical education].  See, so nothing has changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, when, when you were on the verge of graduation, did you have any counseling about what to do to--
Speaker 2: You mean from high school?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: No way.  No counseling.
Speaker 1: What did they--
Speaker 2: I--what I--after high school, we moved to Brooklyn [New York] and I went to Brooklyn College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, education was the thing for me.  I went to Brooklyn College and I got--
Speaker 1: How did you choose Brooklyn--I mean, had, had--did somebody else talk to you--
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Philip Douglas] wasn't gonna spend any money (laughter) okay.  My father, he wasn't gonna spend the money.  So therefore, it wasn't--I, I wanted to go--I wanted to go away like to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or whatever, forget that.  My father wasn't spending that kind of money.  And so, therefore, the best thing to do is to go to Brooklyn College, so I went to Brooklyn College, got associate degree, and then I, I walked past Maimonides hospital [Maimonides Medical Center] in Brooklyn.  And I went in and I told her I would like to be a nurse, how do I go about being a nurse?  And I said to her that I'm in Brooklyn College, and I will be getting my associate degree soon.  So she recommended Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York], and I think it's St. Philip's [St. Philip School of Nursing], is it in North Carolina [sic. Richmond, Virginia] or wherever, I don't remember, St. Philip's nursing school.  Those are the schools, two schools that would take you as college graduate and would give you an RN [registered nurse] plus a B.S. degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Well, well, well, was the grading better in--at, at, at Brooklyn Community College?  Did they grade you more--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Brooklyn--it was Brooklyn College.
Speaker 1: Brooklyn College, but did--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't--no, it wasn't--it wasn't any better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't forget, it was all Jews, basically Jewish, whites, and whatever.
Speaker 1: There were no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that many blacks.
Speaker 1: No black teachers?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  No--black teacher?  I never had a black teacher, never had a black teacher.
Story_ID: 531501
Speaker 1: And as, as I said, I went on to--went into Maimonides [Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York], asked her about the nursing school and she told me about Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York] and this sc- this nursing school I think in North Carolina or South Carolina [sic.], I can't remember.  And you have to fill out a medical, so you had to have dental work, dental work check.  And I went to this dentist, my father's [Philip Douglas] dentist was a Jewish dentist and told him that the application was for Bellevue and for St. Philip's nursing school [St. Philip School of Nursing, Richmond, Virginia].  He says, "You don't wanna go to St. Philip's; go to Bellevue."  He says, "Forget about there.  You don't wanna go down there."  So, therefore, I concentrate on Bellevue, not knowing that Bellevue wasn't gonna accept--right.  I had no idea.  So, I applied to Bellevue, and you do these, the tests and the psychological and whatever.  And they called me in for the interview, and my--whatever was way off the charts, whatever.  It made no--it didn't mean a thing to me.  She showed it to me.  It didn't mean anything to me.
Speaker 2: So it was way off the charts in terms of good?  You passed with--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --flying--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  It was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I had to go get a physical.  And like I said, I always had a bad heart.  So the doctor said to me that, you have a bad heart, and they didn't--they wanted to take me, but knowing that you have a bad heart, and you're exposed to infection, that puts you up--that--you know, that exposes you.
Speaker 2: At risk.
Speaker 1: Right, at, at risk.  So, he said, "We'll take a chance."  And that's how I got into Bellevue School of Nursing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this--
Speaker 1: And there was eleven of us.
Speaker 2: This is 1947, I take it?
Speaker 1: This was 19--I was the class of 1949, '49 [1949], '49 [1949], '50 [1950], '51 [1951], '50 [1950], 1949.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause '47 [1947], '47 [1947] to '48 [1948], I was in Belle- I was in Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1947--
Speaker 2: Okay, so 1949.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1949, I went to--
Speaker 2: You were at Belle-
Speaker 1: Bellevue.  Bellevue.
Speaker 2: Bellevue.  So, this is Bellevue School of Nursing or?
Speaker 1: Bellevue School of Nursing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The elite.  Do you know Bellevue School of Nursing is like going to Harvard?  You didn't know that?  Oh, yes.  The--every, every hospital, every doctor wants to work with a Bellevue nurse.  They trained you like there was no tomorrow.  I walk--you walk into a room, you could tell whether a person have a colostomy or whatever just by the odor.  I mean, they trained you.  They really--clinical, we got a lot of clinical.
Speaker 2: Now that was the hospital, the New York [New York] hospital that was always in the national news if it was--
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: If there was a movie, people always went to Bellevue.
Speaker 1: Because of psychiatric.  We also have a psychiatric pavilion.  But, when you say Bellevue, all people think about is the psychiatric.  They don't know of the big medical.  Bellevue was the first of everything.  Bellevue was the first--.  Not only that, the mayors, when they got sick, where did they go?  They went to Bellevue.  They did not go to New York Hospital [NewYork-Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York] or the whatever, Presby- they went to Bellevue.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it's one of the best--
Speaker 1: It was--right.
Speaker 2: --best in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, in New York.
Speaker 1: That was--at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 531502
Speaker 1: So you were admitted to the school in '49 [1949], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was--right and I graduated in 1952.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was the hardest part of nursing school for you?
Speaker 2: Nothing was hard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what my average was which I'm gonna show you when I took my exam?  Ninety-two point something.  That's when you take all your tests and average them all out.  Nothing was hard.
Speaker 1: So they didn't, they didn't grade you on the C system, I guess.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were, were you the first African American student at Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, no, there was eleven, eleven of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eleven of us in my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long had it been since they, I mean, started letting black people go there?
Speaker 2: The ones that they had before were light, you know.  But we were obvious, and then after we made such a whatever, we set the road.  We--the--for--if you saw the class of '69 [1969], you say, woo, things have changed.  And it closed down in 1969, the three year program.
Speaker 1: But there was no tough time for you in--that you--where you can say, well maybe I don't wanna be a nurse or is this--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  The first time, the first time.  There was this woman.  She was mugged and I had to t- and her face--I've never seen anyone with face so mutilated and puffed up and blood and whatever and dirt.  And she was my patient to take, my first patient, first.  And we put four hours on the ward.  This was my first patient, first.  And I looked at this lady, I felt so bad for her, oh, and I had to touch her, oh, no way.  I did not want--.  I went in the utility room and I started to cry.  I says, "I can't do this.  I cannot do this."  And my classmate says, "Oh, yes you can, yes you can, yes you can."  So, I got the basin, took my time.  I spent four hours on her face alone.  That's how messed up she was.  Delicately I washed her face until she got all the blood out of her nose and whatever and so forth.  And she finally said, "Thank you very much."  I will never forget that.  That was my first patien- that was the time when I did not--I--that was the one and only time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was my first patient.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Story_ID: 531503
Speaker 1: I mean before you decide to go to nursing school [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York], did you think that you could, you know, deal with the blood and the trauma (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never thought about that.
Speaker 1: You never thought about that?
Speaker 2: Never thought about that.  Never thought about--that never even occurred to me, never even occurred to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Really.  It never--I just never thought about it.
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people are afraid of it or it--
Speaker 2: No.  It's, it's--
Speaker 1: --makes them squeamish or sick.
Speaker 2: No, I just--it never occurred to me.  And the thing about it is, just imagine if you've never seen death to see somebody die.  And one patient, I remember, I was, I was no longer a student, I was already a nurse, and I was off for the weekend.  I was the head nurse at Knickerbocker Hospital [New York, New York], and I came on duty, and I was making rounds, and I went over to talk to this Italian man and I says, "Oh, how you doing?"  I says, "What are you gonna have for breakfast?"  And he says, "Oh, I can't make up my mind.  I don't know."  And by the time I turned to the next patient to s- to talk to the next patient, in the split of a couple of seconds (snaps fingers) he was out of here, that's how--that's death.  And I could not understand death, not until my brother-in-law died and we were in Virginia.
Speaker 1: And about what, what time is this?  What year is this?
Speaker 2: My br- my brother-in-law died, was in the '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s]?  Yeah, in the '60s [1960s] or--yeah, in the '60s [1960s] or sixty- seventy- seven- '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s], early s- late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s].  My brother-in-law died and his nephew, my, my--his nephew asked the minister, "Every time I would visit uncle, he always talked to me and asked me about dead people, people who were long gone."  So the minister says, "He was traveling, and he saw more on the other side than he saw on this side."  And I said, "That makes sense."  'Cause the day you are born you are traveling.  And as you're young, you're on this side.  And as you get closer to the door you get closer to see what's on the other side, and that's where I understood death.  So it doesn't matter your age.  It has nothing to do with your age.  It has to do with your travel, your traveling time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm trying to grasp this now.  I'm not--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it really--
Speaker 2: Like you're traveling.
Speaker 1: I mean, physically traveling from place to place?
Speaker 2: And you have the vision.  As you get closer to the other side, you see vision that I don't see because I'm not close up.  So the closer that you are to 5th Avenue, you can see down 5th Avenue.  If I'm on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], I can't see 5th Avenue.  I have to get closer to 5th Avenue.  So the closer to 5th Avenue--so, I'm close to 5th Avenue and I'm telling you what I see on 5th Avenue.  I can't tell you what I see back there on Lenox 'cause I'm closer to 5th and that's how I understood death.  That's how he explained it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And to me, it made sense.  To me, it made sense.
Story_ID: 531504
Speaker 1: Now, in '52 [1952], did you work for Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York] after you graduated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, after I graduated I worked six months.  I worked in the--I worked medicine 'cause I, I liked medicine.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did--
Speaker 2: I worked nights on medicine and I had--there were thirteen floors and I had six floors to cover.  That meant I had to give all the medications and attend to all the emergencies on six floors, forty plus patients on every floor.
Speaker 1: Now, it sounds like the--Bellevue was understaffed in terms of nurses.
Speaker 2: All hospitals are always understaffed.  But, you see, we were able to--we were, we were used to it.  As we said, you look at someone, I could tell whether you need help before you realize that you need help.  That was how we were trained.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--oh, before I get too far away from Bellevue medical--the school, the nursing school [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York], would--was there a special person there that, that, that helped you or, or a teacher that stands out?
Speaker 2: No, nobody helped you.  You helped yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You learned to stand on your own two feet.
Speaker 1: Were there other students that you were really close to that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I have--not only that, my class- classmate just sent me, says don't forget, it's our fifty-fifth anniversary and she lives up in--.  She's Ronnie Rebuffo [ph.], her last name is (unclear).  Yeah, my neighbor, yeah, they were--that, yeah, that we kind of hung out, but not even--after, after I graduated, we--I didn't--I went on--we all went--because most of us were not from New York.  We're from all over United States, Ohio, Utah, all over.  So they go back home.  Some decided to stay here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well--so you, you said you were at Bellevue for six months and then--
Speaker 2: No, at Bellevue for--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --for three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, three years.
Speaker 2: Three--it's a diploma program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, so this is after 1952, after graduation or?
Speaker 2: After graduation I stayed at Bellevue six months.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I meant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I--
Speaker 2: After Belle-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: After grad- I stayed six months to get my license 'cause you have to sit for your boards.  And once you get your license then you can do what you wanna do and go where you wanna go.
Story_ID: 531505
Speaker 1: So where did you decide to go after six months [at Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, after six months--I graduated in September.  I was--I me- I start working and then (laughter) within that six months, I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: March fifty- March nineteen fi- March 1953, I was married.
Speaker 1: Now, how, how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: Through his, his father and his uncle.  His uncle was a doctor.  And his uncle wanted to set up a hospital in California.  And who did you think he wanted to be director?  A Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York] nurse.  All right.  So he also had a nephew, which was my husband, was a carpenter.  He could do the maintenance.  See, he had it all planned.  So, he--I happened to walked in--'cause my father [Philip Douglas] knew them.  This father's f- my father's friends from Guyana, and my father was entertaining them and I happened to walk in from as a, I was a senior student, whatever, coming from--and I saw, saw them, and he saw me and he saw my uniform, and that was it.  So he set the whole--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you, you--
Speaker 2: I met my husband in December '52 [1952], and I was married March '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't even know how to spell his first name.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What is his first name?
Speaker 2: Ancel.
Speaker 1: Ancel?
Speaker 2: A-N-C-E-L.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) A-C--okay.  All right.  Ancel--?  What's his--
Speaker 2: Bowlin [Ancel Bowlin, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Bowlin, okay.
Story_ID: 531506
Speaker 1: So you get married [to Ancel Bowlin, Sr.], and, and did you start a new job after--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Knickerbocker Hospital [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I was working nights and I went to--.  And Knickerbocker Hospital even though it was in Harlem [New York, New York], it didn't have black people.  Even the porter wasn't black.
Speaker 1: Is Knickerbocker in the Bronx [New York] or?
Speaker 2: No, Knickerbocker was in Manhattan [New York], was in Harlem (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Manhattan, okay.
Speaker 2: It's no longer--it's no longer around.  It was across the street from the convent, convent, oh--there was a convent, a Catholic convent up there on Convent Avenue around there, Knickerbocker Hospital, 130-something street.  I worked there as head nurse.  Oh, god.  I was--at first, I worked--I got the job to work in the operating room, and I set up for surgery, and the doctor walked in and he saw me, he said, "Get her out of here."  He never worked with a black nurse.
Speaker 1: He just said, "Get her out of here."
Speaker 2: "Get her out of here."
Speaker 1: So how was that resolved?
Speaker 2: It wasn't resolved.  "Get her out of here."  I had to get out.  He, he wasn't gonna scrub with--he, he wasn't gonna touch instrument that I touch.  There was no way.  So, what I did, I, I, I took--in, in surgery, I took a head nurse position in the hospital, and I stayed there for about a year, and then I went into public health.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--you were at Knickerbocker about a year?
Speaker 2: About a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, I went into the health department [New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene] as a public health nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is working for the City of New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: City of New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now we're at, what (background noise) nineteen fifty--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you see this was a surprise to me because I had no problems in Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York].  Many of the doctors used to request working with me because I was good--I'll, I'll be honest with you, I was good at do- at what I was doing.  And if I took--if I took care of you as a patient, let me tell you, I'm gonna take care of you.  And if--I remember I was taking care of a patient one night, and the intern, I called the intern, I couldn't get him, and I couldn't get anybody.  That patient needed a doctor.  You know what I did?  I called administration.  You know I got a doctor for that patient.  So that's, that's the way--that's the way I am.
Story_ID: 531507
Speaker 1: Now, when you started as a public health nurse--
Speaker 2: You needed a public health degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You needed a degree in public health nursing.  I did not have a degree in public health nursing.  I was an RN [registered nurse] and I had a degree in--my degree is Bachelor of Science in home economics, nutrition.  So, I took the exam, passed the exam, flying colors, and they reject it because I did not have a public health degree.  So I wrote to them and says, "What do you need to have a public health degree?"  I says, "You have my transcript, what else do you--do I need?"  I needed twelve more credits, ones in public--survey of public health and public health nursing, twelve credits.  I took the twelve credits and I got the job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--was this '55 [1955] or--
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: --fifty-four [1954], '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: This was probably '55 [1955], yeah '55 [1955].  I didn't put the dates because I couldn't remem- I, I was supposed to look up the dates.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's, it's gotta be in there somewhere, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in the fifty--
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: It was in the '50s [1950s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I did public health nurse, I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is where you would--you would go out into the community and--
Speaker 2: You go out.  And, you see, when you work for the health department [New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene], it's completely different from visiting nursing.  Visiting nursing, you go in and you do nursing.  Public health nursing from the department of health, you go in and you make your own assessment of the family.  You find out what the family's needs, health, social, and whatever, and you make a--.  Sometimes you realize family have needs that they didn't even realize that they have and you're on your own.  And, and it was very, very stimulating.  And they used to send--give me people that I would train along with--not any more money, but it was--it--I enjoyed it, I really did.  I enjoyed it, enjoyed it very much.  And I used to volunteer for the Red Cross [American Red Cross] to teach neonatal care, newborn, newborn care to first time parents.  And they had a luncheon for the volunteer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, public health nurse was very interesting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Public health nurse is very interesting.  I like it very much.  I like meeting the people.  You met all kinds of people.
Speaker 1: So, you would have a route or something, a sector or, or assignments based on--
Speaker 2: Yes, you have, you have, you have a, a cer-
Speaker 1: Based on people that were on--
Speaker 2: Right, you have--
Speaker 1: --public assistance or something or, or?
Speaker 2: No, no, no had nothing to do with pu-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Health, health, health.
Speaker 1: Just, just health.  So--
Speaker 2: Health, health.  Has nothing to do--
Speaker 1: So any and everybody.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause some of the people I went in, they wanted to--they thought I was the maid.  And I'll never forget, one lady didn't wanna let (background noise)--she didn't want to let me in, and I said I'm from the health department, and she says, "Well, you can tell me--."  I says, "You want me to tell you out here in the, out in the hallway your business?"  And so, therefore, she (laughter), she, she, she let me in.
Story_ID: 531508
Speaker 1: So, public health, you did all categories.  You did doctors, you did nurses, you did politicians, you did ev- they had health.  And you'd be surprised, many of the Europeans that came into, in the '50s [1950s] had a spot on their lungs.  And you know what the spot on their lungs meant?  That they had TB [tuberculosis].  They were exposed to TB.  And once you've been exposed to TB and had TB that spot remains for your life.
Speaker 2: You're marked forever.
Speaker 1: Right.  You see.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause it eats out part of your lung, doesn't it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And therefore if your resistance gets low the TB comes back.  I think just recently on St. Barnabas Hospital [Bronx, New York] there was, they were asking people from 2004 or whatever, 2006, if they came in there and worked in certain areas because somebody there was working had TB, you see.
Speaker 2: Now, that was really--now, TB was--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was very, very high.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very high.
Speaker 2: They called it consumption--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --back in those days.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Right, yeah.  It was even--and it was very high.  And we--and I--
Speaker 2: Was it--was it eradicated in the--?  Start- I think they came up with the drugs--
Speaker 1: Oh, now, yeah, they have a--
Speaker 2: --in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, a medication now.
Speaker 2: In the late '40s [1940s], right?
Speaker 1: And not only that, they do the tuber- tuberculin test.  They do it on, on certain jobs that you have to go on, you have to--.  And if you're in the city like New York [New York] or whatever you're gonna be positive after a certain time because you've been exposed to it, unbeknowing to you exposed to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now that's comforting thought (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 531509
Speaker 1: You went into the homes of--did you go all over the city or did they send you to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went in homes [for the New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene].  I'd go into homes where you couldn't even sit down.  Are you kidding?  Go into homes, roaches all over the floor and you says, oh my god, you didn't want one to drop on you.  Oh, yes.  Oh, yes, went into all--homes where the, the--all--everything was filthy and--
Speaker 1: Was it different neighborhoods or just the same--
Speaker 2: Different neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had certain areas but sometimes you go into different neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Did you have like one specific area of the city that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I had basically a area.  And you see not only did I go into the homes, I also went into the school as a school nurse, so I did school nursing and I did--.  So therefore I got to know the children.  And if the children had health problems, then I would go into the homes.
Speaker 1: So, so what roughly was the area that you covered (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I covered from 110th Street to 125th Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and 8th [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you were very familiar with the neighborhood already (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very familiar with the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 531510
Speaker 1: Public health was the best thing that I enjoyed because you went into the home.  As a public health nurse, you make your own--health department [New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene] nurse, you made your own assessment, the patient's need, healthcare, social care, if they needed to be referred for--if they had problem with welfare, I was able to connect them.  I knew about the social service department [New York City Department of Social Services].  I knew about all--I had first names and whatever, every department within the city so I could touch base with that and make referrals.  Even if you needed an apartment in the housing project, I knew how to touch base.  And it was, it was a fantastic job.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You said you wore your blue uniform?
Speaker 1: Blue uniform, blue bag, black shoes, and whatever, and it was typical.  You saw it, you knew, you knew that was a public health nurse coming through the block.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, and before I got into my house, I would strip, didn't bring all that germs into my house, strip in the front door and roll it up, oh, yes, wash it and (unclear), yeah.
Story_ID: 531511
Speaker 1: You were talking earlier about consumption and TB [tuberculosis].  What other diseases were--
Speaker 2: Typhoid.
Speaker 1: Typhoid?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I think until finally we only had one typhoid in New York City [New York, New York].  New York City f- and we did--venereal disease, syphilis.  Yes, syphilis.  Every, every person that gave birth in New York City, they took the blood and--the mother.  And if it came for--was positive for four plus; that meant that it was syphilis.  And one sad case, I'll never forget, this lady we had to tell her that she needed, you know, the antibiotics and whatever because syphilis.  And she said--and she cried.  She says, "The only person that I ever had any relationship was my husband," but her husband was a taxi driver.  We knew taxi drivers, t- truck drivers and all those guys, those were the guys we had to worry about for syphilis.
Speaker 1: They're out there on the street a lot.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what role I guess does poverty play in, in--
Speaker 2: Poverty--
Speaker 1: --health, since you went to a lot of different kind of places.
Speaker 2: One of the worse poverty thing that I still remember in my mind was when I went--.  This little boy, he was having diarrhea and diarrhea.  We couldn't understand what was wrong with him.  And I went into his home.  His mother was a single parent, and she gave her welfare money to her boyfriend.  And she had two children, and they were there and they found a raw potato, and they fought over that raw potato like a dog.  I will never forget that.  Her cabinets--she had nothing, nothing.  No food, no nothing, nothing, nothing in the refrigerator, nothing.
Speaker 1: Gee.  What--now, so the--you know, poor people have to deal with no food, I guess, or, or, in those days or, or lack of--
Speaker 2: No, food wasn't--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a problem.  They would have food.
Speaker 1: But the--just the idea of--
Speaker 2: But this was--this struck me.
Speaker 1: --the exploitation of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--right.
Speaker 1: --men and women, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because--this is it.  She, she didn't send to--the, the little money that she got, she didn't send [sic.] it on herself and her family, she wanted to buy love, so she gave it to the boyfriend.
Story_ID: 531512
Speaker 1: Were there any disease problems that were particular to well-to-do people?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have to tell you about the well-to-do.  We were--with Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York] being, being the psychiatric, and that's public, so therefore they wanted to expose us to the private quote unquote high- higher up psychiatric pavilion.  I think it's New York Hospital [NewYork-Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York], I can't remember.  But, anyway, we went to the private, I went to the private where the nurse, you don't read the patient's chart because these are quote CEOs and--.  They go to work, they--many of them at that time would go to work during the day but they come--came back to the hospital for psychiatric care, and they were well-to-do.  The dishes were out of s- oh, the, the beautiful china and whatever.  And as I said, we couldn't, we couldn't know the person's name, nor could we read the charts, but this was how they were getting psychiatric care as opposed to the public Bellevue psychiatric care.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that many CEOs that people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thought were crazy, actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had some kind of mental problem.
Speaker 2: Right, had mental conditions and would--being medicated, but they would go back--they would still go to work, but they would come back and stay in the institution, but it was like staying in a hotel.
Speaker 1: Now what access did poor people have to psychiatric care?
Speaker 2: You go to Bellevue.
Speaker 1: And how were the poor treated?
Speaker 2: And don't forget we had psychiatric institutions.  We just recently got rid of all our psychiatric institutions.  We have no psychiatric institutions.  We used to have several psychiatric institutions up here in the Bronx [New York], not only for the children, but for the adults.  We have none.  That's why you see them out on the street.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's something that occurred fairly recently in the major cities--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in the--
Speaker 2: We have no psych-
Speaker 1: --early '90s [1990s].  That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have no pyschia- they got rid of all of that.
Speaker 1: Now, now there's I know David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] when he was secretary of health for the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration one of the, the themes of his speeches was always health, mental health.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how important it was--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --for people to--for everyone--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, and we say, some people act crazy, or whatever, but, but he said it was important for everyone to--
Speaker 2: It was--it's a--
Speaker 1: --monitor their mental health.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  But we don't have it anymore.  So you see people out here on the street and whatever, in the shelters, and, and it- it's sad.  It is sad.  It is very sad.  We don't have it.
Speaker 1: And there's nothing--
Speaker 2: And you--why do you, why do you have such problems in school?  You have children who have mental problems.  Where they gonna go?  The parents, what can they do?  They don't have the money.
Story_ID: 531513
Speaker 1: One of the respiratory problems prominent in the black community is asthma and--
Speaker 2: Now because of the polluted areas, the sewage, and the, the whatever in the--especially in the Harlem area [New York, New York].  They build this sewer or--so they have very--.  And the Bronx [New York], too, a lot of the Hispanic area is very high in asthma.  But, you see, by that time, I was out of nursing, out of it.  I haven't done nursing since ni- since 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So for thirty-five years I've been out of nursing.
Speaker 1: Well, what's your assessment of the time that you spent?  You know, do you--what--do you, do you have an assessment of the program that you served under or, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I loved--I enjoy nursing very much so, and even though I haven't worked, I work at nursing every day 'cause I help, I see things, I, I advise, I, I s- I try to direct people.  I don't tell--I don't diagnose because I know that's not my job, but I do make suggestions that I think you should do so, so, so, you should see your doctor, these are the things you should ask your doctor, so, so, so, so.  And I do say that, people that I know, and even people that I don't know.  If I see you having a twitch like on your mouth, I say you need to check it out 'cause you may be getting a ministroke.
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you were a public health nurse [with the New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene], were--was there--had they made a connection between diet and health in terms of salt, too much salt and too much--
Speaker 2: No.  At that time, we didn't go in--we--as a pu- as a public health nurse, this is opposed to medical.  See, public is public.  Your so--your--that's completely different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: See, all right.  See, so medical is where your diet your medicine, your salt.  That's medical.  That's in the hospital setting.  When you go in public health, if the, if the patient is on a particular diet, you just more or less advise them to follow--but, you don't--that's not your p- that's their social surroundings, how they live--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --what they need to do, how are the living in the condition that they're living?
Speaker 1: Okay, so communicable disease and--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  And their environment.
Speaker 1: --environmental conditions.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's public health.  That is public health.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That is public health.
Speaker 1: So you wanna make sure that the plumbing is working right--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and the, the--
Speaker 2: If--right.
Speaker 1: --there's enough--
Speaker 2: And, therefore you can make referral--
Speaker 1: --ventilation or--
Speaker 2: Make referral, now teach them how to wash their hand, teach them how to take care, wash the baby, and so forth and so on; environmental situation.  That's basically public health, as opposed to medical where you--medication and so forth and so on, even though you have that background and you can make suggestions to them or you write it up in your report and so forth 'cause you do write a report.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--do people--.  There's a high infant mortality rate in the black community, and is, is that a public health concern?  The, the--
Speaker 2: That is a public health concern, and that was always a public health concern.  When I started off in nursing, diabetes wasn't, wasn't picked up in the black person.  It was a Jewish thing.  Diabetes was a Jewish thing because of their diet.  And since they were able to get medical care, and they were able to change their, the food that they ate, change their ways or whatever, you don't hear that as much as now as you hear in the black because look at the food that we're eating.  Look at the junk food that we're eating.  Look at our children.  Look how fat, look how, whatever.  You can imagine a child in daycare having high blood pressure?  That was unheard of.  High blood pressure and diabetes?  And not, not a child that's born with diabetes, not diabetes 1 [type 1 diabetes].  We're talking about diabetes 2 [type 2 diabetes].  Diabetes 2 is adult diabetes, and you get that in a child because of our diet.
Story_ID: 531514
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on those years as a public health nurse [with the New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene] and just, you know, based on observations today, do you think that people were generally healthier then or now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were healthier.  Well, how can I say?  It was a different kind of health, different kinds of disease.  Like, you see more diabetes, more obesity now as opposed to then.  Then, you saw pneumonia, you know, and you saw TB [tuberculosis] because of the sanitary condition.  That's where public health came in.  You said, wash your hand.  Don't you know this now?  Wash your hand and so forth where you didn't--nobody talked about washing their hand.  Little children when we used to examine them, they were nasty and dirty, never took a bath.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--now, that whole situation has changed a great deal--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --just in the last--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --fifty years.
Speaker 2: That has changed.
Speaker 1: I remember as a child a Saturday night bath was--
Speaker 2: Was a big thing.
Speaker 1: --popular, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or maybe two baths a week in a middle-class home.
Speaker 2: And you were--yeah, two baths, you were, you were lucky because, as I said, they didn't take a bath.
Speaker 1: Some people even thought a bath was unhealthy.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So, things that--the, the, the, the--that environmental and the social way of taking care of your body has changed quite a bit as opposed to--.  So therefore, we, we, we have improved on certain things and then we take on other things.  Look at the food that we eat and look at these fast foods.  Not only that, people don't cook anymore.  The more salt, the better it tastes.
Story_ID: 531515
Speaker 1: Now what did you do after 1971?  You went from public health nursing [with the New York City Department of Health; New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene] to--
Speaker 2: I went to--oh, I said, I said the--I, I was volunteering the Red Cross [American Red Cross] and they had a luncheon for the volunteers.  They had it up in Hasting on the Hudson [sic. Hastings-on-Hudson, New York] or somewhere there.  And I'll never forget, they had, we had a, a limousine chauffeur that took us up to this luncheon, my friend and I.  And, oh, it was, oh, the, the, the rug was about like two inches thick.  It was--oh, it was fabulous.  It was fabulous.  And while I was there, this lady, she was director of Lincoln Hospital [Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, Bronx, New York], Ms. Stinkle [ph.]?  I can't remember her name.  She was director of Lincoln Hospital, black nurse, and she says to us, my friend and I, she said that "Mrs. Cooper--Ms. Cooper [Marion Cooper], Central School for Practical Nurses [Central School for Practical Nursing, New York, New York] is looking for nurses, two nurses."  And she says, "Why don't you check it out?"  And my friend, that was her teacher when she was--when--as--teaching at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] because I, I, I was--as I said, I'm Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York] and she was Harlem Hospital.  So, we went for the interview and both of us got a job, got a job as supervisor of, of nurses, teaching, and that was Central, and that was a federally funded program.  And we set up the program for the New York State Practical Nursing Program because we had to spend the whole summer how to set up the various curriculum, program, and everything, and we did that through Central School for Practical Nurses.  And that, I enjoyed very, very, very much.  I guess I just enjoy nursing.  I--maybe I enjoyed everything I did.  I enjoyed it very much, very leisurely, very nice, the people, the people that we worked with, we were very nice, we got along, we had no problems.  And our students, we--our students ranged, ranged from the age of eighteen out of high school to sixty-some odd years old.  And some of them were working in the public hospital, City Hospital [New York Hospital; NewYork-Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York] as nurse's aide, and this gave them an option as an option up.  That's when licensed practical nursing came into being.  And so therefore we taught--
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?
Speaker 2: That was in 19--oh, god.  It was in the '60s [1960s], sixty- it must've been sixty- ooh, when did I work for Central School?  That was maybe '65 [1965], '66 [1966], '67 [1967], around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I thought you were a public health nurse until '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Maybe--no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No?  No?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Until--
Speaker 2: By '71 [1971], I was in the health--I was in--I was in the board of ed [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, by--
Speaker 2: Public health was in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And you, you--
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--
Speaker 2: Up to '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: --did you--okay.
Speaker 2: Up to about '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Up to '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: And then from '58 [1958] on, let's say '58 [1958], '59 [1959] on, I went to--
Speaker 1: You went--
Speaker 2: --Central School--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Central School for Practical--
Speaker 2: --for Practical Nursing.
Speaker 1: So, in the '60s [1960s], the LPN [licensed practical nurse] designation was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, LPN, that's what I was--
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: I was teaching--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was teaching LPN.
Speaker 1: And that came into being at the end of the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And up to sixty- yeah, because then, the federal, federal grant was--sh- it was up to her whether she wanted to renew it or not, and she said she didn't want to ren- Mrs. Cooper--Ms. Cooper, she didn't want to renew it because she said that it's--you have to, you ha- when you work--when you do things with the federal government, you have to, you have to make a notation of everything.  You have to dot your I's and cross your Ts, and she was tired of it.
Story_ID: 531516
Speaker 1: And so therefore I said to my colleagues, I said, "This is a good time to go into the board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education]."  Oh, they didn't wanna go in the board of education.  So I went down and I tried to find out how I can get into the board of education.  Well, they gave the nursing exam only sporadically.  But the home economics exam--see I had a home economics license--the home economics exam was like every year.  And so I took a home economics exam, passed it, and became a home economics teacher.  And so when the time was ready for the nursing license, I took the nursing license--nursing exam.
Speaker 2: So, when did you take the nursing exam?
Speaker 1: The nursing exam, I'd have to look at my papers.  I'll show it to you, when I took the nursing exam.  I have, I have it.  It's, it's--you'll see it.  You'll get the dates.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is in the '70s [1970s], though, right?
Speaker 1: This is in the--
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s], '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Or, or--
Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], I went into the board of ed because I was pregnant with my, my, my chi- my child, my first child [Ancel Bowlin, Jr.] and he was born in 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, by '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '69 [1969], I was in the board of education--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as a home economic teacher.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But you switched, when the nursing program--when they, when they wanted someone to teach that, then you were ready.  You were already in the system.
Speaker 1: I had, I had my license already.
Speaker 2: Had your license already, okay, teaching certificate, okay.
Speaker 1: See, see I, see, you have to be ahead of the game, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, so when did you start teaching--
Speaker 1: So I taught--
Speaker 2: --nursing?
Speaker 1: I taught, I taught home ec in junior high school over in South Bronx [Bronx, New York].  That was--they, they give you the job before you even get your license like as a, a--on a per diem basis or whatever, permanent per diem, and when my license came through, then I real- my baby was born, and then he had allergies or whatever, and this was like 178th Street [New York, New York], and I lived up here.  And if anything happened to him, my first child--after fifteen years of marriage by the way, that was my first child--I wanted to be close to home.  So, I went right over here on Baychester [Avenue], P.S. 142 [J.H.S. 142, John Philip Sousa Junior High School, Bronx, New York] to--I called the school first to find out if they had any position, and the, the secretary said they need a home ec teacher.  That just fell right in.  So, I called to make an appointment to see the principal.  And when I went to see the principal, as I walked in, he says, "You're hired."  I says, "How could you hire me?  You didn't even interview me?"  He says, "I spoke to the school secretary in the school that you were in, and you got the job."
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, so you were there first and then, then you went into teaching nursing?
Speaker 1: No, that was teaching home ec.
Speaker 2: That was teaching--
Speaker 1: That was teaching home ec.
Speaker 2: --home ec, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, teaching home ec.  First, I was teaching Central [Central School for Practical Nursing, New York, New York]--I was teaching licensed practical--I was teaching nursing.  And then I took the boar- I went into the board of education and I retired from the board of education.
Speaker 2: As a home economics--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I retired as a biomedical teacher.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was teaching bi- I have a license in biologic- biological science.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, so the students that were taking biomedical studies with you were--they had plans to become a nurse or, or a doctor or something?
Speaker 1: No, that was an exposure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Exposure to--you will see what some of them said.  That was an exposure.  I did nursing and I taught biology.  Two--in high school, you teach--there were two, two separate courses.  I did biology and I also taught nursing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And in junior high school, I taught biology, chemistry, and physics and home ec.
Speaker 2: Did you like teaching?
Speaker 1: Love it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The kids couldn't even wiggle.  Oh, I had--they gave me the worst--you're, you're gonna see my kids, some of my kids.  They gave me the--I--you know how--I don't know if they did this in, in, in your school, but they used to grade from the very best kids as a class, let's say 7-1 to 7-10 or whatever, I would get 7-10.
Speaker 2: Oh, so you got the so-called worst te- sch- students.
Speaker 1: (Nods heads) And they--and I got the worst kids and they were the best kids.
Story_ID: 531517
Speaker 1: Are there some highlights in your teaching career you wanna tell us about that--any stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, one highlights is that in the '70s [1970s] when New York City [New York, New York] had a budget problem, this was the first time I think civil service teachers we were laid off.  And I was laid off even though I had seniority to somebody.  Anyhow, I won't go into that.  I was--.  So, while I was laid off, I had an opportunity to go to Senegal.  And I took my kids [Ancel Bowlin, Jr. and David Bowlin] out of school and I went to Senegal.  We stayed there for two weeks.  We toured Senegal, Gambia, and whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: That was in the '70s [1970s], '74 [1974], '75 [1975], when, when, when the, when the city went bankrupt or whatever and the teachers were laid off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was laid off and people wanted to know, "How could you be laid off and you going on a trip?"  I said, "This is my only opportunity that I would have to go."  I could always come back and get a job.  If I didn't get a job as a teacher, I can get a job as a nurse.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, Senegal, how, how did you like Senegal and what was the--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was nice.
Speaker 1: How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: It affect me--I saw Goree--
Speaker 1: That's Goree Island [Dakar, Senegal].
Speaker 2: --where they--yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not Goree Island today.  Goree Island way back in the '70s [1970s] is different to Goree Island today.  They update it and make it look more--whatever.  But you really saw how--I mean, packed down in the bottom, we had this pack and it was right by the, the water where they can just push them right into, into the boat.  It was, it was, it was horrendous.  Learned a lot, learned that they make batik, which is their fabric, and I--when I see batik, I have a batik thing that was handmade and whatever.  It was, it was nice.  It was, it was--when I say nice, my kids, my, my oldest one who is now thirty-five, he was three years old and he had, had to have smallpox, the vaccination, had to have yellow fever thing, had to have cholera, all that they had--we had to have before we went over there.  We stayed in what is ca- at that time was called the European hotel, so that meant--right.  I don't know what they call it today, but that meant, you know, the first class, only Europeans stayed there.  And we had grand tours and--which was very--.  And we saw--I don't know if I have the picture here, ant nests as tall as that lamp.  And they had the--I think it was taller, maybe that one because they climbed it and they took my kids up, they lift them up and they climbed it and took them up and I took a picture.  And I, I don't know--I don't have it here, I may have it for (unclear)--and they took a picture, and they were so glad to see American children.  Because not only that, when I travel with my children, nobody else had their children with them.  And people want to know, "How could you travel with your children?"  But I did.  And when I travel with my children, especially to Senegal and all the other places, I carried my pots, my pan, my hot plate, my burner.  I carry straws, wipes.  We did not drink out of any cups.  We drank out of straws, out of w- bottled water.  The only bot--they didn't have all this bottled water that they have now.  The bottled water was what?  The French water?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You bought--we bought cases of that, put the straw--
Speaker 1: Evian.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, and we put the straw in it and that's--.  And every time my kids get in and off of anything, I wipe their hands with the, the, the, the, the, the wipes, like the Clorox wipe, like what we do in the hospital, and that's how I travel.  I had more of that.  And medicine, one lady she stumped her toe, she says, "You have children, so I know you must have medicine."  I had more med- clothes, I didn't worry about.  I had my slacks and tops, didn't worry about that.  But I--it was, it was at the moment to, for what they see.  And I carry--and this--I would cook the breakfast, carry my little packages of oatmeal cereal, boil the water, pour the water in, oh, yes.  Never--and we learned never to eat fruits.  Don't eat the vegetables.  Only eat grilled food.  You know why?  Because of the fertilizer that they use.  Your body may not be accustomed to that kind of things and the way, how they handle things.
Story_ID: 531518
Speaker 1: Because you're a professional health nurse, did you, did you observe the public health practices over there?  I mean, what, what's your assessment of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I observe the public health practices right here, right here.  If anybody had them long, nasty fingernails, they're not serving me.  That is a fact.  I don't even--don't worry about over there, I did it there and I still do it up until today.  I'm sorry, you're not gonna serve me.
Speaker 1: Well, but, but how was Senegal in terms of public health conditions?  Was it, was it--
Speaker 2: They slept on the ground.  I don't know if they do now, but they slept on the ground.  And I'm sure maybe a lot of people here, a lot of people here slept on the floor.  So if you sleep on solid ground or solid floor, what difference does it really make?  Isn't it the same thing?  All right.  And from, from what I saw, they was just people living according to their environment.  And don't forget, I'm from New York [New York] and I (unclear) (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: When you saw how they, they, they lived, they, they, they, they survived, but they didn't live as long as we live now.  Don't forget, we didn't live as long.
Speaker 1: So, so what do you think?  It's major diseases take, take--I mean, it's, it's--what is it?
Speaker 2: What happened is sanitation, sanitation.  I think that's one of the reasons we are living.  Don't forget, that's why you wash--don't--what do they tell you, don't they tell you wash your hands?  Don't you hear that all the time on TV?  Wash your hands.  Wash your hands.  And now, true, they, they all pushing--everybody's pushing medication but, true, isn't it wash your hands?  Wash your hands.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 531519
Speaker 1: Have you been back to Africa again since that first time?
Speaker 2: No.  I haven't been back to Africa.  I traveled to Hong Kong, got this.  That was in--traveled around.  I haven't been back, and I'm done with my traveling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you say your favorite place was St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I love St. Croix.
Speaker 1: All right.  Why do you love St. Croix so much?
Speaker 2: I love the ocean.  I guess maybe because it reminds me of Jamaica in a way.  I love the ocean even though I can't swim, refuse to swim 'cause I--every time I get into the water I think about drowning.  I--but I love the ocean.  I love to hear the water.  I love to hear--love it (background noise).
Speaker 1: Now, have you been back to Jamaica since you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I was in Jamaica in Negril.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to Jamaica, went to Negril.  When I was a kid, Negril was a mud hole.  Now, it is high quote unquote fashionable.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, I've been to Negril.  I tried to go back to where I was raised, couldn't 'cause I couldn't stand the mosquitos, so I didn't get out.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did, did you notice them when you were a little girl (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, that's what I can't understand.  Maybe it's the timing, I don't know.  But I never, never had any mosquito, never, don't have, no.
Story_ID: 531520
Speaker 1: You have a master's in health education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Health education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got it from Lehman College.
Speaker 1: Lehman College here in--
Speaker 2: In, in the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: In the Bronx, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when it, when it first became Lehman College.  Before, it was annexed or Hunter College [New York, New York], and then in the '70s [1970s] it became Lehman College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you get your--
Speaker 2: My master's?
Speaker 1: --master's, yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: That was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And I got it because since I was teaching in the board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education], if you got--you needed to get your master's in order to get a salary change, or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was one of the requirements of the board of education to get a master's in order to maintain your teacher's job.
Story_ID: 531521
Speaker 1: You are a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Schomburg Center for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I got--
Speaker 1: --black research [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: --I got a thing there--I got a donation.  I just donate.
Speaker 1: And the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I donate.
Speaker 1: So, so you, you donate.
Speaker 2: I just donate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I donate.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: I used to, I used to be active up here in the NAACP, that was when I was younger, had time, and I taught in the daycare--not taught, volunteered in daycare at the--is it the NAACP or the--I don't even know what it was, but anyhow, it was a black organization, volunteered for the daycare center, and that's basically it.  Truman High School [Harry S. Truman High School] back here [Bronx, New York], I participated in the career plan--their first which they had this year, a couple of months ago, participated in the career.  And I know the principal personally, and I feel sorry for the boys.  The boys need guidance, they really do.  And I figure that when the summer comes, I'm gonna try to suggest to her if she could have a--put aside some part of session where they boys could have some kind of mentoring because they do--girls, girls are--they bounce back.  The boys need some kind of guidance I mean just 'cause all this pants down here and it's, it's not doing them any good.
Story_ID: 531522
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I just hope that we can rally around and get our guys going.  I don't worry too much about the girls 'cause I think if we--I, I--'cause I, I could see sometimes if a, if a girl have a certain--black girl have a certain qualification and a black boy have a certain qualification, they're gonna hire the black girl as opposed to the black boy.
Speaker 1: And why do you suppose that's true?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  And why I don't know too, I don't know why we have, what is it, more than 70 percent of the male that are in jail are blacks?  What is that, what is that saying?  I don't know.  And so I do look at that.  I don't know, maybe it's because I have sons as opposed to daughters, but I see girls--when you go to colleges, graduation or high school graduation, how many black boys do you see?  And that's what I look at.  And if anything that I wish to do before I exit out of here I think I would like to work with a group of people with black boys.
Story_ID: 531523
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, I mean, what--is there any major thing--would--that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No.  'Cause I just--you see how the ocean flows in whenever?  That's how I flow.  I didn't plan anything.  I didn't--I liked nursing, I just walked past the thing and I walked into--walked past the hospital [Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York], and went in and asked about nursing.  Teaching just happened.  I didn't plan it.  See, I'm not a person that sits down and plan I'm gonna do this and plan I'm gonna do that.  I didn't plan it.  It just happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you kind of had opportunities and took--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --advantage of those.
Speaker 2: And just like me having all these--I know that I needed, I needed to work.  I want to be independent.  I like being independent.  And to be independent you have to be prepared for anything that comes your way.  So therefore, I have my license in home ec [home economics], I have my license in health education, I have my license in biology and science, I have my license in--.  So there's--if one job is peters out, there'll be another job.  Peters out, there will be another job available and so there--I will always be able to keep my head above water.  I would always be able to be independent.  I don't have to ask anyone for anything, but a job.
Story_ID: 531524
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look at everything you've done to this point, is--what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'll be honest with you.  I don't know.  I know I like people, I love people.  And I like the old saying, there's good in the worst of us, right, and there's best in the best of us.  There's bad in the--you know, you see good people, people who are very good, but there's a little something there that's not so good.  And you see somebody really nasty, there's something there that's good in that person, so you look for that good point and deal with that, deal with the positive.  Forget about the negatives.  The negatives will always be there.  Like yesterday is gone; don't dwell on yesterday.  Look for the future.  That's what's more important.
Story_ID: 531525
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Now, now you're still married, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I'm married [to Ancel Bowlin, Sr.].  I have two sons.  They're very independent.  And that's my adopted son over there and my adopted daughter over there.  I adopt everybody.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: My son, I have a David [David Bowlin] and a Jr. [Ancel Bowlin, Jr.].  My oldest one is a Jr.  And my--
Speaker 1: And your daughter?
Speaker 2: No, I said my adopted daughter.  I--
Speaker 1: Adopted daughter?
Speaker 2: No--Laura [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Laura.  And my adopted son over there, Waymah [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I enjoyed every bit of--I had to wait fifteen years before my first child was born, all right, 'cause I, I'd been married fifty-four years, and my oldest is thirty-nine, right.  So it was fifteen years of waiting.  But it just happened.  And in the meantime that I waited, that's when I went on to school.  That's when I did what I did.  I just didn't sit down and cry in my beer.  I didn't say, oh, what am I gonna do?  No, I went on.
Story_ID: 531526
Speaker 1: Now your father [Philip Douglas] passed in '76 [1976], I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father passed in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is your [maternal] aunt [Adina Worghs] still, still with us?
Speaker 2: My aunt, she passed--.  Oh, not only that, diabetes runs in my family.  And I remember, too, where they loved to eat all the, the floury stuff and all the--they didn't cook out but they--all the starchy stuff and the sugary stuff, but diabetes runs--.  But my generation don't have any.
Speaker 1: Now, do you watch what you eat and--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --pay--
Speaker 2: Well, number one, I'm not a--I'm not a food--remember you asked me what's my favorite food?  I'm not a food person.  I can go, I can go--I've been on so many cruises, doesn't bother me at all.  All of the food means nothing to me.  Maybe a piece of chocolate does, but (laughter) outside of everything else, I couldn't care less.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you exercise a certain amount of moderation and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --that doesn't really--
Speaker 2: But I--but, that, that is--I think that is innate because as a child, I was never a food person, right.  You couldn't say, well, you're gonna dangle a particular food over--.  No, forget that.  You're wasting your time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't bite when (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't bite on that, no.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I didn't bite on that.  I didn't bite on that at all.
Story_ID: 531527
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you we think, you think we should before we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, one, one thing I just wanted to say, one of the reasons, too, I'm--like you said, my career in health, I put that to my grandfather or [paternal] great-grandfather because he was the medicine man in his village.  And all of our--all of his ancestors, all of his generation that followed, we're all basically in the health career one way or the other, and that is I guess by design.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did he pass down knowledge of--
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.
Speaker 1: --of--
Speaker 2: He just--this is just--we didn't know him.  I didn't know him.  Why did I say I wanted to be a nurse?  How did I--?  I didn't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if in your family there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --people understand what certain plants are for and certain things.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my father [Philip Douglas].  My father never went to a doctor.  Yeah, my aunt, Aunt Esther [ph.], she never went to a doctor because from her father and whatever, they knew--she came to my house, they can tell me what this plant is good for and that plant.  But do I remember?  No.
Story_ID: 531528
Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I don't know.  I don't know.  A caring person, loving person, not in the limelight.  I'm not a limelight person.  (Background noise) I, I work in the back door.  That's--
Speaker 1: A busy person (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ma'am, how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I'm a caring person, a loving person, and I will tell you that I wrote, like I'm thinking of my, my, my--how I want to be buried.  That's a big thing right now 'cause I even have a thing over there, how I want to be buried.  And I wrote a letter to my children [Ancel Bowlin, Jr. and David Bowlin] to let them know how much I love them; how much I'm grateful to God that he has given them to me and that I enjoyed every bit of their growing up, every bit of it.  That's my legacy to my children.  And there's legacy to every child.  When I see a child, I look at their movements, I look at--I love them.  I really look.  I look at the growth, the possibilities.  And I wish I was able to do more for the young people.  Don't worry about the elders.  They--we, we, we, we are--we are done.  The, the, the young ones coming up, they need us.  They really need us.  And they don't need our negativity.  They don't need us and say, "Oh, you know, you're the--."  No, no, no, no, no, no.  Find something that's--they do positive and tell them how good they are at that.  That's what they need.
Story_ID: 531529
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, tell us what we're looking at.
Speaker 2: You're looking at my ID when I worked at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] as supervisor of nurses, that's it.
Speaker 1: I was a freshman student at Bellevue School of Nursing [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York].  You could tell by my cap.
Speaker 2: I was a senior school--a senior student of nursing at Bellevue School of Nursing, and you could also tell by my Bellevue cap.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when--on one of my cruises of--we went on several cruises.  Love to cruise, but not cruising anymore.  And I don't know what ship I was on.  I usually go on Celebrity line [Celebrity Cruises, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Those--that's my class when I was teaching in the middle school and loved them dearly.  That's all I can say (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is the year there?
Speaker 2: They--the, the year is there, yeah, and they--the class is '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And, and where are you?
Speaker 2: That was at Junior High School 142 [J.H.S. 142, John Philip Sousa Junior High School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you're--
Speaker 2: The year is there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, where are you?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I'm the teacher.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, you, you--
Speaker 2: I know.  I'm the teacher.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right in the center, in the center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Center.
Speaker 2: Look at the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.  I couldn't see--I can't see that.
Speaker 2: Oh, you can't?  You need your glasses?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, probably.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You mean I look like the student?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father [Philip Douglas].  That was taken either '47 [1947] or '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Where, where was it taken?
Speaker 1: Brooklyn [New York], inside his home.
Speaker 2: Harriet Worghs Douglas.  I have no idea when it was taken, probably in the '20s [1920s].  That was my mom.
Speaker 1: The top picture on the--when I was a baby.  I don't know how old because you can see somebody in back of me was holding me up.  And the picture under that, I was in Jamaica with my brother who died of diphtheria, so I don't know how old I was there.  And then the next picture to that I was much older with my boots that I--high-top shoes and I was in Jamaica.  And the picture of that is when I did my Holy Communion at St. Thomas the Apostle [St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: I was--that's a picture of me when I was about ten years of age.  I was--it was taken in the back of my aunt's [Adina Worghs] house, 119th Street [New York, New York], in the backyard.
Speaker 1: My backyard look better than your bed and bre- (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me, graduation picture from St. Thomas the Apostle.  That was in nineteen forty-t- '42 [1942], yeah.
Speaker 1: That was me.  That was a picture that was taken around 1946, '47 [1947] in Brooklyn in my father's house.  And the, what looks like wallpaper on the wall, that was his stenciling that he did himself.
Speaker 2: That was a picture of me as a student in Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York].  I'm all the way over in the corner in a speech class.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which one of these?  'Cause we looked (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Look over where there's, there's a man there grinning, right.  That's--I'm right under him.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Somebody must've just cracked a joke or something.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my great uncle that was taken in 1922 when he went--it was taken in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana] when he went to visit his mom and his sister.  So my grandmother [Patience Douglas] is there.  I don't know which one is my grandmother and my great-grandmother, and I know my Aunt Esther [ph.], who's sitting directly in front of him.  That was my Aunt Esther, my father's sister.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you--can you repeat that please?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what's the--go ahead.
Speaker 2: My uncle [Bowlin's paternal great uncle], Charles Lindo, in 1922, he visited--he left the United States to visit his family, to visit his mom, and, and those are his sisters and--how, how would I say--nieces, nieces, his sisters and nieces, and that was in 1922, the Lindo family.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: This is a picture--all the way over, yeah, right, right--no, over, right there, okay.  That's a picture of my father when he went--when he came here into New York [New York].  He went to night school and that's how the men dressed in those days when they attended night school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Everybody in suit and tie.
Speaker 2: Everybody.  And my father even wore--he had an overall he wore at time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, those were the days.  Everybody--
Speaker 1: That was poverty time.  That was poor time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.  I've, I've heard a lot of people have one suit and they like washed the shirt out--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Oh, yeah, they washed--yes, yes, yes.  And do you know what happens is that they only iron, iron the collar and the cuffs.  They didn't iron the rest of it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: You didn't know that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, no.  I, I--
Speaker 1: No, they didn't because--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I knew it was separate--
Speaker 1: Yes.  No, they didn't--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  This is graduation class of--from St. Thomas the Apostle elementary school in 1942.  The teacher's missing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Here you are.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Somebody squished your hat on.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Oh, my teacher did and everybody started to laugh (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Show me again where--okay, I found you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, look at my hat (laughter).  It's right down on my head.
Speaker 2: Mills school of nursing.  Yes, it's my class of 1952.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, that's right.  There are--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And school--Bellevue School of Nursing, 1952, fifty-five years this year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now, in those days, the guys that were, were in nursing, they were the guys that used to, you know, they--
Speaker 2: They became administrators.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Administrators, okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's how--that's one of the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I thought those were the guys you call if you--
Speaker 2: And that's one--and that's one--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --at Bellevue--
Speaker 2: No, that's one of the requirements to become administrators and to become anesthesiologists.  If you wanted to give anesthesia, you either become a MD [medical doctor] or a RN [registered nurse].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
