Story_ID: 662363
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and observing is Adam Braffman, B-R-A-F-F-M-A-N, and Adam Manta, M-A-N-T-A.  And we're gonna start out by slating the interview.  So I need you to state and spell your name.
Speaker 2: Okay, I am Geoffrey Franklin Brown [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown].
Speaker 1: Spell it.
Speaker 2: G-E-O-F-F-R-E-Y, Franklin, F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N, Brown, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Now do you go by the, your, is your nickname officially Geoff?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In that sense, okay.  And the spelling, where does the spelling of your name come from, your first name?
Speaker 2: So my father's name was George [George Brown], and he didn't want a junior.  But my mother [Helen Young Brown] wanted to have something close.  They looked through the name, the baby name book, Geoffrey comes out or Geoffrey as some people pronounce it.
Speaker 1: That's cute, okay.  And I need to have your date of birth and place of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: I was born October 30th, 1952 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and today is April 25th, 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to also have our location.
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers at 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm associate managing editor for entertainment at the Chicago Tribune.
Story_ID: 662364
Speaker 1: And I ask always five People magazine-ish questions.  Short answer.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Pause) (laughter) I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Speaker 2: I, I'm, I eat like a pig, so I don't have a favorite, honestly.  But--
Speaker 1: You were just seeing me, I was devouring my lunch.  Sorry about that.
Speaker 2: Yes, but if you said, "Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown], this is what you're going to have," I, I'd say it's a cookie.
Speaker 1: A cookie, any special kind of cookie, just cookie?
Speaker 2: Snickerdoodle.
Speaker 1: Snickerdoodle cookies, okay.
Speaker 2: Or oatmeal raisin.
Speaker 1: Or oatmeal raisin, okay.  And I'd like to also have you give me your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I like to tell people treat others as you want to be treated.
Story_ID: 662365
Speaker 1: I want to start out by having you talk about your parents.  Can we start with your mother first?  And if you could give her name and year of birth, that would be good place to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name is Helen, or was Helen Virginia Brown [Helen Young Brown].  Her year of birth was 1921.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about where she was from and what you know about her growing up?
Speaker 2: From Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], she was native Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: So your roots are very strong in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did, did my mother tell you I was born in, in Duquesne [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I was born in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: We, we talked, we talked about--and, and you have a relative, your father [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] I think is from Greensburg [Pennsylvania], which is where that family moved to.
Speaker 1: I see, he was from Blythedale [Pennsylvania], which is up in, like in the coal mine.
Speaker 2: Yes, western Pennsylvania, up in there somewhere.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.  So tell, can you tell me your mother's, her birth and what you know of her background?
Speaker 2: So mom was born to I think her, her father [Shelly Young] was from Alabama and her mother [Willie Dobbins Young] was from North Carolina.  And her father was totally African American and her mother was half German and half Cherokee, with some Choctaw in there.  And they, they, they met through--I have a document that shows that they had permission to be together in Alabama, which is on ancestry.com, but I have the original.  And because they thought she was white but she really wasn't.
Speaker 1: So these are your grandparents.
Speaker 2: My grandparents.  So they give birth to her and her brothers and, and sister and you know just a close knit family.  She went through high--she got through high school, but she didn't have enough money to go to college.  It was either her or her sister, and her sister wanted to go to medical, nursing school.  So she stayed home and worked while her sister went off to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother I guess.
Speaker 2: This is my mother.
Speaker 1: Your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so your mother, your mother grew up in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: And stayed.
Speaker 1: But her, but the--her, her parents, one was--
Speaker 2: North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, and the other was from Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then they came to Pittsburgh at some point.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how would--did your mother share any stories of her growing up?
Speaker 2: Only that she was mischievous.  She was--she could, she could start some trouble and you know, laugh until she got caught.  But, but she was just happy go lucky.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe her also besides mischievous?
Speaker 2: Well as an adult, which is the only way I know, she used to prank her, her brothers and, and sister all the time.  But as an adult, I would say all I knew of her was someone who always supported me and was very nurturing.  I feel like I got all of my moral grounding from her.  So if I said something that she didn't like, she'd say, "You shouldn't do that, and here's why."  And so I'm very--I don't call people names to their face.  It's not like I stab them in the back, but what I mean is I, I don't try to hurt people.  And the idea of hurting someone else where everyone else can see it, is foreign to me.  You have to really push me to do that.  So I get that from her and all lessons in, in life.  You know not to be prejudiced, even you know within our own people we can have some prejudices, and that was not acceptable.
Speaker 1: In, in your family, in your household.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: He [Brown's father, George Brown] was a, a, a newspaper columnist in Pittsburgh [for the Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], and they met--I think somebody introduced them at a, at one of those fine nightclubs that Pittsburgh was famous for, Crawford Grill and like that.  And she--I guess it was love at first sight and they got, they got married in 1945.
Story_ID: 662366
Speaker 1: And tell me, give me your father's name and what you know about his growing up also and the year of his birth also.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He's George Franklin Brown [George Brown], born in 1916 in Crittenden, Kentucky, which is very close to Cincinnati [Ohio].  And Cincinnati is where he grew up.  I don't know a lot about that, except that he was--he and some--he was an only child and, and he had some cousins who were only children.  And, and his mother [Katie Smith Brown] and her sisters were a big family and they pretty much raised them, so--but I, I don't know a lot about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is his also roots in, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or where else?
Speaker 2: Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Cincinnati, that's right.  You said he was, I'm sorry, you said he was born in Kentucky, then raised in Cincinnati.  But how did he--how did the family get to, to Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: He went to work for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].
Speaker 1: Oh, so that was what brought him there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 662367
Speaker 1: Now what about his education?  Both of your parents' education.
Speaker 2: Yes, mom [Helen Young Brown] didn't go to college for the reason I stated.  And, and dad [George Brown] was at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], but I don't think he finished.  'Cause he, he started getting writing jobs and that's what he wanted to do, and he got his opportunities and he moved on.
Speaker 1: Now so both of your parents are deceased now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and so I want--now how many--so do you know what age your parents were when they met or married?
Speaker 2: She would have been twenty-four.  I don't know about the meeting.  But it, it might have been a year that they were together before they married.  So she would have been twenty-four and that would have made him twenty-nine.
Speaker 1: So he was five years older than she was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 662368
Speaker 1: Now what do you have of both, you know from both of your parents?  You spoke about your mother [Helen Young Brown] and the moral compass, what about your father [George Brown]?
Speaker 2: Sense of humor.  We, we--the family--if, if we were talking, we were about that close to laughing at something with one another, something dad said, something I said to dad.  That, that was--we were just always laughing.  And I brought that with me everywhere I go.  It might annoy some people, but I gotta laugh.
Story_ID: 662369
Speaker 1: So you--how many kids in the family, Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown]?
Speaker 2: Well most of my life I've been an only child.  However, my father [George Brown] had a daughter [Antonia Brown], and I, I wish I could tell you how much older she was than I am, but I'm going to just--I think maybe ten years.  And I, I met her twice and she came to live with us for a little while.  And then drifted away and I, I, I've tried to Google her, what I know of her name and her first married name, but I haven't been able to locate her.
Speaker 1: So had he been married before, or he had--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, he'd been married once before.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you found out much later about this.  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Right, I, I did--I mean I knew that I had a half-sister.  That was no big secret, but she, she--I think she lived in Cincinnati [Ohio].  But again, she came to visit once when we were living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we lived a lot of places.  And she was great, and I saw her again in New York and she was great.  But I just you know after he died, we, we got a--my mother [Helen Young Brown] told, told me that she got a letter, but it didn't have a return address, so that was that.
Speaker 1: So that speaks to a strained relationship of some sort, that you may not have been aware of at the time.  You know and that happens a lot.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I, I can tell you what the strain was.  He, he didn't approve of what she was doing at the time.
Speaker 1: I see, so she had a faster lifestyle.
Speaker 2: It wasn't fast, it's just that she was between--she was divorcing and dating.
Speaker 1: I see.  So your father was pretty strict then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not to me, though.  But that's the double standard, right.  I also, since this is a record, I have to talk about someone I consider to be a sister.  She was with mom and dad for--well before I was born.  From the time she was born until around about age seven.  Her name was Diane McNeil [ph.] now.  And she can--to this day, she considers us brother and sister, my parents--even though her mother is still alive, she calls, she calls mom, mom and dad, dad.  So that should be part of any of my record.
Speaker 1: And so she had come to live in what way?  Just the way that--
Speaker 2: Her mother couldn't take care of her and so my parents said, "Well we don't have a kid." 'Cause my mother miscarried.  And so it took her seven years to get to me.  So they had this little girl for about, what, four or five years before I get there.  And then they needed to move to Chicago [Illinois] 'cause he was gonna work for Jet magazine.  And the, the laws of the land said she couldn't come with us.  So it was--and I, and now that's where the story gets a little weird for me.  I, I'm sorry, I don't know why she couldn't go with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she in your life after that, or living with you after that or not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So really, so you grew up in a household where you had an oldest sister, older sister.
Speaker 2: Until--
Speaker 1: To age seven.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, to age seven.
Story_ID: 662370
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember, and we were in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know how they would open the hydrants and the water would come out and there were no swimming pools nearby, so this became our swimming pool.  And I swam in the gutter, which was nowhere near as filthy as gutters are now.  I mean you could just look at gutters now and tell ooh, my goodness.  But there was no odor like there is now.  There was just--and there weren't as many automobiles.  It was all good.  That's my first memory.
Speaker 1: So that--and it's probably on a hot summer day--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause that's when you would open up the fire hydrant--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on a hot summer day.
Story_ID: 662371
Speaker 1: So where did you live, where was your house?  I mean I know you lived--but I'm talking about the house you grew up with maybe in, up until age seven, or was that not a consistent place?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't consistent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You moved around a lot.
Speaker 2: Yes, so it's easier for me to do it chronologically.  I'll try to give my age at the time.  So I'm born, a year and a half later, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], a year and a half later we come to Chicago [Illinois] where he's [Brown's father, George Brown] working for Jet.  He comes back to Pittsburgh.  I don't remember any of that.  Then we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that I remember, and stayed there about three years.
Speaker 1: And how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was four, like ages four to seven, almost eight.  I might, I might have made it to eight.  Then he got a job at The New York Courier, and we went to--another black publication, and we went to New York [New York] for what would have been my fourth grade and some of fifth grade, or third and fourth and fourth and fifth.  And then we went to--he got a job in the, in the Charlotte Amalie, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  So there we went.  His mother [Katie Smith Brown] used to say he had pepper in his feet.  And then he got a job in San Juan, Puerto Rico.  So, so Philadelphia and San Juan are the longest stretches that we stayed anywhere.
Speaker 1: And so how long were those stretches?  You said Philadelphia was three?
Speaker 2: Three, four years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three, three or four years, and then--
Speaker 2: Puerto Rico for me from the age of twelve through sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, those four years.
Story_ID: 662372
Speaker 1: So you know--I usually ask people, and I've done military people before, but can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?  So I guess maybe we start in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yes, so Philadelphia is soft pretzels with mustard and the sounds of just kids playing.  Was, you know, city street and that was, that was it.  There was a Cobb, Cobbs Creek [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] up the street from us which might have been close to Darby [Pennsylvania] I think, and had a lot of grand experiences there, being chased by gangs and whatnot, but they never caught us, well once, but they left us alone after they saw how terrorized we were.  That doesn't happen now, right.  And that's Philadelphia.  New York [New York], the--I mean I'm sorry.  Puerto Rico, the, the, the--when you live near the ocean, you, you can, you can smell the sea.  It's a very strong and very comforting aroma.  And the sounds of--I forgot Philadelphia, the sounds would be the jazz on, on the, on our jukebox cause they were people of the '40s [1940s] and that was their music.  Rock and roll, Beatles [The Beatles], Four Tops, Motown [Motown Records], the whole thing.  That's where I got introduced to in Puerto Rico.  They had Puerto Rican music of course, but I was American and that's--I gravitated to rock and Top 40.  So those are the sounds.  The foods, the--well besides rice and beans, they had a, I think they call them here empanadas, but down there they called them pastelitos.  And a little meat in the middle and, and that was a--that was always a treat.  If you could get one that had enough meat in it so that you didn't feel cheated, twenty-five cents or however much it cost.  So that's, that's my recollection.  And the best years of my life.  I, I met my two best friends there.  We, we came up in high school together and I like to tell people that expressions, you know, some of my best friends are black, or some of my black friends are Puerto Rican.  Actually my best friends are a black Puerto Rican and a white Cuban, as it turns out.
Speaker 1: So were you in San Juan, Puerto Rico--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is that where you were? And were you attending an American school there, or what school were you--
Speaker 2: It was a, it was an English speaking school, it was called Episcopal Cathedral School [San Juan, Puerto Rico].  And it was--well Episcopalian and, yeah it was great.  Small class, we were all very close.
Story_ID: 662373
Speaker 1: So this is really in some respects in terms of the black American experience, atypical growing up.  And I want to, you know I want you to, to talk about what life was like inside, you know, your household and with these moves and how much is being dis- you know when are you starting to be aware of the world outside of you?
Speaker 2: Well the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination, we were in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, so that's '63 [1963].  And that was the most stunning thing, and of course that was before the--was before the, the Birmingham bombing [of 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was before the Birmingham bombing.
Speaker 2: I never knew about the Birmingham bombing 'cause my parents [Helen Young Brown and George Brown] were, you know I was kind of young, they were trying to shield me from that.  But fast forward to when I come back to the states for my senior year in high school [Greensburg Salem High School, Greensburg, Pennsylvania], then racial everything is right in my face all the time.  And no escaping it.  And you have a choice, you can--I mean I never, I never was one of those people who didn't, who didn't want to be black because I was around people different from me.  Well as we used to say back then, colored.  So I just was me.  But once you get to the states, now you're being asked to be part of a movement, one way or another, you know declare what side you're on.  You either want to be an Oreo or a Tom [Uncle Tom] or you're going to be you know, pumping your fist and growing an Afro, which I'm proud to say I did, as you'll see in the photos.  But it was--but I had missed all of that and I had missed King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination and, and the, the water hoses and all that, missed that completely.  And so I wasn't, I wasn't traumatized by that.  It's more like, god how could people be like that?  But I wasn't experiencing it, so I'm kind of clinical about it; don't want it to happen again.
Story_ID: 662374
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know that--I'll tell you the other person I interviewed who was like that, and that's [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett because of her family.  She grew up in Iraq, Iran, one of those. I get them confused, I think it's Iran.  But she grew up there, you know so they--the Bowmans, all of them missed the, the traditional Civil Rights Movement.  But I want to--I'm trying to get a sense of, of how much do you know about your father's [George Brown] history and those moves and can you talk?  Because he--I, I understand the moves, you know and, you know and from the Courier to I think Philadelphia Tribune [The Philadelphia Tribune].
Speaker 2: Actually it was, that was a white paper, the Philadelphia Bulletin.
Speaker 1: He worked for the--I see.  So can you tell me his moves?  Because I understand in the states, but then I sort of, you know I didn't--the, the Puerto Rico and the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  But that I was trying to sort of understand.  And so can you talk about his career and all of that?
Speaker 2: So from Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], where he was entertainment writer and columnist, he goes to Jet magazine.
Speaker 1: Does he talk about who he worked for at the Pittsburgh Courier?
Speaker 2: He was a contemporary of--I mean my mother [Helen Young Brown] used to be able to rattle off the names.  Something Harris, Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris].
Speaker 1: Teenie Harris.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a photographer at the time and, come on, Ha- Hazel [Hazel Garland]--come on.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but and I, and I ran into her, her daughter when I was working at The Pittsburgh Press.  It'll come to me, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: But he was a lover of, of, of newspapers then.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know was this something that he wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well newspapers were--it was either newspapers or magazines if you wanted to be a writer.  So that's, that's, that's where he gravitated to.  And, and that was his passion his whole life.  He, he, he did--in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] he was an editor and he found he didn't like it.  And matter of fact, he advised me not to get into it, but you see how that wound up.
Speaker 1: But you're saying he went from the Pittsburgh Courier to the Philadelphia Bulletin?
Speaker 2: No, first the Jet.
Speaker 1: Wait he was first the Jet.
Speaker 2: He, he went from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: To Jet.
Speaker 2: To Chicago, to Jet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember him telling you anything about either, you know like what it was working like for the Courier and what it was like working for Jet?
Speaker 2: Just there was a lot of camaraderie, lot of camaraderie.  Matter of fact, when I went to work for Jet, a lot of--'cause he died, thus opening, there was an opening and they took me under their wing, bless their hearts.  I just went into his job.  But all the folks who had been there with Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] from the beginning, they would tell me stories about how it was and the--just a lot of pride and, and, and the work that everybody did there.
Speaker 1: But do you remember some of those stories, Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I remember, I remember the other people's stories 'cause they're the ones who were telling stories.  But they, they seemed to be fond of my father 'cause they--I mean he, he came back to Jet right before he died.  So he--but I'm sorry, no I can't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he, so the, the--I just lost my train of thought.
Speaker 2: You wanna get to Puerto Rico, is that it?
Speaker 1: Well I wanna get to Puerto Rico, but he goes from Jet--so at this point that he has the--he's at Jet first.  No he's at the Courier first.  He's at the Courier first, then he goes to Jet.
Speaker 2: Right, then he goes back to the Courier.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he goes back to the Courier.
Speaker 2: Then he goes to the Philadelphia Bulletin.
Speaker 1: And the Philadelphia Bulletin is a white publication.  And what year is that?
Speaker 2: That's going to be, so far it was four, that's gonna be in the '50s [1950s], '56 [1956], '57 [1957], like that.
Speaker 1: Isn't that early to be working on a white publication in those, in those times, or you don't think that that--
Speaker 2: He did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: I mean I think the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] waited 'til about '68 [1968], but I--that's where he worked.
Story_ID: 662375
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember any discussions about him [Brown's father, George Brown] working there [Philadelphia Bulletin], or did he talk about any kind of racism or it being difficult and--
Speaker 2: Yes he did.  And he said they, you know there would be the racial comments and other harassments, and so he figured that that probably wasn't a good idea.
Speaker 1: Well what kind of harassments?  What kind of things?  You have to be specific with me.  There's not going to be generalities in this interview.  You and I have to have an agreement.
Speaker 2: Okay, well fine.  Except that I don't have that data.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's not that I'm trying to hide it, I just don't have it.  I was--I, I was a little kid.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I wasn't paying a lot of attention.  I didn't even know that until--could have been my mother [Helen Young Brown] told me instead of him, actually.  But he was also freelancing for Sepia while he was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So it could be that maybe he wasn't there that long and he was getting his money other ways--
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but mom's not here to give me those details.
Story_ID: 662376
Speaker 1: I have a lot of clippings, but I don't remember seeing it.  But he wrote a lot of things, so maybe--
Speaker 2: So his beat was always entertainment?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So that's, so you, you followed behind him in that way.  In a way.
Speaker 1: In a way.
Speaker 2: But I mean at this--but the periods are so different because the period that represented him, I mean first of all, he's--hold on just one second.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERUPTION)
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask that question again.  So your father [George Brown] is really hanging out at night spots.
Speaker 2: Right, all, all those big stars of the '40s [1940s], Ellington [Duke Ellington], Count Basie, Lena Horne, they'd come through Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Lena Horne was from Pittsburgh, but they, they'd come through Pittsburgh.  Pittsburgh was a, was an important stop.  You had Negro League still and all that kind of thing, Crawford Grill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was a, was a big place for, for entertainment.  But that was, you know they'd have their little music place out in the front and other things went on in the back I understand.  But the, but the music and the, the restaurants and all that kind of thing.  That, that was--Pittsburgh was a, was a, was a destination for, for those acts.  The top jazz acts, yes.
Speaker 1: And there was a lot of that.  And like you said, there were a lot of baseball players.  But when you--let's see.  So did you grow up knowing about Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] and [HistoryMaker] Simeon Booker?  Did those, I mean I know you came to--
Speaker 2: No, he didn't, he didn't--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett?
Speaker 2: Lerone Bennett, yes, but dad didn't talk about anybody except [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson.  And a lot of the people who became big time editors there, while they were contemporaries at that time, he, he didn't, he didn't mention them.
Speaker 1: And what would he say about John H. Johnson?
Speaker 2: Well he had the highest respect for him.  But I, I get the impression that dad didn't like to stay anywhere long, so--
Speaker 1: So what did your mother [Helen Young Brown] say about this?  'Cause she's trailing behind her husband and all these--
Speaker 2: That's right.  And she, she was a great person who liked to be a stay at home.  Not that she didn't like to go out and, and socialize, but she liked being in one place and she passed that onto me.  And all that, the moving around, didn't sit well with me.  It was okay for her because once they got to the, to the tropics, they had all this glamorous travel.  Well I was too young to, to enjoy that so you know I'd stay with my aunt and uncle in western Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: So when you're talking about--well I mean you were with them in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you, but you, you were, you were young.
Speaker 2: Right, I was, what nine, ten, eleven?
Speaker 1: I see.  So what was life like then and what were his assignments there?  Who was he working for?
Speaker 2: All right, so he was working for--there was a senator who owned a newspaper, Virgin Islands.  Not, not in the U.S. Senate, but in the Virgin Islands you know, congress or whatever.  His name was Ottley [Earle B. Ottley].  And, and I can't--and I've been trying to find the name of the newspaper [The Photo News; The Home Journal], but I can't remember.  And he got this offer to go down there and write.  But I don't--but it wasn't entertainment he was writing.  He'd write about anything, politics and whatnot.  But that was a couple years and, and I guess he got tired of that and this opportunity in--opened up at The San Juan Star newspaper, be an entertainment writer cause tourism, the English speaking tourism was huge there at the time.  So there were magazines devoted to it, The San Juan Star of course was a newspaper, big newspaper, English.  It was the number one and maybe number--only English newspaper there, so he got on there.  Then he got a chance to be hardcore entertainment at this magazine called Tony Beacon's Journal [sic. San Juan Diary] in San Juan [Puerto Rico] and that's--he spent the longest amount of time there than anywhere else.  And then once I graduated from college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine], he and mom decided they wanted to be closer.  And so he managed to get another job at Jet magazine, so--and he was there.
Speaker 1: Sounded like they both or all of you, well you were--where were you in school?
Speaker 2: I was--I had been in college and, and then I graduated.  I got a job at The Pittsburgh Press and I wasn't coming back, so--
Story_ID: 662377
Speaker 1: So what things are influencing you growing up with all those, you know the different changes of places?  So you said you know in Puerto Rico and maybe we can talk about the time there, you know the school, what it was like and you know what's influencing you.
Speaker 2: I think it had two affects.  One is of course if you move around a lot unless you're an extrovert, it just makes you more of an introvert.  I never had trouble making friends, it's just that I don't like moving around a lot.  But I think as I look back on my strengths and whatnot, I'm not--I, I tend to be a negotiator.  So if something is going down bad, I want to, I want to negotiate it away rather than okay, let's fight, or, or okay let me get a group of people to, to stomp this down.  So I think, I think that I get that part of my personality, which serves me well in my current job [at the Chicago Tribune], from, from having moved around like that.
Speaker 1: So what's influencing you?  Or what are you, are you a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You, so you're a good student all this time?
Speaker 2: Excellent student.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what, what are you--are you gravitating to English, history, I mean sports--
Speaker 2: Loved to play sorts, loved to play music.  But I, I, I had this dual excellence in English or English, not English lit [English literature], but English, you know diagramming sentences, English classes and math.  I just--that was where I would get my A's; in such things as history and social studies, no.  I mean I'd get Bs, but that wasn't my passion.  Bs and Cs in the--especially history where history back then, I don't know how it's taught now, but back then it was all about memorize these dates, their significance.  Since I've been working for--since I got out of school, working for newspapers and magazines, I feel like that's been my real education in world history because things come up and it's, I didn't know that.  Then you research it and, and which is how I found out so much about the, you know, civil rights struggles on top of the fact that if you work at Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], it's--that's--they were part of Civil Rights Movement from Emmett Till which was the--you know when they really burst on the scene with it, to everything that, that followed.  And, and those reporters would always tell me their stories of, of how they would, how they'd have to operate when they went down south and especially if the, the trial of the people who had killed.  I mean the guys who had killed Emmett Till and I think [HistoryMaker] Simeon Booker as you mentioned, which is terrific guy.  I've only ever talked to him on the phone.  Just, just--we always had a lot of good times.  But I think he was one of those reporters who had--they had to be very careful when the--I guess the, the law enforcement people and the, and the townsfolk weren't gonna cooperate and they didn't like these other folks being down there showing their dirty laundry.  A lot of stories like that and my mentor there was Robert E. Johnson.  He was the associate publisher and executive editor of Jet when I got there.  And you know he regaled me with all of his stories about you know, the rise of Jet and the rise of Ebony.
Speaker 1: So what were some of those stories?
Speaker 2: Well let's see.  Ones that I can repeat.
Speaker 1: Well you shouldn't be self editing.
Speaker 2: No, well I, I--that's not how I want Bob to be remembered.  You know we, we, we had a lot of you know, there was a lot of mentoring, but a lot of joking too so--but I'll have to get back to you on that 'cause I--it's not my story.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know.  But we, we like secondhand stories too.
Story_ID: 662378
Speaker 1: So let's go to the name of the school, you said it was Anglican school?
Speaker 2: Episcopalian.
Speaker 1: Episcopalian, I'm sorry.  Got that wrong, okay.  So Episcopal Cathedral School in San Juan [Puerto Rico].  Now did you go seventh through eleventh [grade], or did you graduate from there?
Speaker 2: I went seventh through eleventh.
Speaker 1: And then where did you graduate from?
Speaker 2: From Greensburg Salem High School in Greensburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: That's because he went back to the--
Speaker 2: No.  My parents [Helen Young Brown and George Brown]--I wanted to go to Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and you could get tuition, a lower tuition by going there if you were a Pennsylvania resident.  Well I was born in Pennsylvania, but I hadn't been there in ages.  So I went to stay my last year of high school with my uncle and aunt, who are like my second parents.  I used to spend summers with them all the time when they were in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and then when they moved out to Greensburg.  So I do not understand to this day, I've tried, I've racked my brain.  I've told this story a million times.  I don't know why I decided to apply on January 1st instead of in September to go to Penn State.  So in the time it takes for them to open it and say, "How bout no?"  I get this thin envelope and they say, "We're full."  So I had to--that's--so I wound up going to Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine] because they were, they were trying to be more inclusive and my uncle was a, a principal in Pittsburgh.  So he heard about it and he says, "Go up there and take a look." And, and I did and I liked it, it was very nice.  It was all male that first year, and then it became coed my sophomore year.
Story_ID: 662379
Speaker 1: So you graduate from Green- now how was your last year of high school, then, if you had spent all this time?  Isn't that a culture shock coming back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, it's a big culture shock.  First of all there were parties, you know, basement parties and all the things you hear about on, on the records of the late '60s [1960s] and, and in Greensburg [Greensburg Salem High School, Greensburg, Pennsylvania] at the time, there was, there were, there were, there were--but the racial tensions were kind of simmering under the surface.  So anything that happened, anything at all could, could set stuff off.  So my, my, my--since I was there for such a short time, this is what I remember.  A friend of mine, we all lived in the same little neighborhood there, he gets in a fight.  We're playing basketball in gym and he just hauls off and slugs this guy who, this white guy, who was I guess playing him too tight.  And there's blood everywhere.  And then everybody split off into racial groups and there was going to be this big fight downtown and, and we were all afraid to, to go anywhere except like when I would go to the bathroom, I had an X-Acto knife on me 'cause I wasn't gonna be victimized.  All that kind of stuff.  But that aside, that episode aside, nobody ever called me any names and I didn't, I didn't--it wasn't, it wasn't that bad until that happened.  But like any small town, you know you have--I didn't do this because I wasn't romancing at the time, but, but other people would, would have interracial relationships and of course that could cause some friction in the families of the, the people who maybe didn't like that.  So that--it's more of that kind of tension.  And I would imagine if that were, say, Birmingham [Alabama] where that's like really illegal (laughter), that would have been different, so.
Speaker 1: But you didn't grow up like that either.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 662380
Speaker 1: So you had grown up in a more integrated environment the whole time and sort of--so then you go to Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Pennsylvania].  Now when you go to Bowdoin, you graduate in 1974?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you go and you, you go in, do you go into Bowdoin as an English lit [English literature] major?
Speaker 2: You didn't have to choose until junior year.  But my mother [Helen Young Brown] wanted me to be a doctor, so I said okay I'll be a doctor.  So I walked into a biology class and they were talking about stuff that made absolutely no sense.  Not even you know, dissection, just what are they talking about?  I said well what's this got to do with being a doctor?  Never mind.  So I just kind of tried to--from there I tried to figure out what I wanted to do.  So when I was a sophomore, my father [George Brown] was still in Puerto Rico freelancing and working at the magazine [San Juan Diary].  And he says, "Well, you--I need, I have something else to do, why don't you handle this one little assignment?"  A little blurb, not, not a huge assignment.  And so I wrote something and he showed me, you know how you write and make it more, you know give it some style.  I--being a quick learner, I figured that out and so I could mimic his style of writing.  It was amazing.  It just--
Speaker 1: You could mimic the profess--
Speaker 2: His style of writing.
Speaker 1: The professor.
Speaker 2: No, my father.
Speaker 1: Your father?
Speaker 2: So I could, I could mimic his, his--so that when he handed it in, they--the people who had contracted for him, didn't know that he hadn't done it.  So that's when I'm a sophomore.  And so I decided well if I'm this good at this, why don't I just keep doing it?  And that's how I wound up in--seeking journalism.  They didn't have a journalism school there.  So Doug Lyons [Douglas C. Lyons] who's an editorial writer now in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], he, he and I made an independent study, it was his idea.  And he says, "But I don't know how to get this done."  I said, "Well let me talk to my English professor," I mean my advisor and he goes, "The editor of the Maine Times is looking for just this very thing.  If you guys go out and get us ten, fifteen people," I can't remember how many, "we'll make a class."  We went out, we got those people, he taught us how to be journalists and we, we wrote these nice stories for him which provided the clips that got me my internship in Pittsburgh [at The Pittsburgh Press], and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 662381
Speaker 1: So the Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] you go to, like I--we had interviewed another gentleman named Robert E. Johnson [sic. HistoryMaker Robert C. Johnson, Jr.].  He teaches at the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts].  He was three years ahead of you.  Do you remember his name?  You know 'cause you're the coming--cause a lot of times that early you're not intersecting.  But how many, how many black students are there at Bowdoin when you come in?
Speaker 2: I remember it reached a peak of seventy, but I want to say forty when I got there.
Speaker 1: Out of the student population of what?
Speaker 2: Four hundred.
Speaker 1: It's a small school.
Speaker 2: Yes, is it four thousand?
Speaker 1: I think it's probably higher than that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably four thousand.
Speaker 1: Or maybe even two thousand and it could have been.
Speaker 2: It was four something.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But forty, forty--
Speaker 1: So what was the student population like though?  I mean was it, you know, each school has its own, own--
Speaker 2: Well we understood it to be a rich person's school.  And they had done this outreach and they were getting kids from mainly Washington, D.C. and a few from Pennsylvania.  But it was mainly Washington, D.C.  And so they--a lot of folks had, had a, had a bigger culture shock than I did.  But we did kind of keep to ourselves.  We had an Afro American Society [African American Society].  We, you know, preferred our own company.  We ate together.  We partied together.  And so we were kind of insulated from anything.  However, there was an incident in which we were partying in one of the hallways and, and somebody comes out, he might have been a hockey player.  And he--and there was--this was like my junior year.  And there was a young lady there who had I guess you would call them--you know where, where the hair, the hair is really tight in knots of, bantu knots, is that--
Speaker 1: Bantu?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well really, really tight braids.  But each one, instead of the braids being long like that, they would--so he called her an N word porcupine and that--well we weren't gonna take that.  So words were exchanged and whatnot and threats were made and it got very tense to where you didn't want to be alone on campus during this period.  Well this couldn't continue because we were there to learn, not to, you know, get assaulted.  So this was my first bite of negotiation of--one of my, another advisor I had said, "Well you know maybe you all should talk and maybe--no one wants to make the first move.  So why don't you, why don't you guys make the first move, you know, be revolutionary."  So I said, "Okay, well let's do this.  Why don't we, a couple of us each go to every frat house," which was where a lot of the anger was coming from, every frat house and just say, "We're people too.  We're not here to fight.  There was a bad misunderstanding.  This was bad, this was bad, but we're, we're, we're saying truths.  We're not going to bother anybody and we don't want to bother you." And they got to see that we were human beings and we got to see that they were human beings and, and that was a major win.  And that's when that part of my personality started to, to blossom.  So--but again, yes one could say that because I had, I had grown up around all kinds of different people, I was just not going to have the same kind of trouble as someone who maybe had never seen a white person before, much less in some campus way far away from home cause Brunswick, Maine is--it's a, it's a hike.  You have to go to Portland, Maine and then take a bus.  It's a--yeah it, (laughter) it's pretty north.
Story_ID: 662382
Speaker 1: So how are you developing as a person there? And you speak of some racial tension.  Do you know the history of African Americans at Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine]?  How far back it goes?
Speaker 2: Russwurm was, I think the first--John Russwurm, maybe it's even John B. Russwurm [John Brown Russwurm], 'cause that's what the African American Society's center [Russwurm African American Center] is named for him.  He was the first, and--
Speaker 1: In what year?
Speaker 2: Back in the 1800s probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, he--I don't know much about that.  But the--there were, there was a very tiny black community in Brunswick [Maine], and there was an Army base there [Naval Air Station Brunswick].  So the only--so the townies, is what we called them, would have some friction with the--with the guys from the base.  Some of the young ladies at our college, they thought the guys from the base came on a little strong for their tastes.  And so there were frictions with blacks and there were frictions with whites.
Speaker 1: And this is the time that there's a lot of friction on campus of, of, of--
Speaker 2: Right.  This is the early '70s [1970s].  It's not that long after riots and, and all that.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's--we're mid--let's see now we are 1974 when you graduate.  Now what are you doing summers?
Speaker 2: Summers, the first couple summers I went, I went back to San Juan [Puerto Rico].  But then I, I wouldn't go home, I would go to my aunt and uncle because I, I was feeling more urban and, and so I'd go home and we'd collect all the, all the requisite fellows and head to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and party.  Or if it wasn't Pittsburgh, it'd be someplace out there in the western suburbs.
Story_ID: 662383
Speaker 1: What are you thinking you wanna do with your English lit--English literature background?  And do you have any professors that are mentoring you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I--well once I got a taste of, of journalism I said, "Okay that, that's it."  Because I--and I hadn't majored yet.  I was just taking English courses 'cause I was good in it and I would take--and I was taking lots of math courses 'cause I was good in that.  And the rest was just whatever was mandatory.  But this is the dirty little secret.  You can take as many English courses as you want and they all count.  You can take as many math courses as you want and they all count.  So I wasn't getting that well rounded.  I--but I was, I was getting good grades in things that most people don't get good grades in, so that was the, that was working for me.  So my mentor was--when I was a freshman [at Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine], I couldn't put two sentences together without some awkwardness, you know because the sentences had to flow smoothly if you wanted--so I took this composition course.  And the professor was Larry Hall.  And took an interest in me.  I guess he saw I went from zero to sixty.  You know I went from not being able to express myself clearly to--look at this.  And I took a few courses with him down the road and, and he was always very helpful and always very respectful.  And, and it was of course he's the person I would have gone to first to talk about this journalism track.  And he, I'm fairly certain would have put me in con- he would have said, "Talk to your advisor about this." Instead of--'cause most people don't talk to their college advisors.  So I think he pushed me in that direction and always, always very supportive.
Story_ID: 662384
Speaker 1: And are you thinking at this point that you want to--were--did you ever think that you wanted to go on to graduate school at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When recruiters come to colleges, they come filling your head full of goodies and Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], no, no, no, Bost- Boston, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  What is it?  It's not Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], it wasn't Boston College.
Speaker 1: It's Boston University.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There's Boston College and there's Boston University.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't college.
Speaker 1: Boston University has a media program, journalism program.
Speaker 2: And, and, and it also had a public relations program.  And one of the recruiters said, "You know with your ability to communicate and with written communications the way you do, and you got an M.B.A., there'd be no stopping you."  So I briefly considered going to graduate school to get into public relations.  The problem: that required money.  My parents [Helen Young Brown and George Brown] didn't have and I had no job that was gonna pay anywhere near that.  I also understood that you could get into public relations with two years of newspaper experience.  So I said, I think I'll go get the newspaper experience, what harm can that do?  And the thing you find out about public relations is that you're probably better off being an extrovert if that's the kind of work you wanna do.  Whereas I can be a reporter and I can be as shy as I want to, but when you have to go talk to somebody else for a story, you just set that aside and you go get it done.  They're probably happy that you're not sitting there glad handing them anyway.  He did his, he did his job and he left, goodie.  And then the longer you hang around the newspaper, if that's really what you wanna do in life, the more you like it.  And then I haven't looked back.
Story_ID: 662385
Speaker 1: So it's something you had grown up around.  You had sort of grown up around, but sort of had not really been exposed.  But you talk about being able to write in the same voice--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and style as your father [George Brown].  Where, where does that come from?  Were you always reading his material?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where does that come from?
Speaker 2: Read--so and this could just be the way the brain works.  So if you see--you're just reading something and you say, oh, I like how that turn of phrase was and oh, I see what he did there.  And then you start to internalize that.  So when you write a sentence yourself, you look at it and you say, well that's kind of dull.  You don't really think about it that much, but you look at what you've done and you say, that's dull.  After a while when you start--when you write--when you've written enough, you start to think about what you're going to say before you even start typing.  So when I'd be out on a story, I'd be thinking about how am I going to approach this story?  What are the words gonna be in my lead?  I want it to be interesting and fun, unless it was a tragedy.  In which case you wanna play the violin.  But you're thinking about that, so by the time you got back to the office, you're just banging it out.  Then you come back and you, you can add style or if you're overwriting, you can take style out.  But that's, yes that's--so and I, and, and most people kind of write like they speak.  So I hear my father talking all the time and I see how that translates to the page and I say, okay, so if you want to say this in a spritely way, then you have to use spritely language.
Story_ID: 662386
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I understand all the moving around, 'cause moving around is hard (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't have a lot of touchstones.
Speaker 1: But you know, but, it's interesting about your--the--well I would have wanted you to know more about your father's [George Brown] history 'cause that history is very rich.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it is.  And that, that is the great tragedy of our family.  There was a lot of talking about it, but no committing it to, to paper and obviously my mother [Helen Young Brown] and I--it was pretty traumatic since he died.  So we would sit around and have stories about you know, he said this and he did this and ha, ha, ha, ha.  But she didn't--she--I don't recall her talking about his struggles at the, at the paper.
Speaker 1: But any kind of stories might be historically interesting.  You know that's--I'm just trying to engage you in the--
Speaker 2: Right, but his family--but, but like you know, your dad said, you know here's your, here's--he calls mom a particular nickname and we called each other nicknames.  That's not--those kind of details.
Speaker 1: We don't think--we like those also those kind of details.  But let me just--because you know remember I said I didn't know, you know if you went by Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown] and how did that come.  But your father--we're at the point that you're talking about, you know 'cause you graduate.  Do you remember your graduation day?
Speaker 2: Yes, well you know.  As well as I remember anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents are in attendance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are there, are there blacks in your class that we would know?
Speaker 2: The, the, there's two.  One the class before and that's Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] at American Express [American Express Company].  And the other one is [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Canada, same spelling, who has that educational program in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Did you interview them?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're trying.  You know he's just gotten dethroned there.  He's no longer head of the, the Harlem zone [Harlem Children's Zone, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Really, that's his thing?
Speaker 1: Just before I came in here, cause I've been trying to get him interviewed and I said to our scheduler, "You're gonna have a hard time because you know he--,"  so that--but that's an interesting group of pe- men right there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said it started out as a single sex.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: School, and then it became coed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That must be hard for women to come on a campus.
Speaker 2: Well they got all the attention.  So how hard could that be?
Speaker 1: But that's an interesting--who--so you chose the school.  I'm just wondering how those three--cause Ken Chenault, now he and Canada are from New York.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So were, were there--were the other black students primarily from New York?
Speaker 2: No, I mean there were New Yorkers, you know cause that's New England.  But the, the, the biggest group was from Washington [D.C.].  I mean New York might have been second, and then there were some of us from Pennsylvania, but not a ton from Pennsylvania, but mostly Washington.  I mean almost overwhelmingly Washington and those folks from, from New York, yes.  Matter of fact, in the group I used to hang out with, Ron Loney [ph.] was New York, I think Gilbert Lewis [ph.] was New York, though Ken was in there too, but you know he--
Speaker 1: He what?
Speaker 2: He, he, he--we weren't--if you look at a foursome, he was close to the other two and I was close to the other two.  And the other two weren't close to each other, you know it--but we, we, we hung together.  We liked each other, it's just that some people you like more than others you know.  But boy is he a big shot.
Speaker 1: Well he's--in fact I was just--I mean we're friendly.  Just two, two weeks ago in New York 'cause he was--he came to celebrate Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] cause--and so did [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns.
Speaker 2: One thing I remember about him, he was ambitious, off the charts.  I mean he, he didn't fool around, he didn't play around.  He did his studies at Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine].  He went to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I think it was, afterwards.  But he was totally serious.  I mean he, he played but mainly he was there to get that degree with good grades so that he could go to a next step.  So, and we were maybe a little less mature (laughter).  On occasion a lot less mature.
Speaker 1: Huh?  Less mature or less on track at that point?  Are you saying?
Speaker 2: Both.
Story_ID: 662387
Speaker 1: So when your father [George Brown]--so you graduate, but your father dies the, the next year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is there any indication that he is sick?
Speaker 2: My mother [Helen Young Brown] says that he, he had some dental disease that he didn't deal with and he smoked.  And he didn't exercise and she had--she and his doctor had told him, "You need to fix that 'cause that'll poison you."  So he walked out to work one day, and this was before Arthur Ashe had his heart attack.  So the world wasn't, didn't know symptoms like they did subsequently, like right now any of us says, "Oh I may be having a heart attack."  Or if you feel anything you're, you're really hypersensitive about whether it is.  Well he didn't know.  And so he thought he just had like a flu or something and he went to Jet and he died at his desk.  Yeah.  So yeah.  The happy part about that is that I got, he got to see me have a page one story in The Pittsburgh Press before he passed.  So he saw me become a, an adult.  And one of my friends in college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine], you know he didn't have that--his father died when he was nineteen.  I mean he was a, not nineteen but in a, in his junior year.  So he--his father didn't get to see him grow up and I always lived in fear of that very same thing happening.  And so I was, I was not happy that my father died, but I was happy that he got to see me become a man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that, that--so what happens to your mother then?  And where, where are they living at that point?
Speaker 2: They're living in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right, they're living in Chicago.  And you, you, when you, when you leave, when you graduate, is that when you get the job at Jet or is it after he passes away?
Speaker 2: After he passes away.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you're at the--at that point you're where?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh Press.
Speaker 1: At the, at The Pittsburgh Press, okay.  And so how, how soon after are you hired then?
Speaker 2: So he died in January and, and I'm there I think April.  I'm almost certain it's, it's April.
Story_ID: 662388
Speaker 1: So s- to the, the world that you came into at Jet.
Speaker 2: Oh boy, so it was, if you, if look at 1972 as an absolute best time ever to be at Jet because that's when the building, the new building was made and all of those stars were in their heyday, all of the entertainment, you know the, the blaxploitation stars and other kinds of stars.
Speaker 1: So you have to talk about the black--who, who like--there was--
Speaker 2: Ron O'Neal and the, 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, you have Van Peebles.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles.  And I'm not there yet, but that's when things are really hot.  I came at the, the end of that.  Not the, not the total end of it, but the end of that period, so--
Speaker 1: You come in 1975 though.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's--from 1975 to '76 [1976] and '77 [1977], that activity tends to drop off.  Black entertainment isn't what it used to be.  It's, it's more record based, like--so you know like Sister Sledge and discos, you know it's not too much Motown [Motown Records] in the air at that time as, as there had been, you know in the earlier '70s [1970s].  So--but it's really thrilling obviously to, to meet these movie stars and TV stars and, and recording artists, and, and I used to write a lot for Black Stars magazine 'cause--besides the extra money, which is not why I did it.  It was a chance to--'cause Jet you had to write short unless it was a cover story.  But, but Black Stars you could write a, a longer feature and my goodness the staff were--I'd been seeing those names for so long, Ron Kisner [Ronald E. Kisner] and Greg Simms [Gregory Simms] and Malcolm West [Malcolm R. West], at Jet.  Obviously, Ebony had all those other huge names like Hans Massaquoi and Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders] and, and Herb Nipson [Herbert Nipson].  All those folks.  But all those folks had graduated from Jet, so they all had, you know, wonderful newspaper, news experience.  And they covered those great stories of, of the day.  But now they were, they were the managers there, they were the managing editors and the editors and, and whatnot.  But we would all come together over lunch 'cause you had like two lunch shifts at Johnson's [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], and I don't know if you heard about the lunchroom there.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The lunchroom was, I mean that's an important part of its history.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Right.  So the, the, the chef there, Chef Eddie [Eddie Walker]--they would make, I mean ham hocks and every, every soul food you can think of: greens, the black eyed peas, the ice--what's the kind of pie that the, you know, pie a la mode.
Speaker 1: Cobbler, peach cobbler?
Speaker 2: Short ribs, but not, not barbecue but the fall off the bone good.  And it was only a dollar a day.  A dollar a day, all that food.  And, and this was at a time when any kind of meal like that would have cost--you get it in a restaurant, it would set you back ten or fifteen bucks [dollars].  A dollar a day for that.  And so you know we all collect there at our--there were tables and, and a lot of laughter and story swapping and you know, talking about people when they were younger and how they behaved and look at you now and stuff like that.  But, but just a group of people who were so proud of the work they did.  And Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] did not accept second rate anything.  I mean just because--I mean he got people of quality to work there, and he, and he insisted on excellence.  Not that he--I mean some people would come through there and try not to be excellent, he wasn't having that.  I wasn't one of those people.  I wanted to be great, so I, I did my best.  When I made a mistake and I got raked over the coals, I didn't take it personally. (Cough) Excuse me.  It's like, okay learning experience.
Story_ID: 662389
Speaker 1: So what floor are you working on at that point?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: That--that's seven.
Speaker 1: You're at se- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jet was seven and Ebony was eight.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the Jet staff at the time?
Speaker 2: So it was Robert E. Johnson was the--
Speaker 1: The editor.
Speaker 2: Executive editor.  Do you remember Robert DeLeon?  He, he married [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll.  He was the managing editor.
Speaker 1: So he was there when you were there.
Speaker 2: He was, he was there when I got there.  And, and I think he, yeah, he was already married to her by the time I got there.  And, and then there was a copy editor named Clarence Brown.  And Clarence replaced Brenda Butler who was at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] by the time I got to the Tribune.  So he, he, he was next in line and, and he you know, he was, he was, he was a great mentor there.  Bob was the number one mentor, Bob Johnson.  And, and then the people I mentioned, Ronald E. Kisner, Gregory Simms, Malcolm R.O. West [Malcolm R. West], I called him R.O. West.  Who else was there?  Well me and, and, and, and they had a pretty solid photography crew I think, Moneta Sleet and, and come on, why I can't remember his name.  The guy used to--the entertainment photographer.
Speaker 1: I don't remember his name, okay I'm sorry.  But Moneta, she [sic.], she, she became iconic, you know for her photographs.  Moneta Sleet, Moneta Sleet.  She's a well known photographer out of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, out of Johnson.
Speaker 1: Right, out of Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: I always thought it was a guy.
Speaker 1: It's a guy?  Okay he's a guy, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I think it was Wallace Muhammad's [Warith Deen Mohammed] son, Ozier was the photographer.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ozier Muhammad.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a photographer there.  There--Todd--his father was a, was a, was a classical singer.
Speaker 1: Brown, Todd Brown [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Duncan.
Speaker 1: Todd Duncan.
Speaker 2: Does that--
Speaker 1: His father was a classical singer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Todd Duncan, he, he, he was a photographer.  And who else, who were the others?  I am so close to remembering that other photographer's name.
Speaker 1: So I mean that's a--like a, a class A operation really there.
Speaker 2: And that was Jet and Ebony, they had a succession of writers that you'd open up the magazine and just say--they, they just--their writing was just gorgeous.  You know and I aspired to write like that.  That's what I wanted to, to get to.  Not that I wanted to work for Ebony.  I never, I never aspired to work for Ebony, 'cause I really enjoyed Jet.  I enjoyed the people I was working with.  Whenever you work at Johnson, you have an opportunity to work wherever you want.  But I, I really liked Jet.
Speaker 1: So you actually could work--so talk about the culture and how it was and, and where are the photographers, were they on staff?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I always hear about the freelance photographers.
Speaker 2: No, they were on staff.  They were--back then it was freelance--the only--I'm trying to think of--the only freelancer I knew was the California correspondent, Bob Lucas.  He wasn't full time I don't think.  Almost remembering that photographer's name.
Speaker 1: And, and so do you remember when DeLeon, were you there when he left?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And 'cause he, he--can you talk about his--what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I--he got--well being married to a star and I guess he--my recollection is that he just--it was just time for him to move on.  I don't think it was a blowup or anything.  I don't recall that.  So he goes out there and he's working for--or creates a public relations firm.  His departure leads to one of my first promotions there.  Because the--he, he--I was copy editor at the time.  'Cause Clarence Brown had left and become publisher of a black newspaper in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So I said, oh, I wanna do that.  'Cause I'm starting to realize that I don't really wanna be a reporter, but I like working for Jet and this is what I--I like this.  I like manipulating words, and I'm good at it.  So when, when he left, then Don Adderton [Donald Adderton] and I became co-managing editors.  And then Don went to be the New York [New York] bureau chief and I got to be managing editor all by myself.
Story_ID: 662390
Speaker 1: And so where this story is headed is that opportunity at Johnson's [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] it came really quick, really quick.  So that's a good thing, and it's a bad thing because if you're young and you get all of that all at once, then I've seen all of this, what else is there?  You're not really striving to have a bunch of experiences that it takes people at mainstream newspapers years to get to.  And I'm getting it all in these concentrated bursts, so that's--
Speaker 2: So you become managing editor in what year?  Do you remember?  How long had you been there?
Speaker 1: It wasn't--not long.  It was--so I, I'm fairly certain the copy editor was '76 [1976].  So this would have been '77 [1977] or '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Right, because I have you returning back to The Pittsburgh Press in '77 [1977].  So you're managing editor before you go back to The Pittsburgh Press.  That's hu- do you think because you were anointed by your, you know your father [George Brown] and, and people?  And then the other was you probably were working hard.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was working, yeah.  Yeah you worked hard.
Speaker 2: Like how?
Speaker 1: Late hours.  The--the amount of work--
Speaker 2: Give a typical day or week.  I mean what was involved with even putting that publication together?
Speaker 1: So let's say leaving aside original stories that you did yourself.  Well we had a box of clips from other newspapers 'cause Jet is a digest, first and foremost.  So you'd rewrite these clips and lots of them.  And then you'd make them--you know you'd make them fit in the design and--so just a lot of work every day and a lot of stress because you, you're trying to do what's right.  Then you've got to do original work.  So you know you'd do some travel and, and, and all that other work would be waiting for you.  No one else would do your work for you while you were gone.  So just--it was intense.  But it wasn't, it wasn't fulfilling.  That, that kind of work wasn't fulfilling me, so I needed--
Speaker 2: Now why was that?  Because it's so short, the writing is so short?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was, it was--once you master that.  I mean once the game, the game is to be as much fun with it unless it's again, a tragedy or something, to have as much fun with it as you can.  But it had to be dignified.  So once you master that thing and what's there for you, okay to do longer form journalism.  But I didn't want to be a reporter ultimately.  I like writing, didn't like reporting.  And I'm a very introspective person.  And so I--rather than deny it and deny it, I just embraced it and said, okay I--
Speaker 2: So how long--so the format--'cause you know they have the--what is the play girl, play, play--the Beauty of the Week, the Beauty of the Week.  They still have the Beauty of the Week.
Speaker 1: Yes they do.
Speaker 2: Even it, you know today.
Speaker 1: Right, back from the [HistoryMaker] Lamonte McLemore, who was the 'Up, Up and Away.'
Speaker 2: The 5th Dimension.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 5th Dimension.  You know he used to shoot most of them.
Speaker 2: He did?
Speaker 1: For a long time.  Yeah matter of fact, once I picked up a Jet after not having seen it a while, I said, "Oh, oh it's a new name in the Jet centerfold."
Speaker 2: I see, I never knew that.  He did the--he shot them?
Speaker 1: Yes he did.
Story_ID: 662391
Speaker 1: So, so what was involved though with putting that together, though, and so as managing--if you were managing editor, you're making decisions about what goes where.  But everything is approved by Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean he would approve everything up to a point.  He wouldn't get too deep in the weeds.  But for example the cover, he would approve the cover.  But he was accustomed to people giving him work that was suitable.  So we didn't hear back from him all--, "You need to change this."  He only got back to us when it was something that we might not, we might be aware of and you know, he--maybe he didn't want a particular angle played up.  He wanted a different angle played up for whatever reason.  But that was rare.  It was--there were, there, there wasn't a lot of interference from anybody on that.  So if you, if you were to open up a Jet from those days, it started with the--I think the National Report.  So you have so many pages to fill, whether there's national news or not.  So maybe four to a page.  Well and sometimes you'd have to report those stories because just picking something up from another paper and you couldn't plagiarize it, so you had to rewrite it.  But sometimes there, there would be a fact that you'd need to check or like that, that takes time.  Accuracy--'cause we didn't make a lot of mistakes.  I mean if the newspaper made a mistake that we couldn't have known, okay.  But we ourselves, I don't recall making or my colleagues making a lot of mistakes because you know we, we were all about excellence.  I'm very proud of it.  Proud of one another's excellence too.
Speaker 1: So that was all set by Mr. Johnson in that way and the team of people.  So--
Speaker 2: I would--I wanna give credit to Bob Johnson [Robert E. Johnson] for that.  Bob Johnson was the spirit, spiritual leader of Jet.  And his philosophy reigned.  So and you know he--his tastes were--he could tell you everything about national news, entertainment.  He knew as much about everything each one of us was doing as we did.  So no he was just, he was awesome.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we weren't able to interview him, but I've heard many a person talk about what a caliber person he was.
Speaker 2: Right.  When he, when he died, at his funeral all of these people came out of the woodwork to say of his philanthropic efforts.  Not, not money but just he would, he would just donate himself and his time and his influence to so many people, just one after another coming up there like that.  That's my my--Clifton Davis, I, I was at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] by then and Clifton Davis walks up there and he's telling a story about you know how he was, he was in some dire straight and, and Bob Johnson, and nobody ever knew it.  That was the other thing, Bob Johnson did all of these acts without--I mean he didn't even tell me about it.  And we used to share a lot of secrets and stuff, but that was a part of him that he didn't feel he needed to brag about.  He was great in that regard.
Story_ID: 662392
Speaker 1: So you--why did you leave then?  You know 'cause--
Speaker 2: The first time I left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first time.
Speaker 2: The first time I left because I guess I didn't see eye to eye on certain philosophical things the way he wanted us, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] wanted us to do certain kinds of stories.  And so we did those stories.
Speaker 1: So what kind of stories?
Speaker 2: Thing is I've told this story so many times, I've left out the details even in the storytelling.  But let's say I want more people stories.  So we'd give him people stories and then he comes back and he says, "Well I, I--why are you guys doing all these people stories?"  "'Cause you told us so." And now he got a little disgruntled and, and so it became abundantly clear that he wanted to make some changes around there.  So we beat him to it.
Speaker 1: And who's we then?
Speaker 2: Well I had a, I had brought up a fellow reporter from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] that--Edwina Rankin, and then it's Kaikai now.
Speaker 1: Name?
Speaker 2: Kaikai, K-A-I-K-A-I, Edwina [Edwina Rankin Kaikai].  And I said you know, "Maybe you might think about going back to Pittsburgh 'cause I don't know where this is headed."  And, and so I followed quickly thereafter.  Then my mother [Helen Young Brown] and my wife's mother got sick and so we wanted to return to Chicago [Illinois], and that's why I went back.  And why did I leave for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]?  Well not only 'cause I was by this time features editor, features writer.   And I just felt like I wanted--I just wanted to have a complete career change and I wanted to get back into newspapers.  And I said, "Well you know let me do this now while I'm semi-young 'cause if I'm fifty years old and you know, who's gonna want somebody who's been working on a magazine for--at age fifty coming to a newspaper?"  'Cause that's all the world was, magazines and newspapers back then.  So I liked newspapers better, so I said, "Well let me do this for a newspaper and see how that goes."
Story_ID: 662393
Speaker 1: Oh it's family.
Speaker 2: It's family.
Speaker 1: So you, you're really--you're feeling smart and young and I mean you're young.  But you're feeling quite the professional.  You've been managing and you come back.  Now who is are--when you come back, you're coming in on the Jet side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so who is there at Jet at that point?
Speaker 2: Everyone I mentioned before except Bill Berry, is he a junior?  Dr. Bill Berry, who's related to the Bill Berry.
Speaker 1: He's a junior then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't know that that's his father.
Speaker 1: That he went by--okay.
Speaker 2: That's the thing, I--
Speaker 1: You don't think they're related, okay.
Speaker 2: They're related, they're definitely related.  I just don't know if he--I just can't remember if that's his father or an uncle.  But anyway, and Bill is just, just the most creative person you'd ever wanna meet.  And right now he's big time educator down at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  But at the time, he, he had been named managing editor after I left and, and you know I, I'm not the kind of person, "No that was my job.  I, I think I wanna do it my way.  No, no, no."  I liked Bill immediately, as soon as I met him, I liked him.  And I, I just wanted to do what I was there to do.  I didn't wanna supervise anybody.  I just wanted to do my thing.  And, and that worked out real well until I got tired and had to move on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 662394
Speaker 1: You had gotten married in '77 [1977].  Can you tell us about your wife [Alice Clark Brown] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah. My wife was a tour guide at Johnson's [Johnson's Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois].  And she never will answer this question, but I--it was love at first sight for me.  I say, "What about you?"  And she just, "Ha, ha."  So I don't know how she felt and she's never gonna tell me.  Maybe on my deathbed.  But, but for me it was like ooh.  And here's the situation.  I was, I was new there and I was supposed to go work in the Los Angeles [California] bureau, which I didn't necessarily wanna do.  I just--but the entertainment editor probably--the writer should probably go out there.  So I went up to get my, my lunch pass.  'Cause you had to, had to buy--you had to have it taken out of your pay, a dollar a week.  So I went up to take care of that and she happened to be sitting at the desk taking those orders at that moment.  And I just see this, you know, bright smile and I was finished.  That was '75 [1975] obviously, and then we, we dated and--for about, I don't know, six months.  And I couldn't take it anymore.
Speaker 1: So it was really love at first sight.
Speaker 2: For me.  Again, I can't speak for her.
Speaker 1: But the thing--so she--you should talk about the tours.  So what was she--'cause that's another feature of the building.
Speaker 2: Yes, they had, let me see if I can count them--one, two, three, four, five tour guides.  And the tours were like constant.  You had to, you had to--you couldn't just walk in and say, give me a tour.  You had to--but schools would come through, dignitaries would come through.  Whenever we had a, a big time guest who wanted to see the building, tour guides would, would, would take them around.  And she was, she was always very--she, she just took it very seriously.  'Cause again you know being a native Chicagoan, this Jet, this Johnson Publishing Company thing was a big deal to her.  So being able to work there.  You know she had been in the circus before she went there.  So she was a--
Speaker 1: She had been in the circus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ringling Brothers, Barnum and Bailey Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus], you know, dancing on the--not the high wires, but you know when, when, when the show girls go up on the thing and, and ride, and ride an elephant.  She was the first black, the first black female in the blue unit of Ringling Brothers, Barnum and Bailey Circus.  They had a red unit and a blue unit.  And the blue unit was new.  It used to be just--but when they split into two so that they could have one group going one way in the country--over the country and another, she got to be on the, on that blue unit.
Speaker 1: That's impressive. I've never known anyone to be in the circus (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 662395
Speaker 1: So with--so I--how do you get hired at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] then?
Speaker 2: So (unclear)--
Speaker 1: You know before--are there any other stories you would like to share about your time at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]?  'Cause you know they had the kitchen there, and then they had the test kitchen.
Speaker 2: They, they also had a, an executive lunchroom where they would take the big stars.  Serve lobster and steak, surf and turf and champagne.  And not low end champagne, the best.  And I, I, I will always remember meeting the stars there and listening to them talk.  That's, that's always great.  But I'll never forget that Esther Phillips, she had a drinking problem.  And she and I and another person who has to remain nameless, stayed after lunch and she starts telling her life story.  Problem is I'm drunk, my colleague is drunk, and this is the greatest story ever told and not one note, tape recorder is not on, nothing's happening.  And we're sitting there trying to rally to get this down so that we can have this blockbuster story.  Well her head hits the--her plate.  The other guy, his, his head hits his plate, and I'm just sitting there saying, I'm gonna be in so much trouble.  So I just kind of patiently waiting 'til they both woke up.  We never spoke of it again.  But it was--that, that's my number one memory besides the surf and turf and the champagne.  The Jacksons.  They come through for a--
Speaker 1: Jackson 5.
Speaker 2: Jackson 5, and they were still The Jackson 5 at the time, no Jacksons.  And I mean the whole family, Rebbie [Rebbie Jackson]--
Speaker 1: His older sister.
Speaker 2: Janet [Janet Jackson], and, and La Toya [La Toya Jackson], who was a teenager.  And, and, and Janet--I think--did she--I don't--yeah well she was on 'Good Times.'  So she had to have been--well she was a little girl.  But, but not Janet was a teenager and Rebbie was, you know our age, an adult.  And, and I just thought it was strange because we were going to do a--that's when I had my first chitterling was at that--I remember that.  And not that they weren't cooked at my house, but I was a finicky eater and it was like, "I ain't eating that."  But my grandmother [Willie Dobbins Young] and mother [Helen Young Brown] liked them, but not Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown].  But anyway so it's Father's Day is coming up and we were gonna do a Father's Day feature on them.  So I'm interviewing them all, and I just thought it was the strangest thing.  They didn't seem to wanna talk about him, and they called him Joseph [Joe Jackson].  I had never encountered a family talking about the patriarch--it's not like they called mom Jacqueline [sic. Katherine Jackson].  But to a, to a, to a member they all called him Joseph and you know nice, rote answers.  Now we know.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  That's an interesting--I mean back then that would have been very impolite.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know you don't call your father by his first name.
Speaker 2: And I, and I can't remember--I'd have to try to find that Jet, whether I mentioned that or not.  I, I don't remember whether I did that 'cause I--it was just a strange detail that I didn't know whether I put it in the story or not.  But it, it remained with me and, and, and then when you see them now and you know back when they were having trouble, they all called him Joseph.  And I just thought--but that, that was my introduction to that kind of thing and I just thought, wow.
Story_ID: 662396
Speaker 1: And, but any other celebrities that you have sort of anecdotes about that you met?  'Cause there were a whole string of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: --that would come, it was almost like an endless string.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, it was.  So Gwen McCrae, 'Rockin' Chair.'  She gives me a story about how her daughter [Wanda McCrae Humes] was--had been possessed.  That story is published, so I'm not telling any tales out of school.  But I went to--I, I just imagined that people would, would, would come after me if my name was on the story and I, I wasn't really proud of doing a story like that.  Although now I'd be delighted, right because the Internet, it would blow up.  But back then I didn't want to be associated with a, an exorcism story.  So--but it was a great story.  It doesn't change the fact that she was telling a great story and I reported it all.  I talked to the minister [E.C. Williams].  So I go to Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and say, "Mr. Johnson, I don't--I, I really prefer not to have my name on this."  He said, "Oh no, you gotta have your name on it."  I said, "Well you know I just, I just fear people, you know, coming after me trying to put hoodoo and stuff on me."  He said, "Oh, okay" (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that got you out of it?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I have not--I've never been ashamed of that.
Story_ID: 662397
Speaker 1: What about people like the, the, the--your general counsel?  Did you have much dealings with her? J- June--
Speaker 2: June Rhinehart [June Acie Rhinehart] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) June Rhinehart.
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  I, I--they had another--she was the head of, of legal, but they had a lawyer on retainer; name gone.  If I'm not mistaken, he might have been the front man when, when Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] bought that building.  That, that's my recollection of the lore, but I don't know that that necessarily was him.  But he would have been of that age.  And I--I had--any dealings I had would be with him and what, what, what you talked to him about is something looked like it could be libelous.  You don't take chances with that.  You, you run that by a lawyer.  Even at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] we don't, we don't play.  We, we get the lawyers involved as soon as possible.  And so that was my dealings.  But June, I mean June was totally accessible.  I mean get on the elevator, "Hi June."  And she was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] as I recollect.  I mean not any time when I was there 'cause she had been there quite some time by the time I got there.  But she was, yeah she was totally pleasant.
Story_ID: 662398
Speaker 1: Now what was the relationship between the Jet and Ebony staff?  You know and--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: No, no relations?
Speaker 2: No, separate publications.  Personally, sure.
Speaker 1: But I mean did people stay on their floors, or did you inter- intermix with floors?
Speaker 2: We stayed on our floor 'cause we were working.  But every blue moon you'd have five minutes to spare and if you wanted to go upstairs.  Like I'd go upstairs and visit Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders], 'cause he was a lot of fun and he was very supportive of, of me.  And just a, you know, great guy and you know if he'd see where you did something stylistically that, that wasn't you know kosher, he'd say--and he'd tell you in a nice way.  You know there's more than one way to tell a young person that they've not done the very best thing, you know.  And you know there were other people there who didn't.  But he was one of the good ones who--you know he was a nurturer, not a, not a, not an autocrat like that.  And they had two managing editors, Massaquoi and, and he.
Speaker 1: I had wanted to get Hans Massaquoi 'cause he has a fascinating story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's, yeah his background alone is--
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about his background?
Speaker 2: Just that he was in Germany, he comes from Germany I think.  I mean he lived there, grew up there or something like that, but that's it.
Story_ID: 662399
Speaker 1: So you go to the Tribune [Chicago Tribune].  So you were hired as a copy editor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So is that--'cause you have a, you, you take a, a--I don't wanna say, you're not a--but you take, you go from features to copy.  That's a, a cut.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  And I--'cause I was looking for--the problem with being a, a reporter is that you never know when your day is going to end.  And sometimes you know, you--it can begin--I was taking a shower once in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and there was this big explosion in, in the nearby town in Ohio.  And so I'm thinking I'm gonna go to work and cover some night meetings.  No, go to that city and start reporting.  Okay.  Well a little of that went a long way with Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown].  Not my--that doesn't excite me.  Not knowing you know, when my day's going to begin and end.  It's funny because that's how it is now at a news--but that's getting ahead of myself.  So being able to sit on a copy desk and just do the work in an eight hour period, that really appealed to me.  And I was a young father and even though the hours were awful, still I mean awful late, not awful up and down, but awful late, strange days off.  But there was some--you could plan.  And I liked that.  I'm not saying this to brag, but everywhere I've ever gone, it's not long before I wind up getting more responsibility.  And I like to joke that that's because I show up to work every day and I'm conscientious.  Leaving talent aside.  But I think there's a lesson in there for all kinds of young people.  If you show up to work every day and you're conscientious, you will be noticed.  And even if you're not that good, we'll get to performance later on.  But if, even if you're not that good, people will come out of the woodwork to help you if you have those two qualities.
Story_ID: 662400
Speaker 1: So when you, when you get there, who's there at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]?
Speaker 2: Well Brenda's [ph.] there, Ruby Scott.  Have you ever heard of Ruby Scott?  She was there.
Speaker 1: Leanita McClain.
Speaker 2: Leanita McClain was there.  I have a Leanita McClain story.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page.
Speaker 2: Page, yeah, but I think he might have been in, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] by then.  [HistoryMaker] Monroe Anderson was there and Barbara Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds] was there, but she was in D.C.  Who else?  Well obviously Fred, Fred Mitchell was there 'cause he's been there longer than I have.  Who else?  You know a couple copy editors, I can't remember anybody's name.  A photographer who I think might have been the first, certainly the first black photographer there.
Speaker 1: John, no not John White [John H. White].
Speaker 2: Yeah John, John--no John White never worked there, but John White reporter did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And then did you have--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ovie Carter.
Speaker 1: Ovie Carter, okay Ovie Carter.  And then I wanted to ask about people like--was, was Jerry Thomas there at that time?
Speaker 2: No, Jerry Thomas, I--one of my next jobs was bureau chief.  Jerry Thomas, Jerry Thomas comes up there and his--I was his first supervisor.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So you start, so but you're saying you find the, the experience quite cold, you know in that way.  And then a year later after you get started, James Squires [James D. Squires] comes aboard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a, he had a knack of just putting people in new positions just on a whim.  And that terrorized the newsroom for a while, but I managed to fly under the radar, so I stayed where I was.  Although I did a lot of jobs as a copy editor.  I didn't just sit on the desk and edit copy.  But there are all kinds of things, there's makeup work where you go down, back when we had cold, cold type and you'd make trims on, on the paper and so that the stories would fit.  Before we got all computerized, so all that kind of stuff, working the photo desk, all that.
Story_ID: 662401
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you assigned to any area at that point?
Speaker 2: I would call it metro.
Speaker 1: So the metro desk.
Speaker 2: Yeah the metro copy desk.
Speaker 1: And so metro desk, politics are a part of the metro desk, right?  So you get started when Jane Byrne is, is I think mayor at that point.
Speaker 2: No, she--
Speaker 1: Bilandic [Michael Bilandic]?
Speaker 2: Bilandic.  Jane Byrne is the mayor that Harold Washington defeat- I mean, right.
Speaker 1: Jane Byrne then it's Harold Washington
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and Daley [Richard M. Daley], they split the vote.  So--and here's my Leanita story.  So--
Speaker 1: Leanita McClain.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you remember that she wrote this story in The Washington Post while she was at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], saying, why I wanna kill white people after the election, because the way people were behaving about Harold Washington really upset her.  Do you remember that?  Yeah.  So I didn't--put it this way--I understood that.  Not--I didn't wanna kill anybody.  My thing was I had taken a lot of abuse down on the printer's floor cause there were some black printers, but most of them were white.  And they were being really abusive.  Okay, I can give you details 'cause I was there.  So this one guy walking down the aisle just saying, "God, I wish to god I lived in the city so I could help you guys out."  I'm like, "Well what does that mean?"  And these are people I'd been friendly with.  It was so cold, and the, and the black printers were just sitting there whispering, "God please let us make it through the night."  But I was, you know, running the floor.  So I had to ask the editorial representative and you know, it was a union shop, you gotta be careful what you do and what you say.  And I had to listen to this kind of stuff.  "What, are they gonna rename the police boat?  African Queen.  Ha, ha, ha, ha."  All night long this is going on and I'm like well--and I have this idealized view of journalists and I'm thinking well when I get off the floor here, I'm gonna be going upstairs.  It was the, the third floor to the fourth floor 'cause the printers were on the third floor.  I'm gonna go upstairs and it's gonna be a breath of fresh air because journalists like change.  And I walked up there and all of these people, young, middle aged, everybody were gathered around the TV looking like someone had died in their family.  Looking at the results.  Now I'm thinking they'd be sitting up there yukking it up, "Aha, look at Chicago [Illinois] politics, that really turned it on its ear."  I thought they would have been excited about that.  And I'm seeing--it's like, "What--do you think he's gonna cook you and eat you?  No, no."  So when her story came out, and, and I think I know the friend she was talking about.  Because I became friends with this person later.  I never asked her about it, but I know they used to hang out.  And when this person couldn't understand why Leanita was all for Harold Washington and Leanita couldn't understand why this person couldn't understand why Leanita would be for Harold Washington.  That's when she wrote that piece.  And I thought I get it, I get it.  I wasn't angry, I was disappointed because again, I had this idealized view that no matter what's going on, we're supposed to be objective and change is good.  Not that night.  Now I would say fast forward to 2008 and there were people--they were trying to hold down, hold it down.  But they were really excited about this, this change.  And I thought well from Harold Washington to this, wow, has this place changed.
Story_ID: 662402
Speaker 1: So, so the Trib- so you had not--this was the thing.  You're talking as really you are, and that is still an outsider to Chicago [Illinois] politics, you know.  And this is a very political town.  So you go--I wanna understand your, your, your--the transition in the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] because you know the period you're talking about, it's a very political period.  It's the election, it's the elation of, of the election of the first black--Chicago first black mayor.  And it's a big news--I mean new--people are buying up those papers because it's the twenty-nine versus the twenty-one [on the Chicago City Council], you know council wars and all of that.  And so I'm just wondering--'cause I have you going--you know you were associate headline editor in 1986, and then you--I think you were promoted--
Speaker 2: But this was, this was post Harold [Harold Washington].
Speaker 1: This is post?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] is post--
Speaker 2: He dies in '87 [1987], but the council wars were in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: In the early years, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: So I'm just trying to understand what is it like being in, you know in that public--I mean at the Tribune and what is, is it that--well what is it like and then I'll ask you other questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well by '83 [1983], by '83 [1983], I'm kind of established as a person who's going--who's good enough to be working at the Tribune.  I might have, I might have bounced around to different desks.  I mean the stories come over and they are what they are.  This is what's happening, council wars.  It's theater of the absurd, right?  But I don't recall even though there was a conservative editorial page, I mean clearly conservative.  I don't recall that the news stuff, and I didn't work in editorial, I mean the editorial board area.  I worked in the news area.  So that kind of stuff just kind of floats by you.  If you see a story that's imbalanced, you would just say that seems a little imbalanced and you talk to the assigning editor about it.  You wouldn't necessarily talk to a reporter about it.
Story_ID: 662403
Speaker 1: Who was managing the newsroom at that time?
Speaker 2: In eight- in the--I, I want--well Squires [James D. Squires] was the editor, right?  And then he had a managing editor, J. Randolph Murray.  And he was running the newsroom and he was the--he's from the South somewhere.  I, I can't tell you where, but you know he was always respectful and you know, he was good to me.  And, and I, you know if I had had any kind of problem with, with other employees, but I didn't 'cause there was no trouble to be had.  I know that the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] has this reputation as being this cold, right wing thing, but it's really--well yeah it's cold.  But it's, it's, it's--if you leave aside what's on the editorial pages, everything else is down the middle.  That's the only way you can operate.  If it--by being down the middle, we displease folks on the left and the right.  And I can talk 'til I'm blue in the face and have on many occasions, but trust me, we don't, we don't go into our news day looking to slant it one way or the other.  People wouldn't work there.  You know this is not like some of your cable channels, that wouldn't work.  Now the fact that individual X or individual Y thinks we're not being hard enough on the bad guys, or we're being too hard on the good guys, yeah, I, I get that, I understand that.  But the idea that we all come together just to, to have an agenda every day, it would be impossible.  And I'm not saying that 'cause you know, to, to, to defend my thirty-three years there.  I mean I, I have a mouth and I--whenever, whenever something's not going on that I like, I'm a newsroom leader and I say it.  And I'm a fair person and I don't like unfairness, I don't like injustice.  So when I see it, I try to find a way to deal with it.  And I'm one of the people who people come to, you know to talk about issues of fairness, so I, I have to be totally dispassionate about it.
Story_ID: 662404
Speaker 1: So when you, when you come--become the national foreign news editor, that seems like--that's a big deal.
Speaker 2: Right, and so, so what that is was a, was a heavy duty quality control.  I wasn't, I wasn't determining what was going to go in the paper.  News editor was sort of a you know I had to, I had to schedule people and I had to, you know I was responsible for accuracy and I was responsible for evaluations of the production side, the, the, the assigning editors and the--but the correspondence, they all reported to the national editor and the foreign editor.  So you know we--and, and we had to get the newspaper in on time, so I was a--I had to crack the whip on deadlines and stuff like that.  That's what that job was, not, not determining what went in the paper.  That comes later.
Speaker 1: Comes later, okay.  So tell, tell your, tell the rest of the things, 'cause I have you metro chief for Rosemont [Illinois], national foreign copy editor, overnight page editor.  You know and in this time I think Jack Fuller takes, I mean--and he's, he's probably--I mean his name became somewhat legendary.  I remember his--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he's a, he's a novelist too, right.  So yeah it's about this time, to answer your question you asked a long time ago, so who's looking out for Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown]?  So Howard Tyner who was the foreign editor, he took a liking to me because again, conscientious sense of humor and all that kind of stuff.  And he was one of those kind of people who would actually take an interest in how things worked.  So he wanted to know how the copy desk worked.  So I told him, you know, and he'd praise our headlines when they were good and slam them when they were bad.  But for the most part, I didn't take it personally.  That's what derails a lot of people, that they can't take criticism so they you know, they bite back and whatnot.  It's like, "Okay you didn't like it, tell me what you didn't like about it, okay."  And you and--you don't repeat the, the--your mistake.  Well he--and then he start--so he's sitting off like the side saying, "We ought to do something with this guy."  Bless his heart.  So one day he gets to be--I think he runs--he, he winds up going over to features because that was the, the track.  So Jack Fuller had been executive editor of features, and then he became the editor and they were trying to groom Howard for the same thing.  So he went over to features.  Meanwhile, I'm out--they decide now I, I've gone to--when I was a news editor, they said, "Okay well we wanna see you become a manager and you know, to man the troops.  So we're gone put you in Rosemont."  That was--they cooked up that scheme for Geoff and so I wound up being a bureau chief, which is where I meet Jerry Thomas.  And, and while I hated every single moment of it, I have to say that that experience was probably the most important in my development because as a bureau chief, you have to chase fire engines and you have to deploy the troops and you have to stay there all night until the story gets done.  And, and if it's not done right, it's on you.  Now what I didn't like about it was chasing fire engines.  All the rest of it, I dug it, right.  So I managed to talk myself into returning back downtown where national, I'm just on the national foreign desk.  And then Howard says, "Why don't you come work in features?"  And there was this thing called the overnight page, and that was the entertainment page.  And funny moment, he says, "So I, I don't know if you're into this stuff."  I said, "Well, you haven't seen my resume, but that's pretty much all I did before I came to the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]."  So I had an affinity for it.  So that's how I got--and I wasn't--here's the thing.  I wasn't too ashamed to say I really--I'm getting depressed from doing this job.  I hate this so much.  So can I please be relieved of it?  So they were able to do it without the--but you know a lot of people asked me, "Well then didn't you think that would derail your career?"  Well when you hate something that much, you don't care.  I wasn't a careerist, so I got, I keep getting promoted anyway.
Story_ID: 662405
Speaker 1: So that--you know was now, was it under you that Jerry [Jerry Thomas] was fired--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No.
Speaker 1: --by the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]?  So that's later.  But not--oh, that is later.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's later.
Speaker 2: Yeah he, he was, yeah he did--he was in, he was still in metro.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay.  But you and Howard Tyner developed a good relationship.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So when--so what about being promoted to entertainment editor?
Speaker 2: So that's '93 [1983], right?  So my boss who was Gary Dretzka, again he and I thought a lot alike and most of the people that he was working with couldn't seem to you know, chase entertainment stuff like he thought it ought to be chased.  You know, creatively.  And to his credit, he was one of the people who, who believed in diversity.  So well how convenient.  So he, he would never get in my way and as I would create--as I would go, I would go out and find stuff in the community that was not the regular old thing.  Howard Tyner took notice and he was like you know, "Yeah that's cool.  I never knew that person existed, that's a great story."  And one of my, one of my fondest memories of that time is Rohan Preston who's the, the theater critic in Minnesota, Minneapolis, Star Tribune, you know he was freelancing for me.  And, and, and, and I brought him on.  And you know he did all the--he, he helped me find all these great things.  And it got to the point where when I took the--when I got that job in the first place, we used to have to look to the Reader [Chicago Reader] to find out what was going on.  And by the time I left it, we--no one really needed the Reader.  I mean it's a nice publication, but you didn't--if you were looking for offbeat kinds of things, you were getting it in the Tribune.  So there's that.
Story_ID: 662406
Speaker 1: That is what you were able to manage to do.  And how did you do that?  So you're talking about the result, but how did you go about that?
Speaker 2: So if you have enlightened management, and they tell you I wanna see different from what's being done here.  I'm tired of classical and theater only.  We'd have jazz and rock and all that, but basically the--most of it was theater and classical and, and fundraisers.  Like the joke that when I started diversify--when I started getting different kinds of, of, of events in there, like the Black Creativity Gala when it was new.  'Cause about that time they decided they didn't need that overnight page anymore [in the Chicago Tribune].
Speaker 1: So things like that would happen and you'd have to--right?
Speaker 2: Right, so but if--but that was that.  But the rest of the entertainment report, like you can do--what we were doing four stories.  And I said, "Well I wanna do a fifth and I wanna do something interesting, something fun, something we're not accustomed to seeing."  So and you know there were some people who resisted that.  And there were others who applauded it.  And the people who--among the people applauding it were you know, Howard Tyner.  So it was working for me.  I'd like to take this opportunity to say--'cause later on we might talk about achievements and whatnot.  But I think this is an important time to say one thing I did that I'm always gonna take credit for.  When I took over that overnight page, the Black Ensemble Theater [Black Ensemble Theater Company] was on our C list.  And I joked that that meant we'd see it when we'd see it, their openings.  And I said, "Well, I'm the entertainment czar, so I say it's on the A list.  So when it opens we're gonna see it on opening night, okay."  What does that do?  If, if on a schedule that becomes important, then down the line it stays important.  So by the time Chris Jones comes around, it, it's, it's a, it's a staple.  But here's where I give him total credit.  So he took, he championed them, the things they did and whatnot, and the folks in New York [New York] took notice of it, and then Black Ensemble Theater starts getting it's stuff on Broadway.  So I always joke that I put them on the A list and he got them to Broadway.  That's a story you won't get anywhere else.  'Cause I was there.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well a lot of times people don't know the, you know the decisions and the power of the media, as, as very important (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  It's easy to just you know, do the status quo.  That's easy.  No one would ever have a problem with, with that, but yeah.
Story_ID: 662407
Speaker 1: So when you--so you're, you're not--I wanna take you to 1998 and 19--1989, 1998 to 1999.  Is that that time you're talking about when you're associate managing editor for entertainment?
Speaker 2: No, that, that's subsequent.  So I was entertainment editor, which is you know--
Speaker 1: And then you become--
Speaker 2: Associate managing editor.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the, the comic strips?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Because I, you know I never even thought--I wasn't thinking, you know, com- I mean when I read this, this was fascinating to me.  So you have to give all the context and all of that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so how I--so the current editor of the paper, Gerry Kern [Gerould Kern], by now Howard Tyner has moved up to be editor.  Ann Marie Lipinski who's going to become editor after him was managing editor, and Jerry Kern who I worked with in, in Rosemont [Illinois], he was--I was his--I was--when he came to work there, I was you know I, I reported to him.  So he knew me from there.  So now he's features, he comes in as features editor, well which position that I think someone else had been in there in between, Owen Youngman and then, and then, and then Jerry [ph.].  So 1990--where were we?  So, so Charles Schulz [Charles M. Schulz], Peanuts guy, dies.  And Gerry says, "We need a special section.  And since you're gonna have to deal with the syndicate too to get the--to deal with all of this, why don't you take responsibility for the cartoons too?"  I hadn't read cartoons since, you know, I mean I used to read newspapers and look at Beetle Bailey and all that kind of stuff, right.  But after I grew up, I didn't look at them, so I knew nothing.
Story_ID: 662408
Speaker 1: But I had to come up with this special section, so find special section.  And now it's time to deal with the cartoons.  And the cartoons are a landmine because any change you try to make, is just gonna set off people.  And they don't take it well.  And I don't care if it's a cartoon that nobody's reading except the handful of people who write into you to say, "What'd you take my cartoon out for?"  Or you tend not to deal with the really, really popular ones because they are popular, why would you do that?  So--but at the same time I felt like what I was looking at was, I always use this word, a bunch of pabulum.  And everything was the same temperature, it was no edgy humor.  And this, again this is times when people want a little more than just humdrum kind of stuff.  So I started dropping things.  We had some research about which strips were more popular than others.  I started dropping the less popular ones and bringing in more edgy ones.  I didn't make it popular.  But again I, I, I was happy to be able to bring in Boondocks [The Boondocks].  And here's how I did it.  I went to all the black people I could find on the staff [of the Chicago Tribune] and I said, "What do you think of this?"  'Cause I mean they give you samples before it's time to start.  I swear to god, 50/50 split.  "I don't think this is, I don't think people would go for this."  And the other was like, "Wow, this is great stuff."  So I just said, "You know, I want great stuff and I don't mind taking the heat for it."  So we put it in and they all went--the syndicate always worked me 'cause sometimes the cartoonists will just go too far.  Just way too far.  I'll give you an example.  And this was down the road some.  So it's funny in the abstract as I'm telling it, but you know he likes to use the N word a lot.  So what he did was he had these, these organizations that when you, when you put the acronym up at the top in bold letters would spell out some variation of the N word.  I'm like you know, I said, "Look, we don't have to do this.  If you'll just take those off, people can do their own work on the acronyms.  Now you've got a really good joke because if you don't get the acronym, you're not gonna be offended.  But if you do and the N word doesn't offend you, then you get a, a second chuckle."  So that kind of thing goes on all the time.  And not just Boondocks.  Almost every one of them.  I had one--I'm not gonna say which cartoon it was because I don't' like to, I don't like to diss the cartoonists 'cause they work very hard.  But this character had his head up his behind.  And the, and the joke was, "Why are you doing that?  'Cause this guy's breath is so bad, I'm up here for some fresh air."  That's--we try to keep some standard of humor, keep it a little bit elevated.  And that's just, that's too much, that's locker room kind of humor.  And I--it's not Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown] the prude, I get this from my conversations with editors; the editors of the newspaper 'cause they're the ones that insist on some standards.  So they don't want that kind of stuff in the paper.  I'm with them on that.  So you have to watch them like a hawk, but it's time consuming.  But I have help.
Speaker 2: But you learned that how, how important a part of this section of the newspaper really are.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Give some context for Boondocks, Aaron McGruder.  I mean 'cause just for--to say his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was, he's a genius, or was.  And--
Speaker 2: Why do you say was?  He's still alive.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what's being produced I wouldn't necessarily put in that--I mean okay so he is a genius.  He's a genius, but his very best work was that cartoon.  Not, not the animated thing on, on--and that's what he--well not anymore 'cause you know he parted ways with 'The Boondocks' on--the televised version.  He's doing something else like 'Black Jesus' or something like that.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that was in the news.
Speaker 2: Recently?
Speaker 1: A couple, couple weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's new, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's why you don't see his name on this 'Boondocks' that's on Cartoon Network.  You don't see it there because they parted ways.  But his stuff was revolutionary.  The, the artwork was revolutionary.  He was very deep and, and--but not perfect and you know we would, we'd have to spike it sometimes.  Or I'd just ask for a, a substitute.  Best of all was when I could rescue it like with the, the acronyms that spelled out the N word.  So I, I would rather work with a cartoonist and keep what they were trying to do than just saying, "Yeah this, this won't work."  Sometimes that won't work, though.
Story_ID: 662409
Speaker 1: So which of the--you know because Ann Marie Lipinski then gets named the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] editor.  And that's the first female--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you have.
Speaker 2: How is the newspaper starting to change in 2000, 2000.  I mean she gets in 2001, but with media it's starting, you're starting to see some changes even before she comes in, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  I think that it became apparent that the print paper could not--you knew what was going on the night before.  So and afternoon papers of course you could capture news during the day, but not on, not a morning paper.  So you know we maybe--we did--investigations would be our news and, and foreign reporting would be our news, and you know we had bureaus, maybe six or seven of them.  And, and that's--but Howard Tyner had been a, had been a foreign correspondent too.  Matter of fact, I think--I don't know about Fuller [Jack Fuller].  But anyway, he, he'd been a--so you know we had all that stuff in place.  So the changes would be kind of subtle because if you're going from Howard to Ann Marie, you know she was more metro oriented and he might have been more foreign oriented, but it wasn't that you'd see a huge difference.  But what happened really quickly in the 2000s was 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  And that is what--
Speaker 2: So 9/11 is, is the difference.
Speaker 1: 9/11 is the difference.
Speaker 2: Because up to that point, papers are looking at the Internet as a marketing tool.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And they're giving away their content.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And you have black voices I think that you're housing.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: At the, at the Tribune.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you even have a digital section that, I don't remember who was running that, but there's a focus.  And you've already at that point, CLTV [Chicagoland Television], is CLTV part of the Tribune?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So what you're basically saying is financially--why 9/11?  'Cause it was already teetering, or--
Speaker 1: No, I think the, the, the, the economy started to feel the effects of us putting all our money into overseas conflicts.  And, and those reverberations--you know we were on a bubble anyway, that tech bubble.  And then, then that burst.  And you put all that together and newspapers just can't spend that much--you know newsprint costs go up.  People being paid high salaries.  But the revenue, now at this time revenue's way high and it's just coming down like this.  And then somewhere along the line, it starts going like this, and then that, and then it starts going like this.  And that froze the industry into a panic.  And now you've got to shrink papers and you have to make decisions about what you're gonna give people 'cause you can't give them everything anymore.  You can't be all things to all people.  Niches start to become important.  And can you serve a niche?  If you can't serve a niche, then maybe that coverage has to, to go bye-bye, and that's very unsatisfactory.  And yet, you know the bigger newspapers, you know like Pittsburgh Press [The Pittsburgh Press] went under, then it's Post-Gazette [Pittsburgh Post-Gazette].  And, and the Greensburg, what used to be the Greensburg Review [Greensburg Tribune-Review] becomes the Pittsburgh Review [Pittsburgh Tribune-Review].  It was just, just amazing, the changes.  So that's--I feel like when the economy you know cause I think it--wasn't there a, a, tech bubble that burst in like '99 [1999]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around that time and then you have the, the--
Speaker 1: The election.
Speaker 2: The election, and then you have two, the 2008 two thousand--2007, 2008 apocalypse.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And newspapers have to decide how they're going to survive, not just how we're gonna do a great job of journalism, but you can't do journalism if you're not surviving.  And the Tribune made a decision to, to shrink in size, which as you know lately we went the other way.  But--and we survived.
Story_ID: 662410
Speaker 1: So you know before--I, I wanna--well let's continue this and then I will--wanna go back to Aaron McGruder.  'Cause I saw some things I hadn't covered and I'd like to ask those in more detail.  But since we're talking about the, the changes, there have been--I mean you have been--and, and I say the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], has been a--I mean from 1999 to the present, which is really you know, let's say fourteen, fifteen years.  It has been--I mean what I, what I saw here was just, I mean it gets--it's like apocalyptic change in some respects.  So can you talk about that?  Because you know what is happening and you know how the paper changes and it's trying to sort of survive and find its way and, and then the world.  I mean then you have the advent of social media and, and the changes in--so I'm talking, but I want you to talk.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you must be talking about the Zell [Sam Zell] takeover?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what happens before the Zell takeover?
Speaker 2: So, well that--
Speaker 1: Because even your whole digital--I think you closed down the digital.
Speaker 2: No, we, we--no it, it--from 1996 it was, it was a constant thing.  But there had been a whole lot of activity in '96 [1996].  So some of us looking back think we overbuilt for what the market was.  And then you come to a time where oh, no now the Internet's taking off.  And we don't have the resources to build.  Like we could have taken the resources from back then and put them in, say 2005, '6 [2006], '7 [2007], we'd be sitting pretty.  But the money wasn't there.  So, so you have a--you try to have an intelligent transformation of your newsroom so that you can have people chasing news and putting it on- online very quick.  And yet putting out this newspaper later in the evening.  And that's just been a slow process that's been accelerating over the last few years.  So that's, so that's kind of happening before then and we're just kind of putt-putting along.  'Cause in 2000 we had bought the Los Angeles Times [Times Mirror Company], which brings in Hartford [Hartford Courant], Baltimore [The Baltimore Sun], Allentown [The Morning Call], L.A., who am I missing?  I think that, that's it.  And all fine papers.  And Greenwich [Greenwich Time] was in there too.  And so, so we've taken on all of this debt in trying to make ourselves a mega entity.  All of that debt sitting out there, and then we had a, a tax case go against us and the taxes and penalties were you know like, I think we owed $600 million in taxes and then for some reason the--we wound up with $368 million in, in penalties and, and interest.  Well you know we could with that 368 now.  So okay, that's another bad blow.  So then Zell comes in and he says, "Okay, I excel at turning things around.  And so I'm going to show the world what I can do with this, I'm gonna rescue this."  Unfortunately for him at the precise instant that he's buying the paper, revenue, advertising revenue decides to, to go down precipitously so that we're not generating enough revenue to cover all of this stuff; we go bankrupt.  And then we just emerged from that last year, was it?  So from 2008, the end of 2008 to whenever we got out of bankruptcy in 2013--
Story_ID: 662411
Speaker 1: How did your role change during that time?
Speaker 2: In 2000 I'm like the lifestyle editor, right, AME [assistant managing editor] for lifestyle.  And then we had a really big reorganization and right sizing as they like to call it, in 2009.  And so in that reorganization, then they said, "Okay well Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown] we need you to--we're gonna do something else with lifestyle, so we want you to do entertainment, you know how to do it," and whatnot.  So back I come and so that's the only change in my role.  Obviously, it's no fun to lay off people, but which I hadn't done--that's not true.  I hadn't done it--that many people.
Speaker 1: So how many people?
Speaker 2: Boy, how many did we lose that time?  I can't remember the number, but I, but myself, I had to tell about ten people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That day.  Other people had left with buyouts and whatnot.  But this was the first time there were what's called involuntary terminations.
Speaker 1: You're talking about 2011, 2012?
Speaker 2: No, 2009.
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], okay.  Because there's a whole--'cause that Jim Warren [James Warren] leaves the paper [Chicago Tribune], you know the year before that.
Speaker 2: Yes, in two, yeah he, I think he might have been in that 2009--
Speaker 1: And Ann Lipinski [Ann Marie Lipinski] had left, you know had left (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she left when the Zells came in, in that--it was that summer.
Story_ID: 662412
Speaker 1: So in 2008 the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] files for Chapter 11.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, December 8th.  And you're saying it's this whole thing.  And then what is Sam Zell?  Is he saying he wants to exit?  He never really was able as you said to, to realize his dream.
Speaker 2: Right, because, because the revenue fell off, fell off the table.  If there had been revenue at the same level when he was putting the deal together, we'd have been okay.  But when there's not enough coming in, then I mean I remember when, when he had a, a televised conference with the staff and they didn't like it when he said this.  He says, "You know, I can't put out the newspaper you want.  I have to put out the newspaper we can afford."  And that sent chills down everybody's spine.  So, but what he was talking about was you know making some efficiencies that we hadn't made and whatnot.  And that's all fine, and you can do that over a period of time.  But when the revenue drops, he was just caught and there was nothing he or anyone else could do.  The only thing you can do is try to reinvent yourself.  So the first part of the reinvention was to shrink the paper in size.  The second part was to add pages back in and make people pay for it.  And the third is we've got to find a way to monetize the Internet, and quick.
Speaker 1: So that's still a work in process.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As we speak.
Speaker 2: Right, and it's, it's--actually it's been a little easier for entertainment because we have an earlier deadline for the A and E [arts and entertainment] section.  So we get about the business of getting our stories done and online first.  We're happy to have them out sooner rather than later.  Other parts of the newspaper like to hold onto things a little longer, but that's changing.  So we get it out there as soon as we can and it doesn't hurt anything because the print audience is, is starting to separate from the online audience.  So if you put it online, these people wouldn't see it, so they don't care.  It's like it's new to them that--the next morning.
Story_ID: 662413
Speaker 1: Oh so they're starting to separate.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And who's the new print audience?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) There is no new print audience.
Speaker 1: So, so when you say they're trying--they're starting to--
Speaker 2: So the audiences are--so you know your, your, your print audience is a little older.  It has the money to, to do these things.  The Internet audience is made up of a whole lot of people, all kinds of people.  So mainly the ones who keep up with technology are gonna be your people who are in business, The Wall Street Journal types.  The millennials who don't wanna pay for anything, and, and then anyone who's come up in the Internet age don't necessarily wanna have this thing on their doorstep every day.  They'd like to get their news other ways.  They're families, they're not creating habits.  So you know passes down to me, I pass it down to my kids, but they're 50/50 on that.  It's like one of them gets nowhere near a newspaper, the other one will read one if you stick it in his face.  But--and that's just the way it's going.  Well we cry about it, but we have to do something about it.  We have to--but it's still a lucrative audience.
Speaker 1: The print audience.
Speaker 2: It's very--it's still--even though revenue is sinking like a stone, it still pays the bills.  Now we're doing a lot of things to raise revenue on the other side; all kinds of things.  We use our printing plant for more outside business, including we publish the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times].  I mean print it, not publish it, they publish it, we print it.  All kinds of you know little businesses that need printing done, lot of money there.  We have--I don't know if you've heard the commercials on WGN [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois], this is where I've heard them where it's called 435 Digital coming up with solutions for businesses that, that need to be more digital so they can make money.  So that's a little side business.  So we're diversifying a lot on the Internet side.  But you know we have a lot of overhead on the, the print side is where that overhead goes, so--but we have to be experimental and--
Speaker 1: So do you think it'll eventually be a print side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There will always be a print side.
Speaker 2: There will always be a print side.  I don't know where I got this from, but it's been passed down to us.  "No form of communication has made any other form of communication obsolete."  So, so after the Bible, people still tell, people still talk, stories to each other.  Gutenberg [Johannes Gutenberg] comes along, we're still making Bibles.  What comes next?  News, wait we did newspapers, right?  Newspapers come along, we're still printing books.  Radio comes along, we're still printing newspapers.  Television comes along, we're still doing radio and all the rest.  Internet comes along, we're doing all of those, and all the rest, and something else is gonna come along and who knows when and we'll still have print.
Story_ID: 662414
Speaker 1: So do you--I, I wanna ask where are you now in your career?  'Cause you've been there for thirty-three years.
Speaker 2: It's winter.  Or is it the, yeah I'm even in the winter of my life, right?  'Cause I'm gonna be sixty-two soon.  Snowflakes are starting to fall, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're older than your father [George Brown] when he passed away.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Matter of fact, when I hit fifty-nine, which is when--he, he was fifty-eight, but he was going to be fifty-nine in, in a couple months.  I thought--'cause everybody whose, whose, whose parents die young have that wonder if, if it's genetic.  His mother [Katie Smith Brown] lived deep into her nineties, don't ask for detail.  Her sisters, they lived into their nineties, and I mean close to a hundred.  My mother [Helen Young Brown], ninety-two.  He didn't take care of his health, I have HMO [health maintenance organization], which you know, didn't exist back then.  So--and I, and I'm more active than, than he is, I don't smoke.  So you know my chances are gonna be better but until you hit that fifty-eight and, and three fourths, I was concerned and now you know I'd like to retire and, and, and I don't plan to be one of those people who retires and has a sense of I don't belong to anything anymore, or woe is me.  It's like okay, I have too much energy to just sit down and die; I have to, I have to do something with myself.  I'm, you know probably volunteer.  I--one, one person I really respect is [HistoryMaker] Phillip Jackson and his Black Star thing [The Black Star Project, Chicago, Illinois].  And I haven't had time to volunteer for something like that, but boy what I could bring to somebody like him as a tutor.  Good in math.  I can do--I can't do the high math anymore, but if I opened a book, I probably--yeah, that's what you do with a sine, that's right, sine and cosine and all that.  It'd be like riding a bicycle.  But obviously kids that age don't need all of that.  They need, they need to see male role models who are from a different world than them so that they understand that it doesn't have to be bad.  They can aspire to something else.  That that's where I see my future, you know, health willing.  But that's, again, we're not there yet.
Story_ID: 662415
Speaker 1: Can you talk about Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] entertainment scene?  You've been covering it, you know and the changes in the entertainment scene.  You know for literally almost thirty, forty years.
Speaker 2: Yeah twenty-some, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, twenty.  But I mean you were even doing entertainment in the black community.
Speaker 2: Right, well but that was national.
Speaker 1: That was national.
Speaker 2: Local, the--I talk about the whole thing first.  Local, the, the, the theater district that you know, Daley [Richard M. Daley] built.  That, that--back in the early '90s [1990s], I used to have a hard time filling my pages.  There was stuff going on, but it wasn't, it wasn't a ton of it.  From about 1993 through about 1996, that curve started to get geometric so that then things just started to blow up.  I mean we always had Taste of Chicago, but it got bigger.  Other things started to happen.  More music venues just started to pop up all over the place, all kinds of things.  I think house music had already started, but, but you know its own way, it kind of blew up.  So there's so much to cover and that's just locally.  Now I, I try to advocate for anything that's you know, from a different culture.  But it, it's--it can be kind of rare.  Like, like say eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] for example, is, is a--it's, it's more of a community organization than a theatrical organization.  But it has its theatrical arm and they do their thing rather regularly.  But some of the other theater companies, it's like oh, they got something going on at such and such.  I hadn't heard from them in a while.  BET [Black Entertainment Television] of course, it's plenty of that.  So I just, I'm, I'm not sure that there's the, the same amount--I mean there's stuff going on, but not the kind of thing that you'd cover.  For example, somebody who doesn't have a recording contract, okay so you can go and say they're appearing at Second Mondays [ph.] at--but you know you have to have a cutoff somewhere.  And it's not, it's not big time stuff.  The big time stuff is coming from out of town.  I think one of the problems is these, these contracts that, that you can't come into Chicago within ninety days of Lollapalooza and Pitchfork [Pitchfork Music Festival] and all of that.  That, that, that con- that contributes to the problem, plus you gotta have a financial base of people to come to the festival.  Look what's happening to jazz.  It's--the black musicians are kind of--they're dying off and white ones are taking their place.  Nothing wrong with that, but where is that next level 'cause they're doing something else.  They got opportunities to do other things that's not music, or they've decided to do you know, house and stuff like that where you know they're kind of off and to the side.  So that's the entertainment scene.
Speaker 1: So you're saying it's not, it's not as vibrant.
Speaker 2: Not the black entertainment scene.
Speaker 1: The black entertainment scene.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the rest of it's--
Speaker 1: It's skyrocketing.
Speaker 2: It's skyrocketing.
Story_ID: 662416
Speaker 1: So for example, a comedian comes through town, all right.  So where are the places that the local black comedians are?  You know we have a, we have a monthly comedy feature that we just run online.  And that guy, he's, he's finding people.  But that's, that's a mention, but what, what's the story?  So we got--what's his name, Burrell, Hannibal Burrell [sic. Hannibal Buress].  Okay he's the big thing and you know he's in the paper.  But you know the next level down is the, these guys, these folks have to eat.  And they're all crawling over one another you know.  We had a story not long ago that The Second City, you know, has to--they have to make a special effort to get minorities into improv because well the competition is so fierce that left to their own devices, they're only gonna go after the people that remind them of themselves.  So they have to make a concerted effort to get, to get diversity in there and it's gonna take some time for those people to, to, to go.  New York [New York] evidently, 'cause I think that's where the, the young lady [Sasheer Zamata] who's on 'Saturday Night Live' came out of.  Think she had a Chicago connection [sic.].  Okay so she's on there, but as a result of that little thing that--when they had their little protest about having no black women.  They were embarrassed into doing it, but the bottom line is they found somebody, she's just fine.  But where, where's that, where, where else?
Speaker 2: So you're talking about the vibrancy really of black Chicago [Illinois] in, in that way 'cause it had more role.  This is a place that major acts would even come to check out the South Side and places like that, right?
Speaker 1: But I mean--
Speaker 2: And what are you--
Speaker 1: They, they do, but they're coming in as part of, you know, Live Nation [Live Nation Entertainment, Inc.] or it's not, it's not some local promotion.
Speaker 2: It's not home grown.
Speaker 1: Right.  So yeah you can see black entertainers all the time, and it'll cost you an arm and a leg.  But there's no--I mean that's--
Speaker 2: And you're talking about from the local story angle too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 662417
Speaker 1: Now what impact do you think that has on a community, Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown]?  That's what I'm wondering.
Speaker 2: Well I think that all of the people, and this is black and white, who complain about the absence of music and things like that in schools, they have a point.  If kids never see a saxophone, how are they gonna wanna play it?  If they--and it's not an easy thing to do.  I tried to play one once and you know you--there's a technique to it and somebody's gotta to teach you that.  You and I just can't pick it up and go, and make a sound come out.  You'll blow your brains out.  Blow your eardrums out.  So there's got to be teachers teaching you and there's got to be bands so that you can practice.  And if that's being taken out of the schools 'cause they can't afford--they, they got to get the math and the science before--and music and sports.  And of course they'll do sports before they'll do music.  That's a real problem.  That's affecting everybody.  But of course what effect anything negative that affects you know, folks with money, affects folks without money.  One of the reasons this is top of mind with me is that DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], which recently celebrated its seventy-fifth anniversary that was the place that created so many jazz legends.  So many, I can't being to make the list.  Okay, and there's DuSable struggling to even keep its name.  Right now the, the, the DuSable alumni have, have fought successfully to get it landmarked, which you know we like to think at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] we had a little, a little part in that because Howard, Howard Reich you know took an interest in it, and, and he was there writing these stories about it.  And it was part of the record, his stories were part of the record when, when the alderman [Pat Dowell] there, sorry I can't remember her name.  You know she and the city council [Chicago City Council], they made it happen.  It got landmark status.  So okay you can't get rid of that building.  Still, the move--they're trying to get rid of the name and you can't, you can't let that glorious history go and call it, you know, Geoff Brown High School cause Geoff Brown happens to be the latest politician to get his name on it, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're talking about your concern about the black community, and I wanna go to that--
Story_ID: 662418
Speaker 1: But I wanna go back to Aaron McGruder.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I forgot that we had this article that Don Wycliff [HistoryMaker N. Don Wycliff] had written saying, "When funnies aren't so funny."  And he even says, "And this time even [HistoryMaker] Geoff Brown was on his case."  So you--it almost I think Aaron felt that you were trying to tell him what should go in his cartoons.  Is that--
Speaker 2: They all do.  But, but the truth of the matter is I don't tell them what to put in there, I tell them what they can't put in there.  Not what to put in there.  That's--I'm not that creative.  And anybody who thinks that's easy, they ought to see the stuff that, that even the syndicates don't run.  It's a very hard thing to do, to be even mildly funny is so hard.  So I don't try to tell them what to do.  Now if something's not working and I have an idea for how it can work, I'll suggest it.  But if they come back to me with something else, I'm like works for me, I don't care.  I just can't have you with somebody's head up their behind saying the air is fresher here.  I, I'm not--so whatever he was doing and I, I don't--you have to refresh my memory 'cause I, I'll remember it if I know what the episode was.
Speaker 1: Well it was, this was poking fun at President Bush's [President George Walker Bush], bring them on.  And then the--Barry when he, he used the death of singer Barry White to take a shot at one of--let's see.  You know he was big, you know what he was?  He was--which I loved, I shouldn't say that, but he was after BET [Black Entertainment Television] in a major way.
Speaker 2: All right, so he has to, he has to write to, to lampoon, whomever he wants.  But in that--in that strip where he took on BET, he turned it into a personal platform to, to say, to, to have a public beef with Robert Johnson, a different Robert Johnson, Robert E. Johnson I think [sic. Robert L. Johnson].  So he's using his platform in the Chicago Tribune and other newspapers to carry on a personal beef with this guy because this guy said something about him.  This is--
Speaker 1: The president of BET.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right at the time, Bob Johnson.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't about whether I agreed with that or not.  I thought, I actually thought that the cartoon, the first two panels of that cartoon were just fine.  It had a girl wiggling her backside and, and you know Bob Johnson says--but here's where it--Bob Johnson says, "Boondocks is bad for things and he, and he does this."  Okay that, that part was fine.  But then I think right in the middle of it he interrupts that to just say you know, "You want some of this?"  Pretty much, I can't exactly remember what the words were.  It's like well then why don't you hold a press conference?  But we didn't--we're not paying to give you an opportunity, and it was a lot of money.  We're not paying to give you the opportunity to fight with this guy in public.  You write a cartoon that, that takes us somewhere that we're--you know that's why you're here; to take us places we haven't gone before.  But you don't get to do a personal thing, you did it with Doonesbury.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Doonesbury.  I was gonna ask about that because that happened in 2012, between 2011, 2012.  So talk about that because you actually removed Doonesbury.
Speaker 2: Yes, there were, there were two things that we removed it from.  One was a one day thing.  And he, again, it was a personal appeal.  He says, "I'm fundraising for this oppor- this, this group, this teachers group."  "Okay, not here.  You know you're supposed to be writing a cartoon, not telling people go here and spend money on teachers because I believe in teachers."
Speaker 1: That was donorschoice.org [sic. donorschoose.org]
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and you know our ethics policy says we can't use our space for that.  They're in editorial space, sorry.  You wanna take out an ad, take out an ad.  But in the editorial space, you can't do that.  Some people--I, and I get it.  How could you be against teachers?  Like well this isn't about that.  This isn't, you know--and single out teachers.  Is that the only people who need money?  He singled it out because he had a relative who was a teacher.  Oh he doesn't say that, right.  So that was that.
Story_ID: 662419
Speaker 1: The other thing, and then we have to circle back to Boondocks [The Boondocks] on this too.  He [Garry Trudeau] got a hold of a book ['The Rogue: Searching for the Real Sarah Palin,' Joe McGinniss] that savaged Sarah Palin.  Now let's just leave aside what I think about Sarah Palin as a person, okay.  This has nothing to do with politics.  We thought, we felt like okay he's got a hold of this book that we haven't read, and he's making these accusations against her that are only in this book and he's promoting this book for this guy.  Well we're not obligated to run something we haven't read and it may or may not meet our standard of, I hate to use libel, but you know if, if we had run this story, if we had run a story saying all of this stuff, blah, blah, blah.  Well it's great that he got this exclusive on the book, but we weren't gonna run something we hadn't seen.  And this, this wasn't just Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoff Brown], I mean the editor stepped in and you know he took, he took the lead on that.  But obviously I had brought it to his attention.  But you know, flip that so the people on the left say that we're big rightists.  It's like no, we're just standing for our principles because when he was going after the, the, the, those abortion laws in Texas and Virginia and whatnot.  And there was some strong language and some very strong satire.  The kind that makes you go ooh.
Speaker 2: That's in Doonesbury.
Speaker 1: In Doonesbury.
Speaker 2: So what is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we left it in there.
Story_ID: 662420
Speaker 1: What is the requirement for cartoons?  How long, how much time do you get ahead of time?  Because there's also the thing about the--Aurora, Colorado shooting where you said you aired that the, you know that--the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] said it aired on comic strip.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we get them.  Sundays are like three weeks out.  Well let's say it's, it's definitely three weeks out that we get to see them.  Dailies, it's a week.  So let's take the, the plane going down.  That, that Saturday we had a cartoon--no that Sunday we had a cartoon about an airplane kind of going out of orbit and the pilot saying, "We're about to make history."  Harmless until the plane goes down.  And the plane went down--so these, these newspapers were off the press and in people's hands on Saturday 'cause you know you can get the Sunday paper on Saturday.  No one knew this plane was, was disappearing then.  And so we have this cartoon and people are complaining.  How could you, how could you do that?  It's like well, we apologize but you know, it couldn't have been intentional because we didn't know.  So we didn't know.
Speaker 1: So that was just the--
Speaker 2: Timing.
Speaker 1: Just timing and sort of random circumstances.  But you have a seventeen member panel, right, advisory panel?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So who is it composed of?
Speaker 2: My, my colleagues on news side and in features, and in entertainment.
Speaker 1: And are the--do people self select in, or they people that--
Speaker 2: Well, they kind of self select in.  I like for them to be fans of the comics, just so that it's not somebody like me who couldn't care less.  So that helps.  But also their passion for it.  So they're gonna care.  People don't understand, so I've got seventeen people.  You probably think that we either agree on everything or disagree on everything, or always down the middle.  But no, you have little--that's what I like about it; it's very diverse.  I've got all kinds of people on it, Latinos, blacks, women.  And you know and, and always have.  At one time there were four people on the committee and I was one of them.  But then I, I wanted more and more.  Because when we started to think alike, that's when I knew I had to get more people in there.  But now this group, they don't think alike.  They, they're like--we make fun of each other's choices and we'll put a--we'll put, we'll put a new--we'll put--I've stopped putting in comics where we're so divided and, and, and the people who like it are like, "It's okay."  Stop doing that because we don't need to make change for change's sake anymore.  We did that.  And that's where it got us to where we are now. But those seventeen people on that committee [at the Chicago Tribune], there's only one person who, who votes.  I don't have a vote, I give two votes to the person who reads them every day.  The one person on the committee who agree, we agree, our, our--what we like and don't like is almost a hundred percent and she--and then--but there are other times when she'll, she'll be in this group and I'll be in that group and somebody else will be in that group.  But most of the time, she and I agree.  So the beauty of it is when we all agree or we all disagree, it matters, it means something.  We're not just seventeen people, or eighteen if you add, if you add me.  Eighteen people who have all kinds of tastes.  'Cause there's some cartoons in there I can't stand.  I can't stand to look at them.  And when I make jokes about getting rid of them, somebody over here will say, "Over my dead body."  And they represent readers.  And so I'm very happy with that 'cause it's very--and I, I--not just racially diverse, but their tastes are diverse.  And they understand what's good and what's garbage, and, and we have great debates about things because you know they care so much.
Story_ID: 662421
Speaker 1: But I just wanted to get back to Boondocks [The Boondocks], there are a lot of things that I took out and a lot of things I left in.  But my orientation was to leave it in.  How can I leave this in?  But satire expertly done is you don't descend into name calling and whatnot.  That's not clever; that's just oh, I have a forum, I'm gonna call you a name.  Where's the satire?  There's no satire, I just, I just call, I just called the president of the United States a name.  And again, regardless of whether I agree or disagree, cause again, I have taken out stuff that the liberals have said well you know, "You right wing, what'd you take that out for?"  Like well 'cause you can't say that somebody did something he didn't do.  That's not satire, that's just lying.  That's inaccurate; we're not gonna have that.  So--and you know or you'll get a cartoon like this, and you know people think that we overreact, but this cartoon was going out of business and so they'd figure they'd get all their best stuff out in the last week.  And so in a family newspaper I have two pigs humping each other with dollar bills coming out of her garter belt.  I'm not gonna run that, I'm sorry.  We're not the Reader [Chicago Reader].  We're not you know, we're not, we're not even you know some of this stuff you see on TV.  We can't do that.  Our readers don't want it.  Yeah, some readers just love it.  Some people on my staff [at the Chicago Tribune], they said they were cracking up.  "Yeah, yeah, you gotta put that in."  It was like, "Yeah, yeah, you're gonna answer the mail."  We are still a family newspaper.  Gotta have a standard, and you gotta stick to the standard.  If the standard gets you--people mad at you, at least I can sleep at night 'cause I was being consistent.
Story_ID: 662422
Speaker 1: So let me ask you this.  What, what are you--where do you see the future of journalism?
Speaker 2: Journalism from Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin] all the way to today, is gonna be fine.  Even if people are just doing it for free.  It's gonna happen because that's, that's what we do.  That's what everybody does.  If you don't live in a totalitarian country, journalism is what you do.  You know journalists in Mexico get killed all the time.  That isn't happening here.  Journalists in Russia, you know, watch it.  All kinds of journalists have some really horrible fates in other countries, not here.  So people are gonna, are going to look for corruption and unfairness and even a--they're gonna go after that regardless of whether they are aligned with a big entity like the Chicago Tribune or not.  Bloggers--my only problem with most bloggers is they're not journalists, so they're not--they, they do this, but they don't go try to find facts.  They're getting their facts from journalists.  Even the morning TV shows, you think that news--where do you think they're getting that from?  And only lately have they begun to acknowledge that they got it from the Tribune or the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times].  But we had to complain to make them do that.  But--and you know and one of them sits there with the papers sitting out and saying look what's in the paper this morning.  'Cause their staffs aren't as big as ours.  So there's always going to be journalists.  Now I think what you're asking me is newspapers and there--there's going to be, gonna be a sweet spot where you value a newspaper so much that you will pay a lot for it.  And then it will sustain itself.  We're charging people little or nothing for it and we're trying to keep it going, but that--as advertising revenue goes down, at some point people are gonna have to pay to make that difference up.  So one does not know, but a newspaper like the Tribune is coming up constantly trying to find ways to fight that battle.  Better to do it from a position of strength than what was happening, which is a lot of newspapers just said, "We're not going to make any changes and we're just gonna fight the good fight and then wink out."  And the Tribune decided we're going to try to, gonna try to lick this.  We, we believe we'll win, but you know maybe we have a different kind of staff.  That's the other thing, and I'm not doing this as campaign for the Tribune, but when we have layoffs, the other side that's not reported is that a lot of those jobs get converted into something else.  So I look around me and I see all this hiring and I sit there, why can't I have more people?  Well it's 'cause they're doing other things.  And they're doing newspaper of the future.  And we're--have a foot in both worlds; we're doing the, the future is now for us, but the present is lucrative.  So we can't just abandon print and just run all over the, the online.  I think that the New Orleans [Louisiana] paper, they tried going all Internet and they had to bring back print.  So right there that tells you that we aren't dead yet.
Story_ID: 662423
Speaker 1: So (cough) if you were coming along now, would you--what--how would you choose your career?  Or would you choose the same career?
Speaker 2: Well I, so what would get a young black male in Maine into journalism if his daddy weren't a journalist?  I have no clue.  There are people who--many, most journalists' parents aren't into journalism, so they just have that--decide to do that.  So as I think I've said in so many ways, I don't have that.  I--you know it, it was easier times then.  I got an internship without--I got an internship at a major metropolitan daily without--with just a few clips.  Now that news- same newspaper would expect me to have one or two internships somewhere at some smaller paper before I even--before they even consider me; big change, big change.  I got all kinds of skills, I could apply to something else, and I guess we'll see how that works (laughter) when I'm retired or get retired.
Story_ID: 662424
Speaker 1: What do you think your father [George Brown] would have thought of your career?  'Cause you were just starting out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I, I think he would have been fascinated at the opportunities that I had that he wouldn't have had.  You know he was not, he, he was not gonna be a boss at Jet.  Those, that day had passed him by.  If he had stayed there, of course, but he left.  So he was going to be a worker bee.  So he would have said, "Man, you, you did all these--you did all these different kind of jobs that didn't exist."  I mean like the, the guy who would be doing the photo--who took their--my parents' wedding pictures.  You know he'd come out of a darkroom with the picture and somebody would send it somewhere where it would be made into, you know, turned into a plate that, that would go into hot type and that was it.  There was no picture editor there.  That, there was no such job.  Some editor with, with, with common sense would say--but, but the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] wasn't, you know--all four newspapers they had illustrations and whatnot, lots of text.  Newspaper like the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], we got so many photos.  You need somebody called a picture editor to manage that.  And, and they have a whole department to do that.  To, to get photography in and, and you know make sure the pictures are cropped right and all that.  It's a whole thing.  That's, that's the one thing I think he would have been fascinated to see, all the things there are to do in a newspaper.  And that's not even marketing and advertising and circulation and all that kind of stuff.  Just in the newsroom.  I, I think he would have just been wow, and you know--there are--rumors have it that he was very proud of me.  So he would have, we would have joked about my exceeding him, but you know, I, I wound up making more money than him pretty quickly 'cause I think when he, when he died he was making--I wanna say nineteen thousand [dollars].  Back then I was making seventy-five, seventy-five hundred.  So that's--you know nowhere near that.  But you know God bless Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois].  First I get ten.  No, first I get like nine something, then I got eleven and with eleven thousand dollars back then, I mean I was, I was rolling in dough.  Had everything I wanted.  Not a luxury car, but I could travel, I could do anything I wanted to.  And then you know that creeps up to about fifteen.  And then I get on the Tribune.  So, so by the time I was done at Jet, it was twenty-three.  But you, you know no one can live on, on that now, but it was twenty-three.  Then I got seven thousand dollar raise to go to the Tribune.  Now obviously doing better than that now, but so you know his earning power was going to start capping as, as times changed and inflation and all that.  And then you know mine would have been going like this and so I just think he would have been astounded at the change 'cause he would have seen it.  It was happening right in front of me, but so much change in--since 1975.  That's the other thing.  There wasn't the same competition because Watergate was just sort of happening and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] stepping down, that was a really--that had happened in '73 [1973] and he stepped down in '74 [1974].  Everybody didn't want to be Dan Rather 'til then.  And now everybody wants to be a big time columnist blogger, whatnot.  So that's going to draws people in cause they see--they get stars in their eyes.  And then you have your people who just really wanna be journalists.  Core of the business.  So they're, they're always gonna be there.
Story_ID: 662425
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I was one of those who really believed in each one reach one.  And of course I didn't just stop at one.  I tried to help anybody who would listen.  It's a long thing.  I, I'd like to think that I gave lie to the idea that affirmative action, there's something wrong with it.  All affirmative action was, was instead of excluding me, you include me.  That's all it was.  What's happened since then, you know people being hired who weren't ready and whatnot, well that's bad hiring.  That's not, that's not the fault of the person 'cause there's so many [HistoryMaker] Geoff Browns around that can do any job.  And you know if you don't give me a chance because you're too busy taking care of a friend of yours or a relative of yours like unions do, or just excluding me because I happen to be you know, not of your tribe, well you're going to then--the more you do that, the more people you're gonna have with something to lose by letting Geoff in the door.  All the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] did when it brought me in was it had an opening, it felt it needed to have something different and I was good.  So I could have gotten in there and turned out to be a dud.  They would have said, "Here we go again."  But you know for every one of those stories, if there's a Geoff Brown in your newsroom 'cause you invited him in and you didn't just say well you know, I don't know you--just, let me just get this off my chest.  There are a lot of kids in journalism who, who their parents have money and they don't have to--they don't have to worry about where their next meal's coming from.  So they can afford to go get an internship somewhere where it's not paying anything in a city far away.  That looks nice.  That's very impressive, and that's an experience you can't get from being poor and having to stay around your town where the market is glutted like here.  So a Chicago [Illinois] kid trying, you know coming out of Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] say, who wants to get an internship with the Tribune, well you know, that's not easy.  That's not--that has nothing to do with them or Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] or any of the rest of them.  But you know, a black kid who wants to get in the business and get an internship--it's gonna be really hard to get it here because this is where everybody's coming to to get their--not their first internship, but their, their second and their third.  And people trying to get their first aren't in there unless--like the Tribune's got a, a, a residency program called the Metpro.  And we, you know they, they make a concerted effort and say, okay, we want to have diversity.  We're going to put people in here who are not like everyone else, it's reserved.  So no talking about, you know what, what--who, who's not getting a job because of this.  And then the people that go through, you know we, we choose right and they do well.  Now you can't--you know every two years you're not gonna fill up the newsroom with, with you know, with diversity that way.  I'm doing my part to, to try to--one thing that people like me can do is be helpful to others who need direction; need somebody to talk to.  I, I wish more people at the Tribune would take advantage of that.  I put myself out there but I know.  I'm sitting up there in an office.  I got a tie on.  Can we trust him?  Well if they talk to some people who trust me, yeah.  But by the time they get around to talking to me, I can't always help them because you know they burrowed themselves into political situation that I can't help with.  Whereas if I'd been there a year ago, I could have helped them.  But you know I, I can't run around the newsroom saying, "Hey, you're black, you need help?"  You know 'cause that's offensive.  So--
Speaker 1: You, you're, you believe your legacy is that you helped others?
Speaker 2: Well I wish I had said that.  That's it exactly.
Story_ID: 662426
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, tell us about this photo.
Speaker 2: All right, this is a picture of me and my father's mother and my mother [Helen Young Brown].  And that would have been in the early to mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.  Can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: All right, and I'm sorry, that was Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The previous one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's in San Juan, Puerto Rico, I'm an acolyte, and that's my mother next to me at the Grace Lutheran Church.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.
Speaker 2: That's--I would have been twelve.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, this is just right, just what we need.  Very good.  Turn them the correct way later on.
Speaker 2: That's me as a baby.  Could have been 1953.  Looks like I have a little age on me there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: That's just a picture of me a little older, maybe seven or eight.  I'm not sure who that baby is.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was probably Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  That's me with my electric guitar, my first electric guitar and I'm in San Juan, and probably had just gotten through singing 'Good Lovin'' by The Rascals.  I would have been thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: No, it would have to be 1966.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: That's me with some cannon, with some cannon balls at El Morro Castle [Castillo San Felipe del Morro], a fort in, in San Juan, old San Juan.  And that would have been in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a better picture of my father's mother, Katie Christine [Katie Smith Brown], but we call her Grandma Chris.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  When was that taken do you suppose?
Speaker 2: That's 1990.  I happen to see that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's on there.
Speaker 2: It's on there.  And that's me and my mother probably in her eighties, early eighties.  And that's me and my wife Alice [Alice Clark Brown] on--celebrating our twenty-fifth anniversary and we're quarreling over whether that was in Chicago [Illinois] or Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very good and next.
Speaker 2: And that's, that's the family.  That's Geoffrey Junior [Geoff Brown, Jr.], Cristina [Christina Brown], Alice, me and my mom.  And that's got to be in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Now this is a picture of my mom and dad [George Brown] at their wedding, which was in 1945 and this was in the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] where he worked.  I don't know if you can get closer and get the caption information.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We can.  Hang on to that.  Every once in a while if I, if I'm slow, I'll tell you to hold off.  It's nothing you're doing, it's just me.  Okay next.
Speaker 1: And that's a more classic wedding photo.  Her nickname was the Brown One, which I'm trying to remem- I think she said it was Billy Eckstine who gave her that nickname.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, interesting.  Next.
Speaker 1: And that's my mother's parents, Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E Dobbins [Willie Dobbins Young], D-O-B-B-I-N-S and to the right is Shelly, S-H-E-L-L-Y, Harry, H-A-R-R-Y Young [Shelly Young].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: At somebody's wedding, probably theirs.  That's me in--that's, yeah that's senior year at Greensburg Salem High School in Pennsylvania [Greensburg, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my wedding to Alice in 1977.  June the 4th (pause) in Chicago.
