Story_ID: 3618
Speaker 1: First I want you to state your name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My name is Horace Julian Bond, H-O-R-A-C-E J-U-L-I-A-N B-O-N-D.
Story_ID: 3619
Speaker 1: Now what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.  I don't know.  I would guess probably several.  I was just thinking about mashed potatoes for some reason.  I love mashed potatoes and lima beans.  I think lima beans are my favorite food.  I love lima beans but only certain kinds, and I can't tell you what kind, but some are good, some are bad, and I like the good ones.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, it's changed over time.  Right now it is the Gulf Coast of Florida.  We have a condo in Destin, Florida, and I like to go there, beautiful beaches.  I'm not a swimmer, you know, water person, but I like to see the water and walk on the beach.
Speaker 1: Weren't you a swimmer at one time?
Speaker 2: I was in high school, a competitive swimmer in high school and college, but I mean I don't do it now.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, which I'm told is not my color, that I should be an earth tones person.
Story_ID: 3620
Speaker 1: And now we've expanded to the nation and the idea is to pick people who are of leadership positions and politics, civil rights, business, bring them down to Charlottesville for two days, they spend two hours being interviewed by me, biographical from birth through present day; trying to find out if they know what it was that set them apart from their fellows.
Speaker 2: And then we ask them to spend a couple hours with students and we feed them a meal and send them on their way.
Speaker 1: How many have you done?
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did one for almost six hours with a man named Freddy Nichols (ph.) who I'd never heard of before, but he was the first black president of a community college in Virginia, spent his life as an educator-- he's between 70 now, 70 odd, and a remarkable guy from a big family, I think the only one who finished college, one brother a crack addict. And just a remarkable story of combination of ambition and drive and thirst for learning. And we can't do six hours with all these people; we're going to do two.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: With each one. And he was tremendously articulate too, so it just helped a great deal.
Speaker 1: It's fascinating and it really needs to be done. I really want to, I hope, I'm on a mission here to get you involved.
Story_ID: 3621
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think probably summertime.  I like hot weather.  I don't mind being too hot.  I hate being too cold, but I don't mind being too hot.
Speaker 1: And your favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.  When I was younger, it was the line from Willard Motley's 'Knock on Any Door' of "Live fast, die young, and have a good-looking corpse," and now I'm not sure what it is.
Story_ID: 3622
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to take you back to your childhood.  You were - what I found interesting about your background is that you were born in the South but raised in the North. But I wanted you to first talk about your father, Dr. Horace Bond.  What type of person was he like?
Speaker 2: When I was born, he was President of Fort Valley State College [later Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  I was born in '40 [1940].  He had become President in '39 [1939].  He was an educator, a University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] Ph.D., had been dean at a number of colleges, and finally came to the presidency of this school.  In some ways he was an austere man, but he was not a cold man, but he was a very proper man.  He liked three-piece suits.  He had a kind of dignity about him that he carried all the time.  He was warm in a family setting, but I think he probably gave other people the impression of being cold and a little withdrawn.  Part of it, I think, came from having gone to college at a very early age.  He was in short pants when he went to college, and I think he got thrown among older people and all his life developed a persona that said I'm older than you think I am and more mature than you think I am. But he was a wonderful father, and he made a wonderful home for myself and my brother and sister and our mother.  He was just a wonderful dad.
Speaker 1: Now what was his background?  I mean, you know, you said he went to college at a very young age, but what was his background?
Speaker 2: He was a Kentucky native.  Let's see, older - came from a family of a sister and two other brothers, and one of the brothers died young, two other brothers, three other brothers.  Let me see - Lucy the sister who is in a nursing home now in Kentucky, Gilbert who lived in Chicago and has passed away, Tom who lived here in [Washington] D.C., my Uncle Tom, which he loved.  He's passed away and Max.  I'm sorry.  Max lives here.  Tom lived in Kentucky, and they've all passed away except for Lucy, and it was a family of boys and girls who became educated, college degrees.  Max got a Ph.D. degree. Strivers and achievers, fairly close-knit even if they didn't see each other all the time, but their children knew each other and played with each other as we were growing up and coming up.
Story_ID: 3623
Speaker 1: His [Bond's father, Dr. Horace Mann Bond] father [Reverend James Bond] was born a slave in Kentucky in 1863 and freed by the Amendment [the Thirteenth Amendment]  in '65 [1865].  When he was sixteen years old, he put his 'tuition'--which was a steer on the end of a rope--and walked a hundred miles across Kentucky to Berea [College, Berea, Kentucky], and Berea took him in, and sixteen years later he graduated with a college degree, and became one of the organizers of Lincoln Institute [a school for black students, initiated by Berea College in 1910 in response to Kentucky's 1904 law denying African Americans the right to attend Berea College, which until that time had been integrated] and fund-raisers for Lincoln Institute.
Speaker 2: So what do you know of education at that time, you know, for--you know, you said he was educated at Berea College.
Speaker 1: My grandfather--well, it was hard scrabble, you had to take what you could get and what was available to you, so if you had the ambition and the drive and the smarts to take advantage of it, you had to find out where the advantage was--and he was fortunate enough to do that, but of course, most people didn't have the option, didn't have the opportunity.  You know, black people, especially in the South, went to--were lucky if they were able to go up to high school--and really lucky if they were able to go beyond high school. But for most it was a few months each year, it was education geared to the farm calendar, particularly in the Cotton Belt--you went to school in the wintertime when the fields were bare, and you dropped out of school to plant and to chop, went back to school, dropped out of school again--or school let out for black kids so they could go out in the fields and pick cotton so it was an education geared to the agricultural calendar and an awful education at that--you know, one-room shanty schools, teachers with no qualifications.  It was just an awful, awful life to live and an awful world to live in.
Speaker 2: And do you remember your father talking much about his growing up or--I mean, you said he was quiet?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah, he talked about his childhood but mostly about his interplay with his sister and brothers, occasionally something about school, some school memory or something like that, but no, he did not talk much about it.  He didn't talk much about his family life, but I don't know if he didn't talk about it or we weren't curious about it or what it was.
Story_ID: 3624
Speaker 1: And your mother, Julia, what was--?
Speaker 2: She's [his mother, Julia Washington Bond] from Nashville [Tennessee].  Her grandfather was a well-to-do florist in Nashville with white and black customers, mostly white customers, the first black person in Nashville to have a telephone.  It's a mark of distinction, and her father [Professor G. E. Washington] died.  Her mother remarried a man who became the chaplain at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], the Reverend Brumfield (ph.).  She grew up there and went to Fisk University. Her father [Professor G. E. Washington] had been a high school principal in Nashville. So she as well came from a family that highly valued education, really valued education, and knew how important it was to escape--not only the ordinary drudgery of life, but if you were black, particularly so--it was added ammunition, added armor against the white supremacy of the time.
Speaker 1: So you're from a family that DuBois would describe as the 'Talented Tenth'.
Speaker 2: Very much so, very much so.  I have a picture of Dr. [W.E.B.] DuBois, E. Franklin Frazier, and my father [Dr. Horace Mann Bond]  in academic regalia.  My sister [Jane Bond] and I--I'm three, she's four--and they're dedicating us to a life of scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now, what type of child would you say you were?
Speaker 2: I would guess--I don't think any of us are a very good judge of what kind of children we were, but I think I was a regular child and played cowboys and Indians, cops and robbers, those kinds of things, and because I lived on these college campuses, I had a universe of big brothers and sisters, big brothers at Lincoln [University, Chester County, Pennsylvania] which was all male then, but big brothers and sisters at Fort Valley [State College, later Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and a community of others, teachers and others.  It was a very tight-knit, close-knit community of people with a common purpose to pass an education on to black young people, so it was an encourage- really nurturing community, and I think all of us felt nurtured in it, felt that we were special --not in the sense that we were better or superior, but special in that we lived in a special place in this world, which could be hard and unforgiving, but it was special, kind.  It was nice.
Speaker 1: Well, you have two siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Older sister, younger brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the middle child.
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite childhood memories you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have a lot of childhood memories.  I don't know which is the favorite, but- -
Speaker 1: Or several.
Speaker 2: We had good times, you know, growing up at Lincoln--some students--I'm sorry, at Fort Valley--some students had built us a playhouse, and this was a little house, a child-size house that, you know, would fit children, a door, windows.  I don't think it had rooms.  I think it was one big room, and I got a picture of myself sitting on the top of this house, and it was--you know, it was a wonderful place to live.  Both these places were great places to live.  At Lincoln, particularly, you had the gymnasium.  How many kids grow up with a gymnasium? And I had the run of the gymnasium.  I had the run of the athletic fields.  In the summertime I had the run of the dormitories.  It was just a very, very pleasant life.  I don't remember much unpleasantness as a child.  I remember once we used to go at Fort Valley to some place to fish and swim, and somehow or another I got caught in a whirlpool while swimming, and I remember going down and my father, fully dressed, jumping in to pull me out, and I think I was more amazed that he jumped in fully dressed than I was that he jumped in at all, because he was not the kind of man who jumped in a body of water with all his clothes on.
Story_ID: 3625
Speaker 1: How did this come about that he [Julian Bond's father, Dr. Horace Mann Bond] actually became, you know, president?  He was the first President of Fort Valley [State College, later Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Fort Valley [State College, later Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], had been a sort of super high school before then, had been built by a man named [Henry Alexander] Hunt who was an educational entrepreneur not in the financial sense but who would try to build this opportunity for children in that part of Georgia to get a better education than they would have gotten in the local public schools. This was a - became a state school, and he built this school, and then it became a college, a state college, and my father [Horace Mann Bond] in '39 [1939] became the first president of it and helped build it up even further for the six years in all that he stayed there before he went to Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  I'm not sure how he got it, how it came to him to get this job.  He had been a dean at Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] so I guess he was moving up the educational ladder and had made a name for himself as a scholar and as an administrator, and they're looking for someone, and they,they come to him.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about the halls of education of blacks and how that was occurring in the South, you know, in the black college system, I mean through your father's eyes or--?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  You know, my father wrote his Ph.D. thesis on what was then called 'Negro Education in Alabama', and it in turn was published eventually as a book, and he wrote about how--in Alabama at least--the public education system for black people was geared toward making them candidates for the iron and steel industries and for the agricultural industry, which didn't mean that they were being trained to be managers but being trained to be workers.  That was the whole idea--to be able to read, write, add, and subtract, that was what you needed if you were gonna work in this business.  You know, a strong back and a not highly developed mind so he had kind of a Marxist analysis of the purpose of education for black people in the South, that it was intended to feed them into the labor system, to make them ready to go into the labor system, and I imagine that's how it happened in all the southern states.  It was an adjunct to the business community.
Speaker 1: Do you think he was more a supporter of W.E.B. DuBois or--?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington?  I think he probably spanned these worlds, that he saw virtue in each of them, that he saw great virtue in Washington's penchant for industrial education, which is what most black high schools would have been--or were called training schools at the time, and he himself was a scholar and an academic and an intellectual so I think he saw that these did not have to be 'either/or' but could be 'and both'.  I think that's what he believed in.
Speaker 1: And he knew both of them, right?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if he knew Washington.  Perhaps so, but I doubt it, but I know he knew DuBois.  DuBois was a guest in our home at Lincoln, at Fort Valley, and I have some correspondence between my father and DuBois.  My father's first publication was in 'The Crisis' [NAACP publication] when DuBois was the editor.
Speaker 1: Now you were five when your family moved to Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Isn't Lincoln where - didn't [poet] Langston Hughes go there?
Speaker 2: Yes, Langston Hughes, Kwame Nkrumah, Thurgood Marshall, now for Thurgood Marshall, I'm not sure, but anyway it was his [H.M. Bond's] alma mater, and so when they looked for their first black president, they looked at Horace Mann Bond and selected him, and he came.
Story_ID: 3626
Speaker 1: And so you grew up - this environment you're growing up on, you know, a college campus, but you were - did you spend all your time at the Quaker school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went there when I was--entered high school, and let me see,  I'm trying to count back,  I graduated in '57 [1957].  I spent five years there so I went in '52 [1952].  I would have been twelve, but from age five until twelve I went to the local public schools.  I began at a school run by a woman who was the wife of a Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, where Bond's father was president] administrator.  Mrs. Foster had a little school in her home, and that was my beginning, and then I went to the local public schools which, when I went, were entirely single-room schools.  Actually it was a two-room school, one room on top of the other, and my sister and I integrated the school.  There was a black school on this side of the street, a one-room school, and a two-room white school on this side of the street, and my father filed a lawsuit on our behalf, but before the suit could come to trial, the school board capitulated, closed the black school.  The kids just came across the street.  They fired the black teacher, and so we integrated what had been the all-white country school.  I didn't go to a school with an indoor toilet until I went to high school.  It's hard for people to think about now, you know, but in some ways it was a good education 'cause you remember the first grade students are listening to the second grade lesson, who are listening to the third grade lesson so that by the time you get to the third grade, you've heard at least part of this already.  I don't think it's something we want to do again today, but it had its virtues, its features.
Story_ID: 3627
Speaker 1: You know, I mean I know your environment that you grew up with--you know somewhat cloistered, but was there a difference, and you were young, too, at the time, but do you remember anything in your family in terms of the difference between being in, you know, the North versus the South or--?
Speaker 2: No, at the time no.  I didn't know anything about it because the Fort Valley [State] College [now Fort Valley University, Fort Valley, Georgia] campus was all black, but I don't have any consciousness of segregation.  We would go to Macon [Georgia] which was nearby or we'd go into downtown Fort Valley which was quite, quite small, and there would be white people there, but I don't have any conscious of there being any barriers between us.  I was a little kid.  I do remember once, and I can't remember how old I was--we had gone to Nashville [Tennessee]--it was my mother's home--we had gone on the train, and my mother walked through, got off the train with us, and we're walking through the white waiting room, and a policeman said to her something about "Niggers need to be over there," and she said, "Are you calling me a nigger?" And he was so taken aback by this that he didn't know what to do, and she just walked on. But aside from that, that's all I can recall.  I do remember being upstairs in the Jim Crow section of a big theater in downtown Nashville when World War Two ended, and obviously we were up there because it was segregated, but the incident in my mind is the end of the war, not the fact that I had acquiesced in this segregated system.  I had gone to the movies with a woman who was our babysitter. So I don't have any consciousness of segregation when I was a kid at Fort Valley.  We got to Lincoln.  I have no memory of integrating the school.  We just went to the school.  That's all I knew about it.  I didn't know about the lawsuit and had white and black playmates and had no distinctions between them, and there were white and black teachers at Lincoln who had white and black kids who were my playmates.  I'd later discovered that one of my father's white teachers had belonged to a segregated swimming club for his kids that we could not have gone to, and it was a matter of some contention among the other faculty members.  You know, "How could he do that?",  but I don't remember it impinging on my life in any way.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about since he was the first black president, are you aware of anything, any, you know, hostility to him or any problems that he had?
Speaker 2: I now know there was, but no, at the time I didn't know of any.  A group of students and alumni had been agitating for years and years and years for there to be a black president at Lincoln.  I mean the whole idea--why train black men to for leadership positions if they can't be president of their own college?  Of course, there was no thought of having a woman president as Lincoln has since then, but I now know that there was a long, long period of agitation and protest to get a black president there, but I also now know that some white faculty members and probably one or two black faculty members were not too happy with a black president at Lincoln, but at the time, no.  I knew nothing of this.
Story_ID: 3628
Speaker 1: Now so as you--I mean you start when you're five, you know, but you go to the one and then the two room, and it's up until what age?
Speaker 2: Up until I am twelve, and then because the local public schools were so poor--I would have gone to the Lower Oxford Township Consolidated High School, and they're just not good schools--and my parents decided that I would go to a private school.  My sister who was a year older had already gone to the Cambridge School in Weston, Massachusetts, and I was to go and did go to the George School in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, not that terribly far away, but it's boarding school, and so for the next five years I went there.
Speaker 1: And tell me what that experience was 'cause you're twelve, you know, you were around that puberty.
Speaker 2: Twelve, I was away from home for the first time--I failed the first year,  I had to repeat the first year, but you know it wasn't as traumatic, looking back on it, as it may seem, and I don't remember it being very traumatic to me.  I just wasn't ready or equipped or mature enough to do the kind of work they expected of me, and so I had to repeat the first year, which meant that my classmates went on, and I  stayed behind so I had that brand-new set of freshmen to become acquainted with, but I spent five years there.  I liked it a great deal.  I had a lot of initial loneliness when I was there.  I'd never been away from home before by myself, living with strangers in this dormitory, this kind of regimented life which was not like what I was used to at home. But it was a good school, Quaker school.  These are people who are tolerant, racially tolerant, and the whole notion of Quakerism appealed to me--not enough for me to become one but it appealed to me a great, great deal, the whole idea of the worship service. I just found it terribly appealing, and I ended up liking it very much, enjoying it, and--I'm terribly glad I went there, and I loved it.
Speaker 1: How do you think that experience shaped your life?  They are known to be, you know, very liberal, but how do you think-- 'cause those are formative years--?
Speaker 2: They gave me my first exposure to nonviolence, and I never, never said "Gee, we could use this in sit-in demonstrations."  I never said that.  I never imagined that, but it was the first time I ever heard about it then, and later when the movement came along, it was evident to me that this was a technique that could be used to fight discrimination.  I mean Martin Luther King and the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott used it first, but I was grounded in a way that almost none of my other colleagues in the student civil rights movement were.  They gave me some idea of social action.  We used to go on weekends to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  They'd have these weekend work camps go to Philly and go usually in groups of five or so to some old person's home, and we'd chip the paint from the walls, and we'd clean up the place, and then we'd paint the place, and the American Friends Service Committee did that, and they also had work camps overseas which I never went to, but in Germany and Japan, and each summer a group of kids would go to Germany and help rebuild shattered communities and engage in some kind of social action, and again I didn't think gee, maybe I could do this in my life, but it showed me people my age, high school kids doing this kind of thing, and it opened possibilities to me, and I can't say I said "Gee, we could do this and call it the Civil Rights Movement,"-- but at least it showed me that people my age could do these things so it was a wonderfully confirming experience about who you were and how you could make your place in the world and that you could make changes in the world, that you didn't have to just vote and hope the person who won did a good job, that there was more to it than that. And you could be a part of that 'more'.
Story_ID: 3629
Speaker 1: Now it [the George School, Newtown, Pennsylvania] was a co-ed school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it was--what was the racial balance?
Speaker 2: The racial balance was myself, one other kid when I was a first year student, and then one other kid after that, so in my five years there, I don't think there were more than four black kids there.  There was one black teacher, a couple, Mr. Stretts, John Stretts.  I just went back for my fortieth anniversary a year or so ago and saw Mr. Stretts and his wife who had retired to Oakland [California] and came back. So, it was overwhelmingly white, one or two Asians, but overwhelmingly white, overwhelmingly white.  Everybody was white--except the people that worked in the kitchen--they were all black. And at the school everybody had a job so you not only went to school, but you had a job, and the favorite job was called 'shift.'  That was working in the kitchen, and there were two shifts of 'shift.'  You either worked early setting the tables and serving the food or late cleaning up the tables and helping the kitchen staff run the big dishwashers, and the preferred one was the early shift.  You got to eat early, you got to eat as much as you wanted, and you got to eat the specialty which was these sticky buns they served for breakfast so it was not unusual to bring a pillowcase to breakfast with you, and you would bring back to your room a pillowcase full of these sticky buns--they were delicious.
Speaker 1: Well, now what about socialization there, you know, I mean and the dating thing?
Speaker 2: We had dances every Friday night, and they were heavily monitored.  You couldn't dance too close, you know, bodies couldn't touch, and this was the time when people danced like this (probably demonstrating with his arms but this can't be seen in close-up) as opposed to the way they dance now.  They danced like this, and when I got there, I was the shortest person in the school, not the shortest boy, I was the shortest person.  There were no girls shorter than I, and that to me was a real handicap in dancing, and I couldn't dance so that was another big handicap, but I learned how to slow dance.  I've never learned how to fast dance.  I learned how to slow dance, and I used to go to dances.  I only dated one girl during my time there, and it was, you know, a serious teenage romance, I mean heavy, but she was my only steady girlfriend, and what that meant was that we would go to dances on Friday night.  We'd see each other during the day.  I don't think we had classes together.  I think once we went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for the day.  There was a train from the George School into Philly, a train that stopped at George School and went into Philly, and you'd go to Philly for the day or we'd go into the nearby town New Hope--Newtown, I'm sorry.  New Hope was further away. And there was an ice cream parlor there, and that was a favorite place to go with your girlfriend. So that was kind of my social life at George School.
Story_ID: 3630
Speaker 1: I remember once I had--we had school jackets, you know, with 'George School' [the integrated boarding school Bond attended in Bucks County, Pennsylvania] on the back, those kind of baseball-style jackets that are very popular even today, and I remember I used to wear that jacket all the time. And the dean told me not to wear the jacket when I went into town with this girl [his white girlfriend, a classmate at the George School] because it would reflect badly on the school. And I was just astounded.  I could not imagine that he would say such a thing to me--and of course, I kept on wearing my jacket whenever I wanted to--but it was just--it was like really being doused with cold water because it was the first time in that context that race and racism had extended to it, and I imagine this guy thought he was, you know, doing something good or something or other, but it's just, oh, it was just an awful thing to have happen.  There were clashes between the school and the town kids.  We were the privileged kids.  They were the 'townees', and I remember one night coming back from the movies when a group of kids--and they were white 'cause all these town kids were white--set upon people coming back.  Nobody hit me, but you know they set upon my people walking kind of in a file back into the school and hitting them with rocks and knocking them down and so on.  Scary.
Speaker 2: And did your parents know of this relationship?  Did they express anything?
Speaker 1: Yes.  No, they knew of it, but they never expressed anything about it.  I don't know what they said to each other, but they never said anything about it, and I think they thought, and correctly so, that it was a high school romance and when high school ended, it would end--and they were absolutely right.  High school ended, and it ended.  Distance does not make the heart grow fonder.
Speaker 2: Now at that time, were - did you have any--?
Speaker 1: One other thing--you know what Jack and Jill is.  Well, my parents had enrolled me in Jack and Jill because at Lincoln there were almost no other--there was a very small number of black kids my age.  I can't think of more than three, so there was no Lincoln social life at all so when I came back for the summer, I mean, dancing?  Nobody danced that I knew of.  There was nothing, no parties, you know, except for birthday parties or something like that so they enrolled me in Jack and Jill, and I used to go to Jack and Jill functions in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which I really did not like because these Philly kids were so sharp, such great dancers, so sophisticated, and they knew each other, and I didn't know them, and I felt like a real fish out of water there. But one girl and I became attached to each other, and I can't remember if I was seeing this other girl at the same time or what, but--anyway she invited me to her prom.  No, I invited her to my prom, that's right, so I guess I wasn't going with Maris, who was the white girl.  I invited her to my prom, and it became much more elaborate than I wanted it to--first she lived in Philly, the school is in the country, so she had to get from there to here which meant, I think, that her parents had to bring her, but you don't want your parents to bring your date to the prom--so it just was not a good experience, not a good experience.
Story_ID: 3631
Speaker 1: At this point in your life, you know, you're in your teens.  What would you - did you have any sort of dreams or ambitions?  Were you - things that you wanted to do or were you--?
Speaker 2: I had always--and I don't remember when this began--I'd always been interested in being a writer.  Now I wasn't sure, what did that mean?  Did it mean a journalist, who wrote the truth?  Did it mean fiction, a novelist, or something like that? And I never was sure, but I just had this kind of vague back-of-the-mind idea that when I get out of here, when I get out of college, I'm gonna be a writer of some kind.  I like to write, and I have a facility for writing.  I can do it quickly.  I could take some thoughts and ideas and put them down on paper, and they were understandable to other people, and other people liked them, but that was the furthest I'd gone with any idea of a profession or job.  I really had no firm plans, you know, not doctor, lawyer, my classmates wanted to be doctors or lawyers or whatever--none of that, none of that.
Speaker 1: Where do you think that love for writing came from?  Was it from the--?
Speaker 2: I think it came from my father because he was always seated at a typewriter typing away, and he didn't touch type, but he typed tremendously fast like this (demonstrates), and he used to tell me or my mother used to tell me that they'd go someplace to make a speech, and he would sit in the back seat of the car with a portable on his lap writing the speech, and I'd--. Writing was just something he did all of the time, and I knew that he spoke.  I knew--and I used to go every now and then to places with him when he spoke, and I knew these were written, not extemporaneous, off the top of his head--and the house was full of books, and we always read as kids, so I lived in a world where writing and reading were just part of family life, and I guess that's what attracted me to it.
Story_ID: 3632
Speaker 1: I think in some ways--well, I think I'm like each.  I think in some ways I'm like my father [Horace Mann Bond].  I think I talk a little bit like him.  I write like him.  I have his same insistence that things be documented, that--put footnotes in my speeches.  Nobody sees these but me. But if somebody says "Where'd you get that from?", I want to be able to say "It came from right here, and I got the footnote to prove it!" And I've always been concerned about things being right, and I think I get that from him, and I've always been interested in marshaling facts to make my argument, and I know he did that.  He - you know, he gave a series of lectures at Harvard called the Inglis Lectures [longstanding series of lectures on education, featuring various scholars ; Dr. H.M. Bond's published as 'The Search for Talent', 1957], and the basis of them was that talent and toilets come together.  He took the Army Intelligence Test that all men going in the army take. Senator Richard Russell of Georgia [noted segregationist who served as U.S. Senator from 1933-1971] had gone on and on on the floor of the Senate about how badly black boys did on these tests and how that meant we were unfit for citizenship, and my father took these tests and discovered that yes, black boys did terribly on these tests, but southern black boys did worst, southern white boys did next worst, northern black boys did next worst, and northern white boys did the best, and then he took census track information and looked at the prevalence of indoor and outdoor toilets and correlated that with these test scores and demonstrated that if you come from a county where there are more indoor than outdoor toilets, you're gonna do well on intelligence tests so that talent and toilets are intertwined, and I just thought that was so clever, so clever a way of saying that economic class has a lot to do with how you do on these formalized tests that I think it sunk in to me that if you're gonna argue, if you're gonna convince somebody that up is down, you gotta lay out some facts for them, and so I've always tried to do that.  I think I got that from him, and from my mother [Julia Washington Bond], my wife tells me - maybe I don't recognize this in myself - that I get a kind of soft disposition from her.  She's a soft person in a good sense.  I don't mean easy, but soft person, soft-spoken, quiet, kind of reserved.  I get that from her.
Speaker 2: And who do you think shaped you like in those formative years 'cause a lot of your time was spent at school.  Do you think it was, you know, the kids that you were around or were there people at the school that influenced you or do you think your family?
Speaker 1: I think family more than anything else.  You know, it's funny.  To go to this reunion, this 40th anniversary of SNCC, I was just thinking that I'm not really close to anybody I went to high school with.  I'm not really close to anybody I went to college with.  It is these people to whom I am the closest.  These people are the equivalent of my high school buddies, my college buddies.  I'm closer to them than I am to these other two groups to whom most people have some kind of relationships so I think it's my family really.  I mean I had a good high school experience.  I had a wonderful college experience.  I had some great teachers.  I met people who, you know, became friends at the time or very close to, and I may see one or two of them now, but it is the people from the movement experience with whom I'm the closest.
Story_ID: 3633
Speaker 1: Let's talk about this now so you graduate from high school, and the same year that you graduate, I think, is the year that your father accepts a position at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You get accepted to Morehouse [University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you--were you seventeen at the time?
Speaker 2: I was seventeen.  It was '57 [1957], and we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], and I had no college plans.  I knew I was going, but I had not taken the very necessary step of applying to a college which you have to do, and so we-- don't know what I was thinking, if at all.  He drove me by what I now know to be Atlanta University which has a beautiful college-like campus--brick buildings, green grass, trees in summertime, beautiful.  He said "That's Morehouse."  I said, "Ooh, I want to go to Morehouse!"  Well, it turned out to be another school entirely, but I applied to Morehouse, and I got into Morehouse, and it was a wonderful, wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Why did he do that?
Speaker 2: I think he had--even though he was familiar with the--I think he, you know, just pointing idly over there, and Morehouse and AU are--
Speaker 1: Practically right together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right together, so maybe he was pointing beyond Atlanta University--but that's how I ended up at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: So you're a Morehouse man.  You know Morehouse men are kind of traditional.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They say about other schools, "Your girls may be sweet, but your boys can't compete with those Morehouse men."
Speaker 1: You wrote for the Pegasus [Morehouse University magazine], right?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: And did you declare a major?  Was that the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can't remember when you had to do this, but I was an English major, psych minor, for what reason I do not know, but, you know, took psychology courses, English courses, took a chemistry course which I failed--just awful in math, you know, science, just not my thing. And as I say, had a good experience--I was on the swimming team, to my great surprise.  I didn't think I would be a college athlete.  I'd been on the track team and the swimming team in high school, but I didn't think I would do anything in college.  I thought I was beyond that, and I had a good time, wonderful time.
Story_ID: 3634
Speaker 1: Did you, was there any--because you're still on college campuses so was there any feeling of difference that you were now-- because you had been raised in the North.  Was there any feeling because now--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  By this time, of course, I knew that the South was very different from Pennsylvania where we'd been living, and I remember when I got ready to go to Morehouse [University, Atlanta, Georgia], I needed a suit, and my mother said "You know, we need to go downtown and buy you a suit."  I said, "Mama, you go.  They won't hurt you."  Because I thought white people  would, you know, beat you up in the street in downtown Atlanta [Georgia]. And it took a little while, you know, a couple of months for me to realize that I could comfortably move about this community--in many places, not all places--but could comfortably move about this community with no difficulty at all--especially in Atlanta--that I could go downtown, I could do this, I could do that.  I couldn't go to, you know, some places.  I couldn't go to restaurants.  I couldn't go to downstairs in movie theaters.  I couldn't do that, but aside from that, I could go wherever I wanted to, and nobody, you know, looked askance, but it took me a little while to get to know that.  I was, you know, I was frightened to be coming back South because we had, you know, the Pittsburgh Courier and the Afro-American [both African American newspapers] in our house, and they were telling all these atrocity stories about lynchings and murders and so on, it was just--it was scary.
Speaker 1: So was that - I mean was that a decision that you were even allowed to make?  Wouldn't you have preferred maybe going to a northern school?  You definitely had the academic.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't think so.  I had been away at school, away from home at school for five years, and I was ready to be at home again, stay back home again. And then we were coming to this new locale, and I don't know if I was, you know, wanted to feel it out or whatever, but no, I didn't want to go away.
Speaker 1: And your--what were your siblings doing at that time?  Your sister?
Speaker 2: My sister [Jane] who is a year older,  was--where was she?  Indiana?  No.  That's right.  No, she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She entered Spelman.  My brother who was a little more than a year younger entered - I'm not sure of the chronology here, but he went both to Washington High School, the big black public high school in Atlanta, and he went to the Cambridge School, and I think he went to Booker T. Washington High School first and then went to the Cambridge School in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: So now this--so your father--this was once--was this viewed as a move up or just like--?
Speaker 2: I think it was viewed as a move down--or at best a lateral move.  He [Dr. Horace Mann Bond] had gotten in trouble with the Board of Trustees at Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] over some stock in a Liberian mine which had been given to him and to the university, and the university wanted his, and it turned out to be worthless in the end, but--. And then there was an autocrat, and I can't remember this man's name, but a well-known figure who was on the Board of Directors who I think was making life uncomfortable for my father, who thought my father was spending too much time paying attention to the education of Africans.  Lincoln always educated African students, and he thought my father spent too much time on this.  You know, Lincoln was the first college in America, I think, to have an African Studies Program that my father set up, but anyway some kind of problem between him and the Board of Trustees. And this offer from Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] came, and he took it.
Speaker 1: And he was Dean of the School of Education [at Atlanta University] at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 3635
Speaker 1: When you entered Morehouse, did you like it immediately?  I mean, it's a different environment, totally.
Speaker 2: It was a very different environment.  Even though I had lived on this black college campus, I had never, ever been around as many black young people my age.  Everybody at Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania],  was older, all the students were older than I was--and it was exhilarating: Morehouse [University, Atlanta Georgia] all male, Clark [College] across the street coed, Spelman [College] across the street all female, Morris Brown a couple blocks away, coed, Atlanta University nearby, coed, and it was exhilarating, and there was such a mix of people in some ways like the mix at George School--that is, from different places, different towns and cities, you know, different  backgrounds, so I went to school with people from Detroit, Atlanta, Philadelphia, New York, Los Angeles, Durham--I mean all these--and the rural south, small towns in the rural south--so it was this mix of people that was real interesting and real exciting and, you know, got to know a circle of people, and we became pretty close friends.
Speaker 1: And what was Atlanta like in those days?  What was the town itself like?
Speaker 2: Well, it--hmm.  It was hustling and bustling.  It's a city--it's always been a city on the make.  It was a city on the make when it was run by white people.  It's a city on the make now that black people--I always say it's Booker T. Washington's dream writ large--successful black business people, entrepreneurs.  And there were two black business districts then, Auburn Avenue on one side of town and Hunter Street which became Martin Luther King Street on the other side of town, and I lived near Hunter Street.  That's where I gravitated toward, and there were, you know, beauty parlors and restaurants and a bank and law offices and dentists and doctors and, you know, a professional street there, and it was just a good place to walk down.  I felt vibrant.  Then, remember, I had never lived in a city before.  I had always lived in small towns, country towns, and so this was exciting.  It was vibrant and alive. And there were nightclubs, bars, a lot of VFW clubs that I would go to with live music and entertainment.  It was so exciting and good entertainment, too, not famous people but good entertainment, and then there were a couple of clubs on Auburn Avenue where bigshot entertainers came on the Chitlin Circuit would come through.  I remember seeing - this is years later - Little Stevie Wonder with his mother taking him up on the stage, the Supremes and the Temptations all on the same bill, a Motown Traveling Revue--. So it was an exciting life, good life.  School was good, challenging, interesting, good friends I made and hung out with and went places with, football games, girls at Spelman.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Now you interned at Time magazine.  When was that?  That was--.
Speaker 2: You know I - for somebody that teaches history, I can't remember a single date, but I don't really remember doing much except writing some essays which I don't think were intended to be published in Time or if they were, they never published any of mine, but we got a little bit of money, and we just had to write about these things.  They asked us to write about things.  Maybe this was some kind of--thinking back on it--some kind of farm team for Time.  Maybe they wanted to develop young writers or something. And I don't even remember what I wrote or how I even--I don't even know how I got to that, but I did intern.  I don't think I ever - there's a bureau in Atlanta, and I used to go in to the bureau, and I think the chief would say "We want you to write something about this," and I don't ever remember it ever being a racial topic or race-connected or race-related in any way.  I can't remember what they were.  It's very vague.
Speaker 1: And what did you fancy yourself at that point in life sort of?  I mean - you know, I mean I know writing was your passion, but what--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, it sounds--and I guess it must have been somebody but not a plan, not a scheme, nothing to do after college graduation, but that's who I was.  You know, I was a college student, and I didn't look much beyond that.  Something would happen.  Something would come up.  Something would turn up.
Story_ID: 3636
Speaker 1: Then how did you--this person of sort of privileged background--how did you get involved in the movement?  Was it because things were  percolating?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well, this story I've told a million times--I'm sitting in Yates and Milton's Drugstore [a popular hang-out for black students in Atlanta, Georgia] and this Lonnie King comes up to me and shows me this [headline in the Atlanta Daily World, an African American news]paper: "Greensboro Students Sit In for Third Day" [referring to protests by black students in Greensboro, North Carolina ]. [Lonnie King asked,] "Don't you think it ought to happen here?" I said "It will happen here."  "Don't you think we ought to make it happen here?" And he was-- he's a commanding guy, and he said, "You take this side of the café, and I'll take this other side," and there was another guy there, Joe Pierce, and we began canvassing our fellow students.  I don't know.  It just seemed natural to me.  We began canvassing other students, and we had a group that got bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger, and we called them together, and we began to lay plans, and I was in.  That was it.
Speaker 1: And was--what did your father think of these activities?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no parent knew that we were gonna get arrested. And I don't think any parent, at least not my parents, knew that we had been making these plans all along.  The President of the Atlanta University [Dr. Rufus E. Clement] knew that something was bubbling.  You can't have a secret in these communities, I mean, it's not possible. But he knew, and he called us in, and he told us we needed to write a statement of purpose, and so another student and I wrote this appeal for human rights which appeared as a full page ad in the [Atlanta] Journal and Constitution and Atlanta Daily World.  Lillian Smith, the author, gave Dr. Clement the money to pay for it and--but our parents didn't know we were gonna get arrested, but they must have sensed that what had happened in Greensboro, what had happened in Raleigh [North Carolina], what had happened in Charlotte [North Carolina]surely was gonna happen in Atlanta [Georgia] pretty soon--and when it did happen, I think my parents were, you know, a little horrified--their son is in jail--and sort of proud as well, you know, so it's this mixture of fear and admiration: "Glad you did it. Wish you hadn't done it,"  And from then on, when I dropped out of college a few months later, they were terribly upset, but at the same time knew that I felt this was something I had to do, and I would not be deterred from it.  I had to do it.
Speaker 1: But why did you feel it was something you had to do?
Speaker 2: Because we felt, I think, commonly that unless we gave ourselves full-time to this movement it wouldn't go at the speed at which we wanted it to, and the things that had to be done wouldn't be done if we didn't do them, there was no one else to do them.  We were doing something that our elders had not done, would not do, or could not do or hadn't either the courage or the ability to do, and so we decided to do it--and if we hadn't done it, it wouldn't have been done, so we had to do it.  Somebody had to do it, and it was us.  We were doing it.
Speaker 1: And do you--and so really at that point school probably seemed irrelevant.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely irrelevant.  I did not need what I was learning at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to do what I was doing-- and I started to say I haven't needed it since.
Speaker 1: (Laughter from interviewer)
Speaker 2: But you know, sadly, it's true.  It's true.
Speaker 1: And was there a whole movement on campus?  I mean I know you were the.
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was a group in Atlanta--what happened is the sit-ins began [at the Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina] on February 1, 1960, and then they spread very quickly, and in each of the towns they spread to, a group is born--and in Nashville [Tennessee] it's called the Student Central Committee. In Baltimore [Maryland] it was called the Civic Interest Group.  In [Washington] D.C.-- I'm not sure what it was the Howard [University] group was called--oh, the Nonviolent Action Group, NAG.  They like these acronyms. And ours was called the Committee on Appeal for Human Rights [COAHR], and Lonnie King was the chairman, the guy who had approached me first, and we had officers, and I became the publicist, the publicity guy.  I was the person who would see the journalists. And when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was formed [Easter weekend, 1960] and SNCC located its headquarters in Atlanta, I became the Communications Director which was nicer than saying flack, and I saw the journalists, I wrote the press releases, I sent them out. I did--I typed them,  I wrote them, I mimeographed them, I printed them, I folded them, I stuffed them in envelopes, I licked the stamps, I took them to the post office, and I put them in the mail.  I did all that stuff, and eventually I got other people to work with me and help me.
Speaker 1: These were pretty heady times, though, in--.
Speaker 2: They were extremely heady times.  There was something going on all of the time.  It was engaging from early in the morning until late at night, every day, seven days a week, all the time.
Speaker 1: And your--the relationship-- I mean Martin Luther King [Jr.] had actually taught a course or something--.
Speaker 2: Yes, he taught a course at Morehouse in the fall of '61[1961].  I guess that was the last semester I was in college.  I was the Class of '61, I should have graduated in May or June of '61. So in the fall of '61 he co-taught this philosophy course with his former philosophy teacher, Dr. Samuel Williams, who was also the President of the Atlanta NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and they co-taught this course once a week, and I can't remember a word that passed between us, and of course, and I've asked a couple of my fellow students, and they can't remember anything either--except there was a lot of conversation about the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott, which by then was six years old. Yeah, that's right, six years old, but I don't remember that.  I wish I did.  I'd have some secret insights into Martin Luther King, but I don't.
Story_ID: 3637
Speaker 1: What do you think SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]'s role--what do you see its role in the whole Civil Rghts Movement?
Speaker 2: First, we went places no one else would go. The theory in the Civil Rghts Movement then was that Mississippi should be attacked from without and we attacked it from within.  We were the first--that's not true--Medgar Evers was the only professional civil rights worker in the whole state of Mississippi.  Within months after we went in in 1961, we must have had twenty-five or thirty people working in Mississippi. The attitude of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other organizations was it was too dangerous to work here--witness Medgar Evers' murder. But we said, "That's precisely why you have to go here," and you know, some of our people were killed, too.  Then the other thing we brought to the civil rights movement which was really in its own way radical--this conference in Raleigh was in memory of Ella Baker who was our mentor.  She was one of the founders of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  She helped write the position papers for Martin Luther King that pulled SCLC together. And she used to say, "Strong people don't need strong leaders," and she taught us to be suspicious of charismatic leadership. And we believed--we had a slogan "You have to do what the people say do", that you can't come to a small town in Mississippi and say to the people there "Hey, here's what we're gonna do."  You have to say, "What do you want to do?  What's bothering you?  What's, what's your problem?  What do you think we ought to do about it?"  You have to work with them in that way, and you'll discover that among them are leadership figures who are just waiting for something to happen so they can emerge. So that's what we brought to the civil rights movement, and in addition to that, we built two independent political parties.  We supported candidates for ASCS committees, Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Committees where no black people ever--.  We supported eight candidates for Congress.  We--I said we built a labor union which is existing today--that's forty years ago, it's still existing today.  We brought--when we got involved in my expulsion from the legislature, we brought foreign policy concerns into the black discourse--not that they weren't there before, but we brought them even further and deeper into the black discourse.  When we began to articulate Black Power, we shifted the debate from not just integration but control. We want control.  We want to control these communities, and we want to control the politicians who get elected in these communities So we have a record of achievement and accomplishment in the short eight to nine year span of this organization which is far greater than just sitting in at a few lunch counters and riding a few buses.  It's a tremendous record of accomplishment.  I gave a talk on this in Raleigh [North Carolina], and my own colleagues didn't know what we had done.  We got people arrested at the South African consulate in New York City twenty years before the Free South Africa Movement began getting people arrested at the South African embassy here. So we predicted and preceded many things which came into the civil rights movement at a later time and a later date, and we opened the door for things to come into the movement.  We're hell.
Story_ID: 3638
Speaker 1: Well, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] was founded at a conference that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Ella Baker had called together, but there was never a formal relationship between SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and King and SNCC even though many of King's lieutenants wanted us to be the youth wing of SCLC, but we wanted independence.  We did not want to be tied to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], to SCLC, to CORE [Congress on Racial Equality], to any of these groups.  We wanted our own group because our argument was that we had done things that our elders had not done, and why should we tie ourselves to them when they weren't doing what we were doing?  Why should we sublimate our identity and our energy to theirs? And over time, while there was always a friendly and close relationship, there was a little tension and hostility, too--not so much aimed at King himself but at the image of King. I can remember being at a hotel in Atlanta [Georgia] to go to a meeting with King, and he was walking down the hall ahead of me and goes on by, and I'm coming behind, and there's some maids in the hall, and one of them says "Oh, that's Martin Luther King. He's come here to help work out this labor situation we're having." And I thought to myself, "These women are ceding to Martin Luther King the power to mediate this dispute when for one reason or another they're not able to do it themselves--and by giving it to him, they're lessening their ability to do it themselves. And we just resented that, the people saying--around King would say, "Here comes the leader, here comes the leader, here comes the leader," and we just resented the hell out of that.  We just hated that because we thought he took away--without intending to--I don't think this is a personal flaw, but it's just his persona and his charisma--he took away the ability of people to do things for themselves.
Speaker 2: And you were all about really self-empowerment.
Speaker 1: Indeed, indeed.
Speaker 2: Now when you say professional civil rights worker--.
Speaker 1: I mean someone paid to do it, paid to do it.  There were - you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had a network in Mississippi as it did in all the states except Alabama at the time.  The NAACP was barred in Alabama, but Medgar Evers was the first paid professional civil rights worker in Mississippi in '61 [1961] when we came, but within months I'd say we had a couple of dozen people--and eventually by the summer of '64 [1964] we had five hundred people working in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Now was this--was your movement or the SNCC organization assisted from the North or were you, you know--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. We were not a membership.  We had no members in the sense of dues-paying members, and we were dependent entirely on contributions from the North and occasionally from foundations, but we had 'Friends of SNCC' groups at Madison, [Wisconsin] at Berkeley [California], at all the big, you know, college campuses who raised money for us.  We had a singing group called the Freedom Singers, just like the Jubilee Singers from Fisk--we used to send them around singing. They sang at this thing in Raleigh last weekend [a reunion of former SNCC members to mark the fortieth anniversary of the organization's founding].  They're just fabulous, fabulous.
Story_ID: 3639
Speaker 1: You're very heavily involved in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  Is that what got you interested in politics?  I mean what was--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah because--well, two things.  Number one, we were urging people in the rural South who had just been able to register to vote in the last year or two--and finally by 1965 when the Voting Rights Act passes, able to vote at all in most places--and we're saying "You can be the sheriff." And they'd say, "I only have a high school education." And we'd say "Well, this cracker who's the sheriff now can barely read and write so how come you can't be the sheriff?" And you know, we were encouraging people to run in their home communities, and I lived in Atlanta, and there was a court decision which reapportioned the Georgia legislature, created these brand-new districts, no incumbents, and in an adjacent district, a friend of mine, Ben Brown, [Benjamin Brown, Georgia state representative 1966, 1969-1977, then in Carter administration] was running for the [Georgia State] House, and he said, "Bond, you ought to run." And I said, "I don't even know if I'm a Democrat or Republican." And then I thought to myself, "Do I want to be in a political party that has [Arizona Senator] Barry Goldwater as the head of it, or do I want to be in a political party with [then President] Lyndon Johnson?  I'm a Lyndon Johnson man."  So I became a Democrat, and I ran for the legislature, and I won the election and was elected to a one-year term in a body with two-year terms because the court ordered this election in the middle of the term, so this new group of us gets elected--most of us black but some whites, too, because representation in my county went from three to twenty-four. The legislature was so mal-apportioned that my county, the most populous county in the state, had three representatives. The smallest county had one. So we get these new representatives, we all get elected.  In December of '65 [1965], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] issued an anti-[Vietnam] war statement--which, if I read it to you today, would be mild in the extreme, but at the time sounded like an extreme statement--and members of the legislature objected.  They filed a challenge to my seating.  When I presented myself to be sworn in on the first day, they asked me to stand aside.  They convened a hearing on the floor of the House, and they voted 185 to 12 to throw me out, declared my seat vacant, and called for a new election.  I ran in the election.  I won the election, and they threw me out again. And by that time I filed a suit, and it was heard by a three judge federal court, and the two judges appointed by President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy voted against me, and the judge appointed by President [Dwight David] Eisenhower voted for me, and we appealed it to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and I came to the argument up here and sat in the courtroom and listened to them argue, and was seated next to one of my lawyers, and the Attorney General of Georgia was arguing that I should be thrown out, and Chief-- not Chief Justice, but Justice Byron White said to him "Is that all you have?  So you mean you come all the way up here, and that's all you have?" And I nudged my lawyer and said "We're winning, aren't we?"  He said "Yes, we are." And a couple of months later, in December of '66 [1966] they voted nine to zip to seat me, and in January of '67 [1967] I got in, and I stayed there for twenty years.
Speaker 1: So who was your lawyer?
Speaker 2: I had two lawyers.  One was Howard Moore, Junior, who became my brother-in-law and later became [radical civil rights activist] Angela Davis's lawyer, moved to California to represent Angela Davis, and Leonard Boudin, and Leonard Boudin, who has gone to meet his maker, was just a fabulous guy, he was part of a firm called Rabinowitz and Boudin, and they had carried more Smith Act cases-- anti-Communist cases or cases against Communists--to the Supreme Court, than any other lawyers and were radical lawyers.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] wouldn't represent me because they said it was not a racial question, but anyway so I wanted somebody with Supreme Court experience, and Victor Rabinowitz made the argument for me, and we won.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I mean when you were first elected, you were still very young--(unclear).
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was twenty-five.  I was the youngest at the time, but I was not the youngest ever.  You can be in the Georgia legislature when you're twenty-one, and there had been younger people.
Story_ID: 3640
Speaker 1: I've been in Chicago [Illinois] for 20 years, and, you know, you have to have your political network.  Did you - was your SNCC group basically your network or did it really not matter?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and no.  The SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people became my campaign apparatus.  As SNCC people would come into town from working in the field and spend the weekend or a couple of days of rest and relaxation, they used to come out and campaign with me, but I also began to develop a network within the district.  I had a lot of public housing so I got the tenant association presidents.  You know, black America is honeycombed with little clubs and groups, and so I began to seek out these clubs and groups and spoke to them and got them involved in the campaign.  I went, when I began, to some of the big political black political leadership in Atlanta [Georgia] to see if I could curry favor with them--some I did.  some I didn't. But this was an election that was gonna be won by hard work--who could knock on the most doors, who could talk to the most voters, and who could bring the most voters to the polls on election day. And if there's anything I could do, it was organize--because I came out of an organization that was nothing but organizers.  That's all we did, was organize people.  You know, we used to say in the movement that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] mobilized, SNCC organized. And we organized, and we knew how to do it, and so we did it, and I won--just like that. (Snaps fingers.)
Speaker 1: And why do you think this group of young people with basically no experience became experts at organizing? That's--
Speaker 2: Because they were willing to listen to people--and that's the hallmark of it--and learn from Ella Baker--and I think out of some intuition--that if I want you to do something, the best thing is not to say "Do it."  but to find out what you want to do.  "What are you interested in?  What's bothering you?  What's your concern, and how can we together help meet your concern?" And we learned how to do that, and that's just natural.  I mean that works with any group of people, anybody.  I don't care who you are or where you are or what you are.  If you listen to people and you're attentive to them and you're open to their needs, then you can begin something, but if you come in and say, "I got the plan, here's what we're gonna do,"--it may work for a day or so, but there's no long-lasting movement gonna be grown from that.
Speaker 1: Was there any resistance to you as the northern-trained, light-skinned black person?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't think so, because I was not--I was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] guy, you know.  I was a - in that sense I was as home-grown as you could be. I didn't go to high school in Atlanta, but--there I was. I was a home boy.
Story_ID: 3641
Speaker 1: Now when you were elected, you know, this whole time is sort of--I mean it took you three times to really set. [Bond had won a 1965 election to the Georgia State House of Representatives, which refused to seat him because of his anti-war remarks. After a two year battle, a U.S. Supreme Court decision ordered them to seat him.]
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: That whole experience - are there things that you learned out of that experience?  I mean was that the first time of really yourself--I know you said your father had the suit against the school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, well, I had these experiences in SNCC, you know, I'd been in a couple of tight squeezes in SNCC and in the Atlanta student movement--not very, very tight, nothing life-threatening, nothing at all like that--but you know these situations fraught with a little bit of danger. But this was the first time I had been the point person in a clash with authority---not the very first time but one of the first times--and I was coming up against the whole state of Georgia, it was me against the state. And it confirmed my life-long suspicion of state power.  It made me know that when you are well-organized and well-armed, you can defeat state power, and that when you have right on your side, you can prevail.--you won't always, but you can prevail--and that, you know, I think I was armed mostly--.  I was right.  I was right. These people had no right to do this to me.  I was right, they were wrong.  And right prevailed.
Speaker 1: So what was your family saying around this time period?
Speaker 2: Well, again they were very, very supportive.  My father [Horace Mann Bond] and mother [Julia Washington Bond]--I'm not sure if my mother came, but I know my father came to see the argument in the--[United States Supreme Court]--you know, my aunt who lived at the time in Chicago [Illinois] had sent me an American flag on a silver standard for me to put on my desk in the Capitol--and I still have it, it's tattered and worn out--and I kept thinking, how ironic. Here I am with an--I got an American flag, and these people are telling me I'm not a patriot, and I don't deserve to sit in this body.  I mean it was so irritating, but--we prevailed.
Speaker 1: And how did you feel that day you prevailed?
Speaker 2: I was in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in the airport, and I got a telephone call, and I thought one of my kids was sick or something because I didn't get calls in airports. And I go to the phone, and it's a reporter from the Associated Press, and he told me that that morning the Supreme Court had ruled nine to nothing that I was right, that the Georgia legislature was wrong, and that I had to be seated. And I was just overjoyed.  I did not yell and scream "Hooray," but I think if it had happened today, I would have done so.  I was just overjoyed.
Speaker 1: Now you were married at this time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, how - you got married--when--?
Speaker 2: I got married I think, and again I just have so much trouble with dates, but I got married in '60 [1960] or '61 [1961] to the former Alice Clopton, and we had in fairly short order five kids.
Speaker 1: And two of them are named--are in the--and one is named after your--.
Speaker 2: One's name is Horace Mann [named after Bond's father].  Well, there's - from the youngest to the eldest there's Julia Louise [named after his mother].  Then there is Jeffrey Alvin named in part after an uncle.  Then there is Michael Julian.  Then there is Horace Man, and then there's Phyllis Jane.
Speaker 1: So that they were stairsteps, in a way.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 3642
Speaker 1: So at that time you are newly wed with, you know, a burgeoning family, and, you know, you're still political - you're still active in the community.  What were you doing at that time that you were?
Speaker 2: I was working for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] until I guess the middle of '61 [sic., 1966] when I left SNCC in part over disputes about new directions it was taking, the election of Stokely Carmichael as chair [in May, 1966]--and in part because I'd been there long enough, you know--just, I'd put in enough time and wanted to do something else, and I had discovered that I could make a small amount of money, very small amount of money--two hundred dollars, three hundred dollars--making speeches, and so I was able to support my family making a speech every other week or so.  Then, of course, after I got thrown out of the [Georgia State] legislature [in 1966] I began to get many invitations to make speeches at much higher fees. And then after I was nominated for [United States] Vice President, I began to get many, many more invitations at much higher fees, but at this time I was scraping by, making these one hundred, two hundred dollar speeches around the country.
Speaker 1: Now, with the election of Stokely Carmichael, what were your views about that?  You said--.
Speaker 2: Well, it had happened at an occasion--.  It wasn't just Stokely's election, it was the decision to ask whites to leave SNCC--and the argument wasn't that white people were bad per se, but that white and black people had been successful in organizing black America but that the problem of white supremacy wasn't a problem that resided in black America, it was in white America, and somebody needed to go organize those people and convince them how wrong they were.  And black people couldn't do that--white people had to do that.  And so we asked the white people if would they agree to do it, and some said yes, and some said no.  And then we voted--and I was not there, I hasten to say--voted to ask the white people to leave--and the white people refused to participate in an election about their future in the organization to which they had given so much time and energy and suffered and sacrificed. But their absence from the vote made the vote win, and so they were out--and that was just disturbing to me.  And Carmichael--I didn't have any dispute with Carmichael's increased militance or his initial repudiations of nonviolence because I never thought nonviolence was a way of life.  I thought it was a tactic, and where it worked, you used it, and if you're walking down the street and somebody hits you, then you should hit them--. But I don't know, something about the whole thing that just made me know, this is not for me, this is not my place anymore.  I need to go away.  I need to get out.
Story_ID: 3643
Speaker 1: So then at that point what were you thinking?  I mean besides the fact that you had, you know, these speaking engagements, but where, you know,  you had given a lot to that organization and a lot--and you know, you were one of the founders so I mean at what point--what were your thoughts about, you know, where you were going to hang your hat?
Speaker 2: That something would turn up.  I think part of this time I was working for the newspaper, too, for the 'Atlanta Inquirer' [African American newspaper], yeah, so that provided income, too--and I have got to get this chronology straight,  I'm not sure about it-- but for part of this time I was working for this newspaper, which came out of the Atlanta [Georgia] student movement because the local black daily paper wouldn't support us so we got some real estate men to withdraw their ads from that, and after a couple of weeks they began to be worried about white realtors selling homes in black neighborhoods so they asked us to start a paper, and we did, and it grew to become--it's still ongoing today.  It's not at all the same militant paper that it was then.  It's a pale excuse, but it's still going today.
Story_ID: 3644
Speaker 1: Mr. Bond, you have to excuse my naivete, but I've listened to you, and you know, I got the same impression when I was talking to Mr. [William] Warfield.  You know, other people would describe, you know, the South as very dangerous, and, you know, life-threatening constantly, you know, and you're talking about, you know, this group going in and infiltrating Mississippi and--
Speaker 2: That was dangerous.  People got killed doing that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you seem as if you just sort of glided through the whole thing in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's been a criticism of my life, that I've glided through life, and I think to many people that's the appearance of things.  It's not my analysis of it, but--(pause) first, we're young and may not have initially appreciated what the real danger was, and when you're young, you feel invulnerable.  I'm told that people in combat think "The other fellow's gonna get killed, not me.  That guy over there, he's gonna get killed, not me.  It's not gonna happen to me,"--and I think we had some of that--"Somebody's gonna get hurt, but it won't be me," and we also--this was so necessary.  This had to be done.  We knew we were on a right course, and there was a payoff in the end, and so we just kept at it--but remember, for most of this time I'm working in Atlanta in an office, and I go to Mississippi, I go to Alabama, I go to these places for a few days, but most of my colleagues are living and working in these communities.  They're there all of the time, and I'm in and out.
Story_ID: 3645
Speaker 1: The U.S. Supreme Court rules in your favor, you get to sit in the [Georgia state] legislature.  How do you--I mean, this is a whole new experience for you.  [The question refers to the culmination of a long battle stemming from the Georgia state legislature's refusal to seat the newly-elected Bond due to anti-war statements].
Speaker 2: It's a whole new experience, and it has--as I now know, looking back on many, many things, that every institution has a culture, and I had to learn the culture of this institution, and I don't mean that it had a racist culture, which it did, but it had--it's a political body, and it had a culture, and you have to learn the culture if you're gonna succeed in it, and it took me a long time both to learn the culture and to be accepted by the culture.  Initially I was not accepted because I got in by order of the [United States] Supreme Court--and Southerners--white Southerners--hate the Supreme Court, and the idea the Court ordered this guy to be seated there just drove them nuts.  I used to sit one seat in from the aisle, and a guy who became kind of friendly to me-- Ben[jamin] Brown [African American legislator and Bond's friend] sat right here--he would come down, and he'd say "How's old Julian doing?" And Ben would look over here at me and he'd say, "He's doing okay."  And he'd say, "Good."  You know, he wouldn't speak to me, wanted to be friendly, wanted to be nice, but wouldn't speak to me, had to speak to me through this intermediary, but over time, after about a year or so these other people began to say, "This guy is a vote.  He's a vote for me or a vote against me"--and particularly in committee where the numbers are small, where one vote can make a difference--then they began to say, "We've either got to talk to this guy or lose that vote," and the smarter ones decided to talk to me. And after I'd been there about five years, one guy said to me, he said, "You know, Bond, that time we voted you out of here, what was that all about?"  Well, I wanted to say, "You stupid son of a bitch.  If you don't know what it was all about, how come you did it?"  But I said, "Well,--y'know--. So."
Speaker 1: So what was the composition when you came?  I mean how many?
Speaker 2: There were 12 blacks and a 185 or more - there were 205 House members.  The number was reduced later, 205 House members, and 12 of 'em were black.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the other?
Speaker 2: And in the Senate there was one black Senator and eventually two, and then over time more.
Speaker 1: And the blacks that were sitting there, were they - you would say that they were of a different political philosophy than yours?
Speaker 2: Not radically.  Most--we were all elected at the same time in this reapportionment decision, so we came in all together, but I was kept out, and they came on in--but they were--of the group of them, yes, they were different personalities and politics, and I guess Ben Brown was closest to my point of view, but you know, there were differences. And one woman, Grace Hamilton--who was sort of the grande dame of black Atlanta interracial life, had worked for the Urban League for many, many years--was very different than I was.  She--on a left-right continuum she'd be over here, [looks to right] and I'd be over here [looks to left].  Now, on race-related matters we were like this [hands held together]. But on good government issues she might take one course, and I'd take another--or most blacks would take one course, and she'd take another. So there were differences among us.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what do you think the--? How long did it take you to really sort of be effective in that?
Speaker 2: It took a year for me to figure it out.  It probably took another year for me to begin feeling my way.  I would say two or three years.
Speaker 1: And did--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) When I got to be a [Georgia state] senator, I was hell. Because I came into a body with people who had had no experience with me at all, and most were willing to accept me at face value.  I don't mean they loved me or liked me or embraced me, but they said "Just another guy.  We'll see what he'll do."
Speaker 1: And what was behind your decision to run for the Senate after you had--?
Speaker 2: It is more prestigious.  It's a smaller body.  It's more respect.  My senator was Horace Ward.  [United States President] Jimmy Carter made him a judge, created a vacancy.  My district was in his district, and I wanted to move up, and the House is raucous and large and rowdy, and a lot of country people in it and it's a cruder place, and the Senate was more genteel.
Story_ID: 3646
Speaker 1: When I got to be a [Georgia state] senator, I was hell (grins).  Because I came into a body with people who had had no experience with me at all, and most were willing to accept me at face value.  I don't mean they loved me or liked me or embraced me, but they said "Just another guy.  We'll see what he'll do."
Speaker 2: And what was behind your decision to run for the Senate after you--?
Speaker 1: It is more prestigious, it's a smaller body, it's more respect.  My senator was Horace Ward.  [United States President] Jimmy Carter made him a judge, created a vacancy.  My district was in his district, and I wanted to move up, and the House is raucous and large and rowdy, and a lot of country people in it.  It's a cruder place, and the Senate was more genteel.
Speaker 2: And what did you like about politics?
Speaker 1: I liked coming to the Senate--there are 56 senators.  If I could get 28 of them to come my way, I'm gonna win, and I loved getting those 28--and the 28 I get today won't be the 28 I get tomorrow, because this guy will vote for me today and against me tomorrow, and I liked the trading and going around and talking to them.  I usually knew that I could get the black senators.  I usually knew I could get the urban senators, the people from Atlanta, Augusta, so on, because most of the issues I was fighting for weren't black-white.  They were urban-rural or urban-suburban or city issues. So I could usually get the city people, and the challenge was to get some of the suburbanites or to get the rural people, and that was often hard to do, but I liked doing it.  You go around the chamber.  You sit down with them.  "You got a minute?  Can we talk about this?  I got this bill.  Can I get you on it?  Here's what it does," and so on, and sometimes they'd say "Well, you know, I don't know, my people back home wouldn't like this."  I'd say "Well, can I get you not to vote against it?  Can you do that?" and so on--"Or not to speak against it?"  'Cause some people are powerful--if they speak against it, you're dead.  "Can I get you not to say anything about it?"  "Okay."  "Or is there something you've got I can help you with?  Can I do something for you?"  And sometimes they'd say, "Yeah."
Speaker 2: Now what didn't you like about the whole political--that whole--?
Speaker 1: I can't think of much I didn't like about it.  I liked all of it.  It only lasted--we only met forty days a year, January through March, taking a break every budget year for the House Budget Committee to hold hearings on the budget.  So this is not an onerous job, and there are moments of it that are just fun.  First, politicians, you know, are bigger than life creatures.  They have extravagant personalities.  I remember one time there was a guy who was a figure of fun, a butt of jokes, with probably cruel and mean jokes.  He looked like a overweight, great big guy, looked like a melting vanilla ice cream, and he asked somebody to write a speech for him, and the guy put in stage directions so this guy's giving the speech, and he's saying (in dramatic oratorical style) "Ladies and gentlemen, if you pass this bill, the widows and orphans of Georgia will cry and moan." (Points as if at audience.) "Now tell a joke.  Pause for the laughter." And he's just going on and on and on--and the rest of us are going--ahhh (covers his face as if helplessly cracking up)--laughing and laughing and laughing.  So there are moments of levity and fun.  It's a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Now you say you only sat forty days a year?
Speaker 1: Um hmm.
Speaker 2: So what was the other part?
Speaker 1: The other part, I'd be out on the road making speeches, especially after 1968.  I could go out for a week, sometimes making two a day.  I've made five a day.
Speaker 2: And did you like servi-,serving your constituents?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes.  I had a--.
Speaker 2: As opposed to campaigning?
Speaker 1: I never liked campaigning, but I liked the service, and I had a newsletter which I distributed a couple times a year to key people in the district.  I went to neighborhood meetings and, you know, community club meetings and that kind of thing.  I, when I got to be a senator, I had a staff--a secretary, really, it wasn't a staff--and I eventually got to be chairman of my senate delegation so I had an even bigger staff.  When I was in the House, I shared a secretary with a number of other House members, but because some of them did no constituent service, I could get this woman's time for my business.  And so, yeah, I liked doing--I liked helping people.  What I didn't like was, because Atlanta [Georgia] having district-level city council members was relatively new--as new as having district-level state office holders--constituents often couldn't tell the difference between a city official and a state official.  So a great deal of what came to me was city problems:  "There's a dead dog in the street outside my house." or "My garbage wasn't picked up."  And I wanted to say,  "Why don't you call your councilman?" but you can't say that to people.  You have to say, "Okay, I'll take care of it." and you do--so I didn't like that.  It was a distraction and a waste of time, you know, because their councilman wasn't doing the job, or they didn't know who their councilman was.  But I liked it generally.
Story_ID: 3647
Speaker 1: It's true that I was a star, but I'd prefer to say I was notorious because for some people, primarily black people, I was a celebratory figure, but for many, many white people, particularly my colleagues in the [Georgia state] legislature, I was a notorious and negative figure--well-known but not necessarily well-liked.  But you know, the nature of politics is you learn very quickly that you have to get along with these other people.  Whether you like them or not, whatever their politics are, you have to get along with these other people because the time is gonna come when you need these other people.  They need you, you need them, and you can't afford to let personality intrude--and the best politicians don't let personality intrude.
Speaker 2: So would you consider yourself a good--were you a good politician?
Speaker 1: I was a wonderful politician.  I didn't win all the time.  I lost on a number of occasions, but I tried to be careful about the fights I picked and laid as much groundwork as I could and not be extravagant.  Some people introduced thousands--not thousands, but dozens and dozens--of bills and dissipated their energies.  I tried to narrow my focus and do things that I thought I could put some energy into.  Because although this is not physically taxing work, it is mentally taxing work, and I think you've got to husband your resources.  You've gotta do what you know you can do.
Story_ID: 3648
Speaker 1: And what things did you accomplish, you know, between your time in the House and your time in the Senate that you are probably most proud of?
Speaker 2: Most proud of creating the Congressional district that gave Atlanta [Georgia] a black member of [United States] Congress.  That was a two-year effort.  It took an enormous effort.  It took rallying a lot of disparate forces, creating allies where you didn't expect to get them.  It was a tough, tough thing to do.  When I say two years, I don't mean all of two years, but it took two legislative sessions--really two and a half because we had a special session just for reapportionment--and it was tough, and it was at a time when computers were just becoming tools.  You know, today if you want a district in Chicago [Illinois] that can elect a left-handed paperhanger, I can draw that district.  But you couldn't do that then.  You could draw a black district or a white district or so on, but that was the degree of sophistication you had, and so it was tough, and building the coalition that made it possible was tough.
Speaker 1: So what was the impetus behind that?  I mean who - was that your brainchild?  Was that someone who came in?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a common dream, I think, of black legislators.  We knew that Georgia had sufficient black population for us to have two black Congressmen, but you had to put these votes together, and that meant you had to control the drawing process, and if you didn't do that, then black votes would be used to elect white Democrats, and of course, there's a philosophical argument you can make.  Is it better to have one black Congressman out of ten or three white Democrats who are dependent on black votes for their victories?  At the time we thought it was better to have one out of the ten so you had to - what happened is if you think about Georgia as a square, I let those nine districts around Atlanta be drawn any way they wanted, and then I took the district in the middle, the hole in the middle of the doughnut, and that's where I worked my magic, and I got help from the Republicans, from Paul Coverdell who is now a United States Senator, and the district had been drawn with the dividing line like that, and we just turned it on its side because the black people are in the South, and we created a black district here and what Coverdell hoped would be a Republican district here.  It turned out they were both Democratic districts, and both of them elect Democrats today.
Speaker 1: And what do you think has happened in Georgia or Atlanta because of that?  You know, what was?
Speaker 2: Well, it's giving John Lewis a seat in Congress, and it has added to the strength of black political interests or liberal progressive political interests nationwide.  It hasn't done much more than that.  I mean I think it's dangerous to put more into it than that, but at the time it was an important victory for black political strength and power, and I think probably gave heart to people in other parts of the South that it could be done.  It took a long time, as I say, but we did it.
Speaker 1: I'd like to--.  Were there other things that you were proud of during that time?  You know, that was what you were most proud.
Speaker 2: Well, Ben[jamin] Brown and I, we were in the [Georgia State] House together and largely at his initiative put together a program of low-interest home loans for low income Georgians aimed not at black people particularly but benefiting low income Georgians, and I understand - I've been away for 11 years.  I understand it's still ongoing now with some changes and alterations, but it meant that people who could not buy a house suddenly got the opportunity to buy a house, and you know, it's just great when you can do that.  I helped, not through the legislature but through the use of my influence, I helped a woman become the first single parent of an adopted child, and you know, it's just great because here's this kid, no family.  Here's this woman, no husband, doesn't want a husband, but wants a kid, and I helped put them together.  And you know, it's a common practice now, but I was glad to be able to do it.
Story_ID: 3649
Speaker 1: You know, I just wanna ask you about a quote that I saw in one of the--I'm not sure where I read it--it came out in 1977.  I don't know if it's true or not.  You said, "I guess I'm a little lazy.  I've not had the discipline to be a better legislator."
Speaker 2: You know, I'm so sorry I said that--I said that. Because when I ran for Congress, John Lewis just used it against me over and over and over and over again.  I don't believe it's true.  I don't know why I said it, and it's a warning to people to never say things like that about themselves because they will come back and haunt you as this came back and haunted me.  John won this campaign for a couple of reasons, but for one, he'd managed to paint me, to define me, before I could define myself. And he defined me as a lazy person--and I've worked hard all my life.  I have three jobs now, three paying jobs right now.  I'm like the mythical Jamaican family on [television program] 'In Living Color', you know.  So I'm sorry I said that.  It's not true.  I didn't mean it.  I was a good legislator.  I worked awful hard.  I'm proud of what I did, and I hate that I said that, but I said it.
Speaker 1: You know, do you think--? Well, let me ask this question. Because you won that--you lost that race against him, it was a bitter race.
Speaker 2: I lost the race that he ran against me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the first one out of the blocks.  He had just been reelected to the Atlanta City Council to a four-year term, and I could not imagine that someone would win an election one year and give up the seat the next, but of course he did.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your feelings at that point because this was--I mean obviously you had worked to create this district, and there might be, you know, a sense--not of entitlement--.
Speaker 2: Entitlement?
Speaker 1: Right, but you know--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was crushed.  First, you know when you lose an election--and this was the first one I'd ever lost--when you lose an election, it's--imagine you're a high school boy and you ask a girl for a date, and she says no.  This is several hundred thousand people saying no, and if you're not careful, you take it personally--that a hundred thousand or more people have said, "We don't like you." or "We like this other person better than you."  So it's crushing.  It's crushing, but hey, life goes on.  You move on, and I've moved on, but it was crushing.  It was crushing.  I was convinced I was gonna win--not because I deserved it or it was owed to me, but because I had worked the hardest.  I thought I had the best campaign.  I thought I had the best argument, that it should be me and not him. And none of that proved out, proved to be true.
Speaker 1: Do you think in hindsight--you know hindsight is always twenty twenty vision--I mean besides, you know, making that statement - you know that was--some other things.  Do you think you had sort of gotten lazy in terms of--when I say la- --or you know sometimes when people have been in office a long time, sometimes they're out of touch?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you think that was any--?
Speaker 2: It--well, no, I don't think so.  I had had a hard-fought campaign for the Senate in the previous election [the 1984 Democratic Party primary; Bond ran unopposed in the general election], challenged by this guy [Hildred W. Shumake, Jr].  who later went on to serve as State Senator [following Bond] who has been tried twice for corruption [for influence peddling] and escaped conviction by the skin of his teeth in spite of the videotapes they had of him--but he gave me a run, to my enormous surprise--but I worked hard, and I beat him back.  And until then, I had successfully been re-elected against sometimes opposition, sometimes none, with no difficulty, running hard campaigns even when I had modest opposition.  So I really don't think so. But you know, I think people do get tired of you after a while.  You become a familiar face.  They want somebody new.  You can't know everything that goes into the voters' minds and makes their decisions, so I'm not really sure--but no, I don't think I was out of touch.  I think I was in touch.
Speaker 1: So what would you describe the Julian Bond at that point?  You know, you've this election.  You know you--at this point--really in your life you had really had much of a sort of a golden life.
Speaker 2: A charmed life.
Speaker 1: A charmed life.
Speaker 2: As others have said.  Well, I had lost the election which meant among other things that I was unemployed and, you know, no prospects for a job--and not really that interested in a job--you know, nine to five, 'cause it had been a long time since I had had a nine to five.  And just at loose ends, didn't know what to do, didn't know what to do.  But after some time, you know, I fell into university teaching, and here I am today.
Story_ID: 3650
Speaker 1: And you started--I want to ask you about how you started hosting [the television show] 'America's Black Forum.'
Speaker 2: Oh, I did that years and years before--
Speaker 1: That was before--I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, long, long time ago.  I can't remember how many years.
Speaker 1: About 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I don't know.  The guy who began the show and who wrote the show and who hosted the show and who produced the show got tired of doing all that and left and sold the show to some local investors, and they hired me to take his place, and so for a long time I hosted the show--they hired producers to do it, and I would fly up here from Atlanta once every other week or so.  We'd do two shows, three shows, and the show consisted entirely of me interviewing one or two people for half an hour.  Today the show has become one of those typical Sunday 'shout shows' in which well-dressed men shout at each other, and I only do it every other show or every third show or so.
Speaker 1: Now what did you like about that experience?  I mean even the fact--I mean it's something then that--did they seek you?  They sought you out.
Speaker 2: Yes, they sought me out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I liked it because you had this half hour in which to interview this person about--hopefully some interesting topic, and you had time to stretch out and explore as much of it as you could squeeze into, say, really twenty-five minutes, allowing for commercial time--and it was great.  I liked it.  As I say, it's not like that anymore, but I very much liked that. And I felt it was providing a service, that the viewers were hearing something discussed in a sober manner that they might not have heard otherwise.  It was educational.
Speaker 1: Plus it gave you a platform.
Speaker 2: Yes, it gave me a presence and a platform--and I was just in Starbucks [coffee shop], and a young black woman there said, "I watch that show every week."  I'm always surprised when people say that because it's on such bad times.  It's got bad air times. So I'm surprised that anybody watches it.
Story_ID: 3651
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go back to the end of the election--was there a--?  How long was that period where you were just really trying to decide, because wasn't--?  You were also going through a bad divorce, right?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.  Yes, bad divorce, a marriage of many, many years broke up.  My wife made these charges against me which she later withdrew that I was a cocaine user, and you know it's so odd that the issuing of the charges was just headline news, big ten-point type above the headline in the Atlanta [Georgia] newspapers every day for a week, and the withdrawal was nothing.  But anyway--so all of this was going on, and my life was in turmoil and no prospects for a job, no prospects for a living, still making the occasional speech but just barely enough to keep going, keep body and soul together, and keep my family.  You know, I had all these kids--and a house and a wife to maintain so it was real tough, real tough.
Speaker 1: And what did your--?  I mean, you know--you know, all of us have points in our life that are low moments.  Are there things that you feel that you learned out of that experience?
Speaker 2: You learn who your friends are.  You learn who your friends are, and you learn that people you thought were your friends are not your friends.  And it taught me a real lesson about who my friends were.  It's a sobering lesson, a real sobering lesson, and it also I think leads you--and I don't mean to be harsh--to not depend on other people as much as you may have depended on them in the past.  Eventually, you know, life comes down to you.  It's what you do, and you can't be too reliant on others.  You have to be dependent on yourself.
Speaker 1: And, what about--did you have any concerns at that point in time about, you know, the controversy in, you know, your whole family and relationship with your children?
Speaker 2: Not really, because my children had grown up in a household in which they had seen their parents bicker, and although divorce has got to be always traumatic for children--no matter what happens or who's at fault or what the issues are--I hope to think that this was not tremendously traumatic for them.  They were, after all, all either grown or nearly grown, a couple of them married and out of the house and almost adult so it's not as if they were infants or little kids--so you hope that it wasn't damaging to them, but you know, I think their mother and I just decided, or I decided at any rate, that the marriage could not go on.
Story_ID: 3652
Speaker 1: Let's go to, you know, this period where, you know, you've decided, you know--well, you're not exactly sure what you want to do next, right?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: And what was that whole sort of--you've probably decided you don't know what you want to do next and you're not sure you want to be in, in Georgia anymore. Well, the second part, I wasn't really sure about that.  I had--in an earlier time I had never anticipated leaving Atlanta [Georgia].  I didn't see any reason why to.  There's nothing pulling me away.  There's nothing, no reason I couldn't be there.  I had living, a life, a family, everything was there so I had no prospects or thought about leaving, but when this crises--these crises came along, then I began to think about the possibility but had nowhere that seemed like it was saying, "Come here, come here."  So I happened to be in, I think, Lancaster, Pennsylvania  driving through. Stopped to see a friend who was having a party, and he said, "Here's one of my guests at the house, and he is a dean at the Wharton [Business] School [at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the undergraduate college," and I said, "Gee, I didn't know they had an undergraduate college at Wharton.  I thought it was a graduate school."  He said no, and he said, "How would you like to teach at the University of Pennsylvania for a semester?"  I said, "Hey, I'd love it."  So he made the arrangements for me to get in touch with him later.  I drove on to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I called a friend of mine who taught at Drexel, and I said, "Guess what.  I'm gonna be teaching at Penn."  He said, "How'd you like to teach at Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?"  I said, "I'd love to."  So I began teaching for the first time in my life at Penn in the afternoon and Drexel at night, and that's how I got into university teaching.
Speaker 2: And what do you think of this, you know, this part of your life, the teaching part?  What, what is--?
Speaker 1: I enjoyed it an enormous amount, and I've taught at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] twice.  I've taught at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts ], I've taught at Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Penn, and I teach now at American University [Washington, D.C.] one night a week, one class, and full time at the University of Virginia  [Charlottesville, Virginia], and I have taught very bright young people and not so bright young people, and I can tell you it's better to teach bright young people, but I enjoy it.  When you look out at that classroom and you see an imaginary light bulb go on over some kid's head and you say I did that, that's one of the greatest feelings you can ever have, that you've made somebody see things in a way different than they had seen them before.  It's a tremendous feeling, just a tremendous lift, and I'm lucky enough to be teaching a subject, civil rights history, that I began with a little knowledge of and since have become much more knowledgeable about, and it is endlessly fascinating to me because in spite of all that we do know about this fairly recent period in American history, there is so much we do not know.  Just this past weekend in Raleigh, [North Carolina] I heard stories [at an event marking the fortieth anniversary of the 1960 founding of SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] that upset my idea of things I knew, I knew to be true--and now I know they're not true.  Now if I'm finding these things out, think about how much else there is out there we just don't know.
Speaker 2: So when you first stood in front of your classroom, was there any trepidation on your part or was it, I mean, you know, because this is a new career, so--?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was, but I had prepared extremely carefully.  I had assembled - I had always had a good collection of books on the movement, history books, and I had all the summer to prepare so I read and read and read like a demon.  I took notes like crazy, and I put all my notes on three by five cards, and I assembled them all in a big tray like this, and I had them divided lecture by lecture, class by class, and I'd go to class with a clutch of them in my hand, and I'd think, "Oh, my God, if I drop these, they're not numbered.  What will happen?  I'll go nuts--or if I run out, if I don't have enough,  and so on, and so on, so it was rough going at first, but eventually I fell into a pattern.  I dropped the note cards and went to a narrative, a text, and so when I go to class now, I have a text for this class, for this lecture.  I know what it's gonna cover, and the text covers about three quarters of the class period.  This is a lecture class.  There's no Q and A back and forth, and I leave about a quarter of the time for extrapolation and extra stuff that sometimes just comes to me while I'm talking and speaking.  So I'm confident that what I'm giving my students is as good as or better than they could get anywhere else from anyone else who teaches this subject.
Story_ID: 3653
Speaker 1: Let's talk about civil rights history.  What do you think its place is in American history?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, people ask me if I teach black history, and I say "No, I don't,  I teach American history."  And I'm teaching--really if you want to narrow it down, I'm teaching Southern American history.  I'm teaching the history of the movement from 1900 to the middle 1960s of black and some white people against white supremacy.  That's my subject.  And its place is as a standard part of the curriculum, this is American history,  Americans need to know about this.  You don't know the history of your country unless you know this.  So I am--without boasting about it, I'm providing a service to democracy.  I'm making it possible for more and more people to understand what a struggle we've been through in this country and how much of a struggle we have yet to go through, and I can't tell you how much I enjoy doing it. I--when I used to go to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to teach at--I used to go on the train, and just as I'd approach the station in Philly, I had a Walkman [tape player] with me, and I'd play Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes with Teddy Pendergrass singing 'Wake Up Everybody', and there's a line in there, "Wake up, all you teachers, gotta teach a new way.  Maybe then they'll listen to what you have to say."  And it just gave me so much energy, so much energy that I was just ready for this.  I don't have to do that anymore, but I am part of a group of historians who are approaching all history, but particularly civil rights history which is my field, in a different way.  This used to be taught from the top down.  Here's Martin Luther King [Jr.]--let me tell you what he's doing.  Here's [U.S. President] Lyndon Johnson--let me tell you what he's doing, and here's [U.S. President] John F. Kennedy--let me tell you what he's doing.  Now it is taught from the bottom up, too.  Here's [Mississippi civil rights activist] Fannie Lou Hamer--let me tell you what she's doing, and let me tell you what her relationship is to Martin Luther King and John F. Kennedy and so forth and so on. And that is showing people that this was a 'small d' democratic movement, that it wasn't just famous names and famous places.  As I like to say, Martin Luther King didn't march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] by himself.  He didn't speak to an empty field at the March on Washington.  There were thousands marching with him and before him, and thousands who did the dirty work that preceded the march, and I'm teaching about those thousands.
Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of people who--I mean, you're teaching young people now.  Is it--it almost appears maybe like medieval history to them.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.  Not quite that but almost that, yes.  Yeah, oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Because there're people--you know, I've heard kids say "Who's Martin Luther King?" or, you know, "What was that whole movement about?" so in many ways how do you teach the relevancy?
Speaker 2: It's hard.  First, how do you teach what that was like?  If you didn't live through it, then it's awful hard to teach--and you know, different teachers have different techniques.  There's one teacher I've heard about who puts on the two doors to the classroom 'White' and 'Colored' and makes students--or hopes students will separate themselves by race when they come to class.  I've thought about making all my white students for one class stand up in the back of the room--or something to make them know--but I said "Why should I do that just to the white kids?  The black kids don't understand this either, so why don't I make them all do that?"  And sometimes when I'm talking about the experience of trying to register to vote, I roll up a newspaper, and I hit students.  I hit them on the shoulders, and I hit them on the, you know, top of the head--I'm not hurting them--please, Mom and Dad--but I hit 'em, you know, because I want them to know that you were taking your life in your hands to do this, something that to you is nothing, that people took their life in their hands to do this--but that's not enough.  That's not enough.  So I don't know.  It's hard to put people back in that time, and it's hard to make them understand how relevant it is today.  They can say--they say, you know, "That was so awful back then, but it's all over now.  It's all changed, it's all gone."  Of course, it's not all over.  It's ongoing.  It's continuing.  It's here all about us.  It's every day.  It's everywhere.  And it's hard to do so we have to struggle to find ways to put it into words that resonate in these young, immature minds, these unsophisticated minds, and make them connect with these people forty years ago, fifty, sixty, eighty years ago--and then jump back to today.  It's hard.
Story_ID: 3654
Speaker 1: And so what are your views about the Civil Rights Movement now, the Movement that you were part of?
Speaker 2: Well, that it was our democracy's finest hour.  This was when we were at our best as a people and a nation.  This is when we rose to a challenge, and we met it.  But it's also a period when we didn't do enough, we didn't go far enough, there weren't enough people involved, we didn't do the things we should have done--and we didn't keep the momentum going, for a lot of different reasons, some of them easily understandable, some of them not--so it was a great time, a wonderful time--but we need to have another time like that.  We need to do it again.
Speaker 1: Do you see that ever happening?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It's not predictable.  When I go back and trace the history of the development of the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott [in 1955-1956], you can say, "Oh, they're gonna have a boycott.  I can see it coming."  Because you can see the building blocks falling into line, you can see all the forces lining up, you can see everybody, without knowing it, getting ready for it.  But they couldn't tell that, and we can't tell now what's going to happen.  Now at the NAACP [National Association for Advancement of Colored People] we try to build little movements in communities, but they're nowhere near the scale and the scope of the movement of the 1960s.  Will they develop into that?  No one knows.  It's not predictable.  You cannot tell.  You cannot tell what makes people suddenly connect with each other and suddenly understand that the problem you have in Chicago [Illinois] and I have in Atlanta [Georgia] and somebody else has in Detroit [Michigan]  and somebody else has in Jackson [Mississippi]--these are the same problems, and we need to take a common solution to them.
Speaker 1: Well, the--what are your hopes, though, then for the black community, period, because some people would say that there was a bad thing that came out of the Civil Rghts Movement and that it took the best out of the heart of the black community and--?
Speaker 2: (frowns, puzzled) How do they mean that?
Speaker 1: Well, they mean that it diffused things so you don't have--you know, like a--.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean that integration, the process of integration and so on.
Speaker 1: It diffused things and that our community is in much worse shape now.
Speaker 2: No.  I absolutely reject that.  You know, I knew what then was like, and I know what now is like.  And there's no way now is as bad or worse than then.  Then I lived in a society where most black people couldn't vote, were not citizens of the land in which they had been born, were not citizens, where they had no rights, where they-- their lives were cheap, could be struck down at the whim of almost any passerby--described by one historian as a "borderline genocidal regime."  That's what I lived in, and that was--I'm talking thirty-five years ago--it's not two hundred years ago--thirty-five years ago.  That's not true anywhere in the country now.  This is so much different and a better place now than before.  And the fact that all black people used to live together in a tiny, tidy community and now well-to-do or middle income people--that's what we were fighting for--for the right of people to make their own choices about where they live and where their kids go to school and so on.  That was what--that was the purpose of this.  Now, if some people have not been able to take advantage of that, that just means there's more to do,  there's more to be done, but these people are not the victims of that process, not at all, not at all.  My students come to me, and they see this headline "Rodney King Beaten" and say "Oh, things are worse than they ever were before."  No, they're not.  Rodney King was being beaten all along, but you never saw it on TV, did you?  Nobody ever complained about it, did they? And Rodney King wouldn't have gotten any--[video ends]
Story_ID: 3655
Speaker 1: Then what are your hopes for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, that the day comes very shortly when black people are distributed up and down the income stream, have access to everything everyone else has in the society, that the day--I long for the day when equity and equality arrive.  Now I'm disturbed about the maldistribution of wealth in America.  But that isn't precisely a racial problem.  It has a heavy, heavy racial component, but it's not precisely a racial problem so that's another problem I'm worried about. But for black people particularly, I want us to have what everybody else has--the chance to be whatever we want to be, whatever we can be.
Speaker 1: So how do you think that that's going to happen?
Speaker 2: It's only going to happen if enough people insist upon it happening by organizing, mobilizing, litigating, engaging in coalition, building a national political consciousness that these things must be.  That's the only way things happen in this country, in a democracy.  It's the only way they happen.
Speaker 1: So how is that gonna happen when there's so much apathy, when people are not voting the way they used to?
Speaker 2: Well, by the same way we've always done things, and that's by organizing, by knocking on the doors, by saying, "An election is coming up.  It's time for you to go," calling you on the phone, making sure you go, picking you up, taking you down there, waiting while you vote, taking you back home--creating a consciousness that makes you understand this is an important thing for you to do.  That's--it takes hard work.  You can't do it by having press conferences and announcing it, that you're gonna do it.  You have to do it by knocking on people's doors and taking 'em by the hand.
Story_ID: 3656
Speaker 1: And right now you are Chairman of the Board of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: This is an institution that, you know, earlier in our taping you said was sort of out of touch.
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: Not out of touch.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say out of touch--that they were more conservative.
Speaker 1: They're more conservative, and even though they had a vibrant role in the '60s [1960s] movement, that was a role portrayed largely by the branch structure, the grassroots, and not by the national leadership, although the national leadership came in time to realize that there was some validity in this new kind of militancy.
Speaker 2: But it has been said, you know, that in, I would say maybe the last ten or fifteen years, of the NAACP, that it was lost.  You know, it was sort of lost.  There was also the issue of leadership and all of that, and I'm wondering, you know, what your hopes are for that organization?
Speaker 1: Well, five or six years ago we were five million [dollars] in debt.  Our leadership was mired in scandal.  Today we're enjoying now, I think, our third straight year of surplus.  We have reestablished integrity at the top.  My predecessor as Chair, Myrlie Evers-Williams [activist and widow of slain civil rights worker Medgar] brought integrity to the NAACP.  She paid off half of the budget deficit we were suffering, and she gave me the opportunity to come in and bring the NAACP forward into the twenty-first century.  But I always think people can do better.  If you're doing great now, you can do better tomorrow.  And the NAACP can do better.  We have a good staff.  They can do better.  We have a good Board of Directors.  They can do better.  We have a wonderful Chair--he can do better.  We can all do better, and I just keep pushing and pushing and pushing all of the different parts of the NAACP to do better because the problems we face are so immense, they demand the best.  You can't be half-stepping at this.  This is serious business.  We're talking about people's lives here--and when lives are at stake, you can't be half-stepping.  You have to work hard, and you have to work at your best, and you have to bring your best to it--and I'm not convinced we're always bringing our best.
Speaker 2: And what do you want to see this institution do under your leadership?
Speaker 1: Well, we are engaged in great internal debate about who we are.  Over the last couple of decades--and we're ninety-one years old--we have begun to do a great many things that I think you would describe as social service.  Our mission is social justice.  And I want us to concentrate on social justice.  The social service things we do are wonderful things, and most people would applaud them and celebrate them--and I say, as great as they are, let somebody else do them.  Do you know the story about the two men sitting by the river, and they look out, and they see a baby floating down?  One of them jumps in and pulls the baby out, and then they say "Oh, here comes another baby," and they jump in and pull that one out, and then a third baby comes down the river, and one of the men starts running upstream, and the first guy says, "Come back, come back!"  He says, "No, I'm gonna find the man who's throwing babies in the river!"  And our job is to find the man who's throwing the babies in the river.  The babies need to be saved, but there are people who can save them.  Our job is to stop that man.
Speaker 2: So you want to go back to the NAACP's--the strong tradition of really--the legal side.
Speaker 1: We began the legal side, the mobilization side--we began fighting white supremacy.  Now sometimes we fight the effects and the results of white supremacy. They need to be fought, but I want us to concentrate on the first, not on the second.
Story_ID: 3657
Speaker 1: And what is yourm position about, sort of economic opportunities?  You know a lot of our history in this country at the beginning was fighting from a political standpoint.  Really from the standpoint of either equal education or--or access or housing.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Of course, these are economic fights.  You know.  Why do you want a good education?  So you can get a good job.  Why do you want a house?  Not only so you can have a roof over your head, but so you can have equity.  Why did they begin the boycott against the buses in Montgomery [Alabama]?  Not only so they could sit wherever they wanted to,  but so that black men could be drivers.  The Civil Rights Movement has always had this economic side to it.  I'm disturbed by people who tell me, you know the main thing we gotta do is get economic equity.  I agree, I agree.  But I don't think that's the main thing.  Because why don't  we have economic equity?  What's keeping us from having economic equity?  It's racial discrimination.  So the main thing is fighting racial discrimination.  And when racial discrimination is fought, then economic equity, educational equity, political equity all these things will then come.  We're putting the horse--cart before the horse.  And I don't want to argue with people  who said, we need more businesses.  Some we do.  But what we really need is more jobs.  What do most Americans have?  Do they have businesses?  They have jobs.  We need more jobs and we need more businesses too, but--this is a complicated argument to make, but we began in 1900, 1909 rather fighting white supremacy.  And that's what we should do today.
Story_ID: 3658
Speaker 1: But you know a lot of times people feel that the white supremacist now is a little more diffuse than--.
Speaker 2: Oh much more diffuse.  But not that diffuse.  I mean, that tape at Texaco [of racist comments by white Texaco executives, released in 1996], was that diffuse?  Were those people who killed James Byrd [in Jasper, Texas, 1998] --was that diffuse?  Do the people who turn down black people who want an apartment or a house--that's not diffuse.  The banker who turns down the credit-worthy person for a loan, that's not diffuse.  The car salesman who charges black people more  money for the same car than white people--that's not diffuse.  This is something happening all over the country, all of the time.  And we need to fight it.  and I'm not saying when that goes away  every human problem is gonna disappear, I'm not that naive.  But this is the major stumbling block we face, the major stumbling block.  You know, some people say, "Well you're just playing that old victim thing."  Hey, I am a victim!  I am a victim.  I'm driving down from here to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a cop stops me and tells me I resemble a suspect in a robbery.  Ad the victim comes along and says to the cop it was a teenager.  I am a victim.  Don't take my victimhood away from me.  I have a right to be a victim.  And I'm not wallowing in it.  But it's part of what energizes me and makes me know that there's a tremendous evil at large in the country and we gotta fight that evil.  And that's what I want the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to do.
Speaker 1: And how long is--how long is your leadership gonna be?
Speaker 2: We have one year terms.  I'm in my third term.  When I took this job I had black hair.
Story_ID: 3659
Speaker 1: Are there other things that you would like to see for the black community?  For the, for--I mean there's always discussion now about the digital divide.
Speaker 2: Well, you have all these divides to be closed.  I'll tell you what I'd like to see.  I'd like to see people stop talking about what we need more of is self-help.  What is the Civil Rights Movement but self-help?  What are these people marching from Selma [Alabama] to  Montgomery [Alabama] but self-help?  What are the people who labored in the fields of Mississippi, trying to get people registered to vote, but self-help?  Our history  in this country is a history of self-help.  What are these people talking about?  So I'd like to see an end to the obfuscation and politicization of the efforts we're making.  You know, this has always been a small  D democratic movement.  It is in the best American tradition.  It believes that equality and justice are hallmarks of the American creed and that they ought to be extended to everybody. That's as simple as that. So I'd like to see black Americans and the critics of black Americans and the critics of black American leadership understand that this is an American--we're trying to live out the American dream.  We want to live out the American dream.
Story_ID: 3660
Speaker 1: I remember you were saying the whole movement behind SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was really, you know, being sort of distrustful of leaders.  But you were a leader.  Who would you consider also important in that, that movement?
Speaker 2: Well I think the towering figure of the twentieth century was Dr. [W. E. B.] DuBois.  I mean just a giant.  No one comes close.  With all of his prickliness and all of his enormous opinion of himself, I mean he just stands alone.  He is a giant.  He towers over everybody.  There's nobody like him. There has not been and I don't believe there ever will be.  He is unique. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] of course is an important figure. Booker T. Washington, an important figure, Roy Wilkins, an unheralded but extremely important figure.  And all of the celebrated names we know--today, Jesse Jackson, an important figure.  Al Sharpton, an important figure, and I mean the list just goes on and on.  You hate to name more because everyone you leave out, people say, " What about him?"  But I mean there are dozens and dozens of these figures. So there are just many, many.  It's interesting I haven't mentioned a woman yet.  But there are women out there, Marion Wright Edelman, Mary [Frances] Berry.  We've lost in the last couple of years a couple of real giants, Daisy Bates--Rosa Parks, of course, always a heroine.  And I hope--I hope one day recognized as not just 'the bus woman', but a woman who dedicated all of her younger life to civil rights--much more than buses, the Scottsboro boys--she was all involved in that.  Anyway.  So it's a long, long list of real heros and heroines in the past and in the present.  You know one thing bad that I think has happened to us?  Is that I think we have retreated even more to giving leaders the power to save us.  I can't tell you how many places I've been, how many colleges I've been where the students have said to me, "You know we had an awful racial problem  here last week.  I wish Jesse Jackson would come over here and straighten this out."  And I'm thunderstruck.  First, Reverend Jackson is a busy man.  He's not going to all these places.  And second, why does  he have to come?  Why can't you do it?  What is it in you that makes you unable to do this thing?  Why can't you do it yourself?  And I think we've surrendered to our leadership the power to change our lives, and it's a dangerous, dangerous thing to do.  It's an awful thing to do.  A terrible thing to do.
Story_ID: 3661
Speaker 1: What about your views of the Black church and its role?
Speaker 2: When is this gonna be seen by someone?
Speaker 1: (Laughing) When is it gonna--when is it gonna be seen by someone?  It's an archive.  So it will be--. (laughter).
Speaker 2: I've never belonged to a church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've never gone to church. I've been to churches. And  I don't think I've been to five church services--say ten church services in my life--and then only when I was running for office.  I don't understand the whole enterprise. I do understand why people go, and I--you know, people who have faith and believe in it and more power to them--but it's never been attractive to me, it's not attractive to me now, I can't imagine it ever being attractive to me in the future.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  But are you--would you consider yourself--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It is a powerful force. It is a powerful force in people's lives and it has been a powerful force and a positive force in the lives, and in the movement  for civil rights and equal justice--and a force that probably we could not have done without.  I'm just speaking about my own--for my own self--it's not a force at all.
Speaker 1: Would you consider yourself a spiritual person?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What is your--where does your belief system come from?
Speaker 2: In the sense of a higher power or something, I don't have such a belief system.
Story_ID: 3662
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, Mr. Bond?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that, that--. Everybody has different legacies, I think.  Everybody has a personal legacy, his family--I'm so happy that all my kids are healthy, are--seem to be settled in jobs where they are doing well, all but one married. Seven grandkids.  That's a wonderful legacy, a great legacy. (Pause.) A happy family--I have an incredibly happy family, personal family life with my wife and myself today.  Just a wonderful, wonderful thing.  My life is so much better now then say would have been true fifteen years ago, in every respect.  I just can't tell you, how much better it is, and how much joy I have in life--and that's another legacy.  I want to have an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] legacy which is in some ways separate from my civil rights history.  In the NAACP I hope--I don't know how long I can keep doing this--being the Chairman of the NAACP is a terribly draining job.  It is like being the father of a large dysfunctional family.  The thing is so big.  There are so many personalities and egos involved.  I have a sixty-four person Board of Directors.  Each one wants to be on this committee or that committee and doesn't like Joe or Frank or Bill or Mary or Sue being on the committee.  And each one is sidling up to me saying, "You know, [Kwesi] Mfume [at that time President of the NAACP] did this or Mfume--."  I said, "Why don't you  tell Mfume that?"  "Well (unclear)--."  You know.  Come on!  Jesus!  I've never been in an organization like this before! So I want to stick with this as long as I can.  And I hope when I leave it is economically secure, its staff is the best group of professionals we can assemble, that we've moved the office from  Baltimore to Washington DC, and that we have  achieved nearly--I don't think  we can ever go back to being 'the' civil rights organization in America before--this is a different country, that's not gonna happen now.  But we've begun to approach the stature that we once had.  That's what I hope for the NAACP.  For the rest of the work that I've been doing, I hope that, that people say, "Gee, he did this work and, you know, it came out okay. Some things he did wrong, didn't do this, didn't do that, didn't do this."  And for the rest of my life, you know, it's a mixed bag.  Some of it's great and some of it's not so great.  Some of it I'm not telling you about is awful.  But, you know, "That he was a person."  When I die, I want to have a two sided headstone.  And on one side it's gonna say "race man.  He's a race man."  I'm a race man.  I want to be known as a race man.  And my wife says on the other side it should say, "Easily amused."
Story_ID: 3663
Speaker 1: You said that you were happier now than you've ever been.  Why--what do you account that for?
Speaker 2: For one thing I have more security now.  Economic security.  Now it's not that I'm making a lot more money now than I was making before.  Although I am making more money.  But it--I mean it's not millions of dollars, we're not talking about that.  But I know where it is.  I know how much I got,  I know it's in the bank and this is over here and this is over there.  And this is all entirely due to my wife who manages me. I need to be managed.  And she manages me.  She manages my day.  She manages my coming and my going.  I could not do without her.  I could do without her, you know, actually, but I would not be doing well.  I would be in terrible shape.  I did without  her before we were married and I was not in good shape.  And I don't want to do without her now.  But I'm in so much better shape because of her.  I mean just everything is just fabulous.
Speaker 1: So you, you have found the, the sort of a--would you call your--her a soulmate or would you call her--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  I would call her a perfect partner--and you know, I always hate that.  Because I'd say I'm old fashioned and old school.  "People would say, "That was my partner."  I said, "That's not my partner, that's my wife."  Or my husband or spouse or whatever.  Or if it's a gay or lesbian couple, you know, maybe that's okay.  But if it's husband and wife, it's husband and wife.  But she is a partner in every sense of the word that we go along together.  And I do some things, she does some things and they are a perfect match.  She does what I cannot do.  And I do the very, very few things that she cannot do and it is just perfect.
Speaker 1: Now what are your hopes for the Julian Bond of now and in the future?  You're still, you know, quite young.
Speaker 2: Well, I hope I, you know, live on for a good little while and stay healthy, I don't want to become debilitated and, you know--I don't want to end up in a home.  I think I'd take my own life before I let that happen to me. So I hope I know when, when it's over, when I think it's over. But, so I hope I stay healthy.  I'm looking forward to retiring as soon as I can.  because I want some leisure.  I, I work seven days a week now.  I work all day, every day.  I'm sitting at my computer doing something every day of the week and I want to stop doing that.  Or stop doing it seven days a week.  I want to get out of that.
Speaker 1: Are you writing as much as you once did?
Speaker 2: No.  Everything I do is, is business relationship in the sense that it's either connected with my job, or my position at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  So no, I'm not writing at all.  I'm writing, but it's NAACP writing, or school-related writing or something like that.  Or academic writing.
Story_ID: 3664
Speaker 1: And what do you think--your father [Horace Mann Bond] is, is dead, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Oh, long dead, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: What do you think he would say about the Julian Bond academic?
Speaker 2: I think he'd be very happy that first I'm an academic.  Oh, no, first that I went back and got my degree, my BA degree--which in fact--as a  matter of fact he saw me do that, he saw me do that.  But that I'm an academic.  I'm in the world that he chose for himself.  That he would be very, very happy about that.  So I think he would be happy.  I think he would be pleased.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Julia Washington Bond]?
Speaker 2: She is pleased.  I talk to her, I see her all the time.  I hope she's pleased.  She gives me the impression that she's pleased.  And I think she is pleased.
Speaker 1: And just one last question.  This goes back to, what was your decision to go back to school?  You were, you know, I mean, to take your degree?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  I'd, I'd come so close.  I was in the final semester of my senior year [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] when I left.  I was so close.  You know, maybe if it had been two years, maybe I wouldn't have done it.  I like to think I would have, but maybe not.  But it was so close.  And it was so relatively easy to pick it up and go back and do it.  I would have been a fool not to have done it.  And I did it.  I got that ring.
Story_ID: 3665
Speaker 1: Okay, this is from left to right in the back row W.E.B. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois, Dr. E. [Edward] Franklin Frazier, and Dr. Horace Mann Bond, and in the front row that is myself [Horace Julian Bond], age three, and my sister Jane Marguerite Bond, age four, and the men are dedicating us to a life of scholarship and my sister to be the mother of scholars.  Sexism rears its head even then.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond and his sister Jane Marguerite Bond are being "dedicated to scholarship" by scholars Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, Dr. Edward Franklin Frazier, and Julian's father Dr. Horace Mann Bond, ca. 1943; Front row, L. to R.: Horace Julian Bond and Jane Marguerite Bond; Back row, L. to R.: Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, Dr. E. Franklin Frazier, and Dr. Horace Mann Bond.  On this occasion, Jane is "dedicated to be the mother of scholars."  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3666
Speaker 1: This is left to right at Lincoln University [Julian Bond's sister] Jane Marguerite Bond, Sylvia Hill, the daughter of the Dean, Dr. J. Newton Hill, noted singer, actor, political figure Paul Robeson, and myself [Julian Bond].  I'm not sure of the age here but probably ten or so. Okay?
Speaker 2: [Videographer:] Okay, just let it go for a few seconds.
Speaker 1: This is at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania.  Robeson had just given a concert.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond, pictured with entertainer and activist Paul Robeson, his sister, Jane Bond and daughter of university Dean, Dr. J. Newton Hill after Robeson's concert at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, ca. 1950; L. to R.: Jane Marguerite Bond, Sylvia Hill, Paul Robeson (seated), and Julian Bond.  Robeson's father, a former slave, had gone on to graduate from Lincoln University.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3667
Speaker 1: I don't know the date.  I used this picture, publicity picture, for a long time. Do you need to see the screen here?  (Photo jiggles during preceding comments.) Um, yeah, back in the big hair days.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond's b/w publicity photo, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3668
Speaker 1: This is Selma, Alabama, in the spring of 1965.  From right to left, that is the Reverend Ralph David Abernathy, Julian Bond standing, James Bond standing, an unidentified waitress, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in front of James Bond, and unidentified man with glasses on there, and Dr. King's brother with his back to the camera in the foreground.  That's the Reverend A. D. Williams King. And that's at Davis Brothers Cafeteria in Selma.  A few minutes after this Dr. King will integrate the Hotel Albert in Selma, recognized to movie viewers as the hotel in 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [motion picture] built by slaves, unfortunately torn down.  King signs in at the Hotel Albert, becoming the first black person to register in the hotel--and a white supremacist came up and said, "Are you Martin Luther King?" and he said, "Yes," and the guy kicked King in the groin, and King with his remarkable self control just flinched, of course, but didn't raise a hand to this guy, and the police came and took him away.
Speaker 2: [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Julian Bond, Ralph Abernathy, and others planning civil rights strategy at the Davis Brothers Cafeteria in Selma, Alabama, spring, 1965; Clockwise from bottom left: Dr. King's brother, Rev. A. D. Williams King (facing away), unidentified waitress, Julian Bond's brother, James Bond (standing), Julian Bond (standing), Rev. Ralph David Abernathy (seated), and Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3669
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken here in Washington [D.C.] a year ago in February of 1999.  That is the Presidential Seal.  I'm about to introduce the President of the United States, Bill [William Jefferson] Clinton, to speak at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] function, and obviously I'm happy to be doing it.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond at an NAACP event preparing to introduce U.S. President Bill Clinton, Washington, D.C., February, 1999.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3670
Speaker 1: This is taken in the spring of 1999 at Northeastern University in Boston [Massachusetts].  I'm giving the commencement address and getting an honorary degree.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond giving the commencement address at Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, 1999.  On this occasion he also received an honorary degree.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3671
Speaker 1: This is in I think December '99 [1999] at the White House.  That's a White House reception.  I don't quite remember the occasion, something to do with the Millennium, and that's President [William Jefferson] Clinton and myself.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond (left) talking with U.S. President Bill Clinton at a White House reception, Washington, D.C., December, 1999.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3672
Speaker 1: A Christmas picture from - what year is that --let's see--down there on the left hand side?
Speaker 2: 1959
Speaker 1: '59, 1959.
Speaker 2: From left to right there are my mother Julia Agnes Washington Bond, my brother James Bond, myself, my sister Jane Marguerite Bond, and my father Dr. Horace Mann Bond.
Speaker 1: [Julian Bond at age nineteen with his family in a photo on a Christmas card, Atlanta, Georgia, 1959; L to R: Bond's mother, Julia Agnes Washington Bond, brother, James Bond, Julian Bond, sister, Jane Marguerite Bond and father, Dr. Horace Mann Bond. From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3673
Speaker 1: This is me holding up the hands of the victorious Maynard Jackson, Mayor of Atlanta.  He has just knocked out Muhammad Ali, and I have counted Muhammad Ali out.  I gave him the longest count I could give--it must have lasted 25 seconds or more, but Maynard was too powerful and floored him with a single punch.  It's an exhibition bout Muhammad Ali was having, and Maynard, the good sport that he is, agreed to do it, and after they jousted for a few minutes, Muhammad Ali--I was a referee--Muhammad Ali said, "Hit me." And you could tell Maynard didn't want to hit him, and Muhammad Ali said, "Hit me, hit me!"  And finally Maynard hit him, and he couldn't hit him like that and Muhammad Ali threw up his hands and rolled his eyes back and fell on his back, and I counted him out.  It was a great victory.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond (right) referees an exhibition boxing match between Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson (standing with arms raised), and boxing champ Muhammad Ali, Atlanta, Georgia, 1975.  Ali would later say he was dazed by Jackson's 'droopy shorts'.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3674
Speaker 1: Sometime I think in the early '70s [1970s], and from left to right it's myself [Julian Bond], [U.S.] Senator Edward Kennedy [Democrat, Massachusetts], and Yancy Martin.  Martin was the head of an organization I had begun called the Southern Elections Fund that was an early political action committee.  We gave money to local level candidates for public office in the South, mostly black but some white ones, too, and we elected a couple hundred people, mostly to very, very small town offices, and I think this is a fund-raiser where Senator Kennedy had agreed to come to draw a crowd.
Speaker 2: [Georgia State Senator Julian Bond, U.S. Senator Edward Kennedy and Yancy Martin, head of the Southern Elections Fund, at a fundraiser for the SEF, ca. 1970s.  The Southern Elections Fund is a political action committee that contributed to African American and liberal white candidates running for public office in the South.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3675
Speaker 1: Relatively recent, sometime in the last five or so years because my hair has not all gone gray yet.  I don't even know where it is or who took it, but there it is.
Speaker 2: [Julian Bond's b/w publicity photo, ca. 1995.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3676
Speaker 1: This is myself and President Jimmy Carter.  I'm not sure if this is while he is President or after.  I don't know anything about the date or locale or anything, but it obviously is not only in the big hair day, it's also in the big tie day.
Speaker 2: [Georgia State Senator Julian Bond with U.S. President Jimmy Carter, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3677
Speaker 1: --When this is but obviously a--graduation--somewhere.  Somebody.  Doing something. What's the date on that?
Speaker 2: 1969. This is a wonderful picture.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is like--[laughs]
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: But no it's a really wonderful--(laughs) I was--I was getting--I'm sorry--(continuing laughter)
Speaker 1: [Georgia State Representative Julian Bond giving a commencement address, 1969.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
Story_ID: 3678
Speaker 1: This is a 1968 picture actually taken by a Life magazine photographer named Vernon Merritt, I think, and this is taken in a section of my [Georgia state legislature] district [in Atlanta, Georgia].  'Life' [magazine] was doing a story on me, and he took a series of pictures, and this is a section of my district called Vine City which, as you can see, is dilapidated, run-down shacks, the poorest of poor people, awful place.
Speaker 2: [Georgia State Representative Julian Bond tours the poverty-stricken Vine City area of his legislative district, Atlanta, Georgia, 1968.  Photograph by Vernon Merritt; originally published in 'Life' magazine.  From the collection of Julian Bond.]
