Story_ID: 436530
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Louis Battle, R-O-B-E-R-T, L-O-U-I-S, B-A-T-T-L-E [HistoryMaker Robert Battle].
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 28th, 1972, Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm artistic director designate of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is August 27th, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 436531
Speaker 1: Five warm-up questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to do it anyway, since we always do it.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Ribs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, what would that be?  That's hard, I love Saratoga Springs--
Speaker 1: New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My goodness, anything repeatable (laughter). Let's see; no, not really.
Story_ID: 436532
Speaker 1: We usually go into more detail but can you give us your parents' names and, and just a little bit about your--
Speaker 2: Yes, my birth mother's name is Marie Battle and my father's name was Louis Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I've read that you were basically rescued by your great aunt [Anna Horne] and uncle [Willie Horne]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in a situation and, and then raised by your second cousin?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And she effectively has served as, served as your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you were raised in Miami, Florida?
Speaker 2: Yes, Miami, Florida (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well tell us a little bit about your childhood.
Speaker 2: Ah, well the parts, I don't remember, but being three weeks old and my great aunt and uncle took me in.  I have brothers and sisters.  At the time, they were in foster care, as I have heard the story, and, and so I believe at some point they came back to my birth mother but because I was taken in by my great aunt and uncle, I stayed with them in Miami until my great aunt died in 1979 and then her daughter, Dessie Horne Williams, effectively, in a way, became my mother or at least that mother figure, but she really is my cousin.
Story_ID: 436533
Speaker 1: When I think about getting to this place, artistically, there was always art in the house.  There was always music, even my great uncle [Willie Horne], he would sort of play the piano and sing and then, of course, Dessie Horne Williams, who is also an English teacher, they had a group called the Afro-Americans and they performed song and poetry that had to do with the black experience, black poets, writers.  And so I was sort of steeped in this early on, this idea of, you know, expression through art.  We went to church [Wactor Temple African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, Miami, Florida] every Sunday and my mother played for the church, my mother being Dessie Williams now, and so I was around that.  I learned to speak in front of people because I had to say a poem every Easter, much to the dismay of the congregation.  So there was all of that going on and at home, it wasn't an odd thing for, all of a sudden one person started the piano and then somebody to come join in singing.  My first song that I learned was, 'That's Entertainment,' my mother taught it to me.  You see how this is all leading somewhere and I would sort of dance around and I would sing a song and we would, we would have a blast doing that.  So, and then at some point early on, she would practice piano in the house and I decided that, she got up from the piano and I went to the piano and, with one finger, I figured out the melody and they realized that I had an ear for music.  So they found a piano teacher for me named Juanita Heard [ph.] and she taught me every Sunday for half hour for six dollars and she would come to the house and teach me.  So, from that, I started singing, had a high pitched soprano squeaky voice, not the bass baritone you hear now and so I sang in the church choir, I sang in the, then school and all of that and, of course, poetry, because my mother was such, is such a great speaker and so, and she taught, of course, literature.  So, it wasn't odd for her to all of a sudden go into some sort of verse or something, you know, to do with Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] or something.  So I was also around that as an influence.  So, I guess, for me the, the, the track that I took had a lot to do with the house that I lived in, the home that I lived in.
Speaker 2: So you were about seven when you moved in your, your cousin, with Dessie?
Speaker 1: I, I always think, I was about five.
Speaker 2: About five?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the way I remember it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: This is 1977 or '78 [1978], something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I was born in '72 [1972], yeah something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 436534
Speaker 1: Tell me about school now.  Where did you go to school in Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 2: I went first, elementary school was Orchard Villa Elementary School [Miami, Florida] and then for junior high it was Allapattah Junior High [Allapattah Junior High School; Georgia Jones-Ayers Middle School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Allapattah, it's a little tricky, and I don't know if I can just toss it out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Does it start with an A?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A-L-L-A-P-A-T--
Speaker 1: A, I guess?
Speaker 2: --A-H, or something like that, something like that, you can look it up, and then to Miami Northwestern Senior High [Miami Northwestern Senior High School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Now you didn't stay at Miami Northwestern, right?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  I moved on.  Once New World School of the Arts [Miami, Florida] started, I, I eventually moved on because that was an art school, you had to audition to get in and--
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you considered an artist in grade school and middle school and the first part of high school?  I mean, in terms of--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) senior--yes, you could say that.
Speaker 1: Did you draw too?  Did you do--
Speaker 2: No, was never good at visual art.
Speaker 1: Sing, dance--
Speaker 2: Sing, dance, played piano.  In junior high I was in the band so I played clarinet, you know, so, so I was always involved somehow, you know, it was either, either in public or, you know, I was often at home, you know, taping myself singing and, and all that and pretending I was performing for thousands of people.
Story_ID: 436535
Speaker 1: In fact, with my great uncle [Willie Horne] always, we called him, Daddy, we didn't call him, you know, so if I change his title a few times it's because there are many different ones but he would always bring a tape recorder to church and he would tape the, the service, or the sermon, and then listen to it over and over and we had a very charismatic preacher and what happened is, I was so taken that I would learn the sermons with the tape recorder and I would put on my little bathrobe, because you need a robe, and I would preach.  So I really wanted to be a preacher at that time because of that.  So, there's all that progression to now.
Speaker 2: Now you went to A.M.E. Zion Church?
Speaker 1: A.M.E., yeah, Wactor Temple [Wactor Temple African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: A.M.E. Zion?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 436536
Speaker 1: Now I read somewhere in this literature that you organized a group of youngsters to do some Michael Jackson routines?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was this your first attempt at choreography or, or trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I would, anything I ever learned I had the passion to teach it.  It was never really interesting to me unless I could teach it to somebody else and that part I probably loved more than the act of learning it but the notion of giving it over to someone else, letting them know the big secret, whatever that was.  So, I would get people together in the neighborhood [Liberty City, Miami, Florida] and I'd make quote, unquote, videos, and, but I could convince people who were not dancers, maybe a couple of football players and, that this is what they needed to be doing somehow.  So, you know, it's really--
Speaker 1: Was, was there a particular, I know that you were coming up during the time of the, with the music videos first, you know, started hitting--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Did you have a particular favorite of Michael Jackson's or anybody else's that you were trying to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Michael Jackson, because at that time, I mean, he sort of re-invented the whole notion of what a music video was, it was storytelling in a way, it was a ballet, you know.  And so, we were all sort of ensconced, I mean, when anytime the videos would come on, everybody would run back in the house to, to look at it.  So, anyway, that was a big part of imitating that and so we used to learn, I mean we'd, I had a best friend at the time, Clarence Holder [Clarence Holder, Jr.], and he was into dance, actually, just before I was, we met in junior high at Allapattah [Allapattah Junior High School; Georgia Jones-Ayers Middle School, Miami, Florida] and at that time, PAVAC, Performing and Visual Arts Center, was a magnet program that bused young folks from their regular junior high to a place in the morning, you auditioned to be able to have that happen and you did your singing or your dance or whatever you were into and then you were bused back and then you went through your regular day of school, you know, wherever you were.  And so that's where I auditioned for the singing part of the program and my best friend, Clarence, got into dance.  And so, he and I formed that bond and what he would do is he would teach me what he was learning in dance and I'd teach him what I was learning in voice.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't considering yourself a dancer at that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he and I used to go around and, and do 'Thriller.'  We knew all the steps and we'd go to parties and we'd perform, you know, these Michael Jackson things.  I mean, he went further and got a curly perm, I didn't, but, but nonetheless, we, we were really heavy, heavy into it and I used to actually teach him once I started to learn dance and I started making up dances on him.  So it started early on this idea of instructing, teaching, drawing stuff from people and so that lasted a long time.  It was a very important, I think, time.
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting the impact that Michael Jackson has had on dance--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the country that I think, I think of one of the few times and only times you see ordinary people, you know, try to learn a step is when they saw, when they saw 'Thriller.'  A lot of people would line up and actually, in front of the TV, and try to do the steps.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true.
Speaker 1: And recently, didn't they have a big 'Thriller,' I think, where everybody around the world was doing 'Thriller' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah they did, yeah, quite a profound effect on the world but certainly on dance, I believe, since certainly on me, and--
Speaker 1: Did you participate in that or did you, or what did you think about it then?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when you saw, when that--
Speaker 2: Well, I thought it was--seemed normal to me because everybody knew the steps, even if they were shy to admit it, you know, but, so it was, it was right, you know, it was right.
Story_ID: 436537
Speaker 1: But having seen that and then, you know, I'm thinking of junior high [Allapattah Junior High School; Georgia Jones-Ayers Middle School, Miami, Florida] when I first saw the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at Jackie Gleason Performing Arts Center [The Jackie Gleason Theater of the Performing Arts; The Fillmore Miami Beach at the Jackie Gleason Theater] on Miami Beach [Florida] and we were bused in, the students were bused in to see but before that, my introduction was through, of course, videotape and in the dance classes, we would watch 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey] or we would watch whatever but it was, it was Ailey and we would learn the steps and we would try to do the, the stuff and learn the choreography and do everything.  And so--
Speaker 2: This is in high school you all were--
Speaker 1: This is, yeah, junior high into high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is, was this your, how are you, can you remember when you were introduced to the work of Alvin Ailey?  Was this the time?
Speaker 1: Yes, this was the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: So 'Revelations' was a--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.  I mean, you didn't know nothing if you didn't know 'Revelations' and you called yourself, learning dance.  I mean, that's just the way it was.  So--
Speaker 2: Did you first see it on video or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, videos, videos, that's where I saw everything, the notion of live performance was not at the ready, at my neighborhood [Liberty City, Miami, Florida].  I mean, you know, the idea of going to the theater, it's different.
Speaker 2: So you had never been, had you been to the theater to see--
Speaker 1: I'm sure I had but I never saw anything like that, you know--
Speaker 2: I know your, your--
Speaker 1: --it left an indelible impression-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and that's what it did.  It was the moment where I could see myself reflected in it, my upbringing, coming from the church, reflected in it.  I might have seen 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] before, but I didn't have the same connection that I did when we went to the theater and we saw the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.  Immediately, there was a sense that there was something that belonged to you, that you were connected to it and that it was a part of, it was family.  Do you know what I mean?  It, so it wasn't that sense of watching something outside of yourself, for watching something that's in you and I remember that effect and all of us felt that way.  You know, we knew the dancers, they didn't know us, but we knew everybody.  Dudley Williams came to the school to speak to us, I remember, which was really profound.  So--
Speaker 2: Were you a junior in high school then or about what time was this?
Speaker 1: Yes, junior in high school.  No, this was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was that the school of the performing arts [New World School of the Arts, Miami, Florida], or was it earlier?
Speaker 1: No, I was still at Miami Northwestern [Miami Northwestern Senior High School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm, and we were bused there, so--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so, I think, were you a freshman or a--
Speaker 1: Freshman.
Speaker 2: Freshman, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was fourteen.
Speaker 2: So you were thirteen or fourteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And gangly (laughter).
Story_ID: 436538
Speaker 1: So they were actually there and you knew about them and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the thing.  I mean we knew what we knew, but then to see it live was something altogether different and I'm convinced that at that moment I was set on a path that has led me from Liberty City [Miami, Florida] to now being the artistic director designate of the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  The neighborhood I grew up in had its own trauma in terms of, you know, I saw the riots, a couple of them--
Speaker 1: So, this is Liberty City?
Speaker 2: This is Liberty City and the news coming out of Liberty City wasn't always positive.  So when we had a chance to see what the possibilities were, that's what that was, seeing the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, it was about possibilities but that was always a part of my household and nobody, I mean, you know, when I started taking piano lessons, you know, I knew who Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] was and Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart].  I knew who Sarah Vaughan was, that was important when you talk about possibilities.  The artistic part of it really has always been about possibilities and I think because of that I propelled myself into a whole other galaxy in a way.  I mean, going from Liberty City to The Juilliard School [New York, New York], that's no small matter, with a full scholarship, and then dancing with the Parsons family [Parsons Dance Company], touring the world, starting my own company [Battleworks Dance Company] and now this.  I think, it is all steeped in the fact that great art lets you know that, I love the quote, "I am a human being and nothing human can be alien to me," [Terence] and that's what dance has done for me and many other people and certainly what 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey] has done.  So, it's pretty awesome, pretty awesome.
Story_ID: 436539
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Battle's second cousin, Dessie Horne Williams] said in an interview that I read that she's not responsible for your success but she's responsible for telling you to keep, you know, to encourage you to keep going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, so did you know, and when you were in high school that, well, that you were, you know, bound to be, you know, to be a professional dancer or--
Speaker 2: Know that I knew.  I knew I was bound to do something because I, as we say in the vernacular, I flitted so with different things.  So I knew that, that I was supposed to be in front of a lot of people doing something because that was always what I gravitated toward, either wanting to preach, wanting to teach, wanting to sing, wanting to dance, wanting to act, whatever it was, there was always that, that leadership part of me that sort of burst through.  So I knew that I was supposed to do something.  I think my mother's modest in saying that, what she said but the fact of the matter is, she nurtured my curiosity and validated it even more important that, "Of course you will, of course you can," and that is more powerful than money, you know.  We didn't have the money.  She couldn't pay for my dance classes outside of school.  I met a teacher named Adelaide Munez who taught me ballet at PAVAC, Performing and Visual Arts Center, and she decided to take me under her wing and pay for my classes outside of, of school so that I could be studying because I started late for a dancer, I was fourteen.  And then when we would have holidays, she would pick me up from my house and take me to the school and give me private ballet classes.  So, but my mother always encouraged that curiosity.  She never said, "Well, why aren't you practicing piano anymore?" when I'd say, "Now I don't want to play piano, now I want to do this."  So, I guess your question of, did I know, not exactly but definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, she knew what you were going towards but not exactly the specific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --role--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you'd play.
Story_ID: 436540
Speaker 1: Do you think, I'm tempted to ask this question--do you think that you would have, had you not been raised by her, would you have been on the same path?
Speaker 2: I wonder but I think it's a divine plan, you know, and, and this is the way it's supposed to be.  So, I can't say what if but, but certainly it all seems reasonable, you know.  I mean the idea that, first of all, I was born completely bowlegged, I left that out, and so when my great aunt [Anna Horne], aunt and [great] uncle [Willie Horne] took me in, the first thing they did was take me to get braces for my legs.  Would that have happened, I'm not sure, I don't know, but it happened, my legs are straightened.  Because my great aunt took ill, we moved to Miami [Florida] so that Dessie [Battle's second cousin, Dessie Horne Williams] could help take care of her and Dessalee was the one steeped in show biz, you know, so that's where that influence happened, you know what I mean?  So, so I think that this was the way it was supposed to be.  I think there was no other way and I think because I was taken in, that whole word, I mean, of course in our culture that happens all the time.  You know, somebody's raising So and So and So and So, but because of that I know something about extended family and that is one of the cornerstones of the Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], this notion of extended family.  And so, so I say that to say all of that has prepared me to do what it is that I'm doing now.
Story_ID: 436541
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  Now how, how did you, you got a scholarship to Juilliard, how did that really take place? How--
Speaker 2: Juilliard came to Miami [Florida], recruiting and auditioning students at the New World School of the Arts [Miami, Florida].  I had never had a, this big plan to go to Juilliard, it wasn't on my radar.  I didn't know much about the school, as a lot of people actually do, but I had intended to stay and then go to the New World School of the Arts college after high school, it seemed reasonable to me and when Juilliard came a callin', some people were going to the audition and I said well maybe I should just go, why not, I have a solo ready, I'll just go to the audition. And I went and I got accepted into Juilliard and it's pretty simple and then they sent the bill and I said, "I don't think so," and I remember it was Muriel Topaz, was the dean at that time of dance, at Juilliard, and she said, "Let me call you back," 'cause I told her I wasn't gonna go and she called back within an hour or something and said, "How about if we offer you a full scholarship?"  And so that's how that happened.
Story_ID: 436542
Speaker 1: Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] was extremely challenging, certainly, especially my, my first year.  In fact, I, I wanted to leave Juilliard because, you know as a freshman in college, nobody knows anything and you know everything, that was me.  And so, this was one of those mother moments.  So I made a plan to leave Juilliard and I went home for one of the holidays, could have been Thanksgiving or whatever, and I talked to the dean at New World School of the Arts college and I said, "Listen, you know, I want to move back to Miami [Florida]," and he said, "Okay, we can help you do that," you know, "We'll give you a scholarship, money in your pocket, so you can do it."  You see, I always figured my mother [Battle's second cousin, Dessie Horne Williams] was reasonable if you had a plan.  If you could come and show her a plan, then she'd be okay with your decision.  So I got my plan together.  I got--came home, I said, "Listen," to my mother, who I've always called Dessalee, I've never called her mother, "Here's the plan.  I'm going to leave Juilliard, come back home, I got a full scholarship at New World, it's all going to be great, no money out of your pocket, this will be wonderful," thinking she'd say, okay.  She did say okay, she did also say, "But sometimes you might want to think about finishing things when you start them."  I graduated Juilliard four years later, I won the Martha Hiller Prize, Martha Hill Prize [Martha Hill Prize for Outstanding Achievement and Leadership in Dance] and the Princess Grace Award [Princess Grace Statue Award] at that time.  So, she is modest when she says she has nothing to do with my success.
Story_ID: 436543
Speaker 1: After Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] now, did you have, were there any special teachers or mentors there that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  At Juilliard, Carolyn Adams, who danced with Paul Taylor for seventeen years, was a star dancer who then went on to teach at Juilliard for many, many years but she was one of my teachers and not only just teaching dance steps but it was much deeper than that, just the profound thing she had and has to say about what it is we do, had a real effect on me and so I always listen to her and always sought out her advice, because she became a mentor for me and a great friend.  Before that there was Gerri Houlihan, I'm going back now to New World School of the Arts [Miami, Florida], another extremely important teacher who really has, has remained a great friend and a great mentor.  Those are the people I think of immediately when I, when I think of people who, who continue to do that.  At Juilliard, there was also Benjamin Harkarvy who passed away.  He was the dean of dance after Muriel Topaz and he became a very important mentor in my life, certainly in my choreographic life.  So, that's something that's always been and maybe because of the way I was brought up, again, going back to someone taking you in, taking you in, I've always been able to seek out people to help me get to where I was going and maybe I did that when I was three weeks old and didn't even know it, but there's something about that that has always been a part of my surrounding.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's part of the equation, the student actually seeking a mentor as well as the mentor seeking the student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I always tell students that, that, you don't sit around and wait for somebody to come to you and say, "I would like to teach you something," but that you seek them out, this is a proactive thing and it'll mean more to you but you have to make that first step, you know.  A teacher will often give you what they will give you in that hour and a half class or two hour class and they will teach you but they're not going to assume you want to hear what they have to say every five seconds.  So, you know, you have to make that move, forward, to seek out mentorship.
Story_ID: 435985
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about, or summarize, like what you did after Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and how you got involved with the Alvin Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].
Speaker 2: While I was at Juilliard, actually, that was my first involvement, I went to a summer session with the school and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the Alvin Ailey school?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I studied with the, in the, I was in the summer intensive, and that's where I met now the late Denise Jefferson and we became friends in the sense that I would sometimes, even when I was at Juilliard I would come over and have conversations with her about what I was doing in my progression and how I was doing with dance and all of this.  So that was the, the first time I met [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Waters and, you know, I just started to become more connected.
Story_ID: 435986
Speaker 1: And then when I graduated from Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], I then started to dance for the Parsons Dance Company and while I was at the Parsons Dance Company I still remained curious about choreography.  So, again, the same as when I was a young person in Miami [Florida], I would seek out dancers and I would work out material.  One of my important dances is called, 'Takademe' [Robert Battle].  I made that dance when I was in the Parsons Company but I made it in an apartment in Queens [New York] in a little living room no bigger than a loaf of bread, I made this dance that now has become one of the most important dances that I have.
Speaker 2: Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: T-A-K-A-D-E-M-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thanks for asking.  People usually don't and they misspell it all the time.
Speaker 2: Is it, what's the meaning of it?  What's the significance of it?
Speaker 1: It's just the, the syllable, it's from, well in Indian culture, to learn to play the tabla, which is the drum, that you learn the syllable first, "ta ke ta ka chum, ta ka deme, ta ke ta ka chum," so the, the score is that, is the vocal landscape, right.  And so within that you hear, 'Takademe.'  So I decided to just name the work 'Takademe,' so that's where that comes from, it's the music of Sheila Chandra, Sheila, and then the last name is C-H-A-N-D-R-A but anyway, going forward, so I started making dances while I was dancing with the Parsons Dance Company and then David Parsons allowed me to start to choreograph on the company because he saw stuff I was making up in hotel rooms and he thought it was pretty good. And so, this was a rare thing because no one else, other than he, had choreographed on the company that is his namesake and because of that, other people got to see my work and one of the people to see my work was [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Waters and she saw it and she decided to commission me to make a ballet for Ailey II, second company, and that work was called, 'Mood Indigo' [Robert Battle] and I believe that was in '99 [1999].  Then after that, I choreographed a dance called, 'The Hunt' [Robert Battle] and then 'Takademe,' I choreographed that beforehand but she got to see it.  And so later on she put those ballets into the repertory.  [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison saw my work because of that and commissioned me to do a ballet for the main company.  I believe that was in 2003 when she asked me to do that and so that work was called, 'Juba' [Robert Battle] and this started a long relationship, choreographically with the Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] or companies and after that I made another work called, 'Love Stories' [Robert Battle] that was a celebration of the new building, it had to do with past, present and future and this is kind of ironic that it was done with three choreographers, Judith Jamison, myself and Rennie Harris.  Judith Jamison did the first section which had to do with the past.  Rennie Harris did the second section which had to do with the present and I did the last section that had to do with the future.  So, accident, probably not; and after that I had a couple of other ballets that went into the repertory.
Story_ID: 435987
Speaker 1: Going further, would you like me to go further into how I took the mantle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --well 'cause it all kind of--so in 2008, [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison announced to the dancers when they were on tour in Atlanta [Georgia] and at the same time, Sharon Luckman [Sharon Gersten Luckman], the executive director announced to the staff that she would be retiring in 2011.  I, with maybe a couple of other people, received a phone call immediately after that saying the same thing.  Judith Jamison called me herself to let me know and then it hit the press.  And then, maybe a couple of months later, we went out for lunch, slash dinner, and she asked me if I was interested in the job and you can imagine what I said and I did, I remember my words.  I said, "Yes, I have thought about it and I would love the opportunity to lead the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]."  From then on, I started doing my research just to get a little more ready for the interview process that started a year later.  In 2009, the interview process started.  It was, it culminated in seven interviews and, and then in April, the 28th of this year, I got the job.  So, that's the short version.
Speaker 2: So the interviews are with the board of directors and--
Speaker 1: The interview was with a fraction of the board, it was called the search committee or succession planning committee and so it was the board and it was also Sharon Luckman, who's the executive director, and that's, that's basically was the search committee, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Intense stuff.
Speaker 2: Was there any point during this process that you felt, well, maybe I'm not going to get it--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --it might be the wrong one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, probably many times and some of that just had to do with the length of the process, of thinking, hm, well if I haven't gotten it yet, you know, I've given all my best stuff.  You know, so there were moments were I doubted, and certainly I had those thoughts of, well I didn't dance with the company, I didn't know Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey], so yes, I started to think, "Oh maybe that could be an issue." It turns out it's not an issue and we all know Mr. Ailey through his work, much more than I think you would if you just said, "Hello."  I mean, so because it is such a human expression, I do feel, and I did feel that I knew him. And in terms of the notion of family, again, it's about extended family and when Mr. Ailey decided in 1958 to, to not just make it a company of his ballets but he decided at some point that this would be a repertory company and that many choreographers would come through the door, especially African American choreographers who didn't have companies or who didn't have a platform to be heard, that created an extended family and I have benefitted from that largesse which makes me family, you know, and so, I think it was, there was doubt but that's natural.  I think though overwhelmingly I felt that this was where I was supposed to be.
Story_ID: 435988
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison as a choreographer and Rennie Harris and other people, so anybody, you know, paying attention to what's going on now, if they expect you to just replicate Alvin Ailey, they're probably wrong, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think he, he would not expect that.  I think that Judith Jamison would not expect that.  I mean, I, I think, well I've gotten this label of being a maverick, I always thought it was a car but, anyway, but I've always done, or tried to do that in my own work.  I've always tried to, to challenge myself and challenge the audiences but I got that from, again, my modest mother [Battle's second cousin, Dessie Horne Williams] who, I remember when I was, I used to improvise when I first started dancing.  I would go in the back room and I'd put on some Michael Jackson or somebody like that, and I would, I would just improvise and she would always hear the music and one time she said, "Why don't you try classical music sometimes?  You don't have to always do the same music."  So I tried it; but, again, it was sort of pushing me to go outside of what I thought I was capable of.  And so even in my own work, I choreographed to classical music, to the Indian music I was just talking about, to African drums, to, you know, it just, it's all over the place.  As one audience member said, "From Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] to bongos," you know, and I think that's a part of what some people like about my work and it's certainly a part of what interests me about making work, is about surprising people and making them hear things in a new way, you know, that is really a part of what I love about what I do.
Speaker 1: So do you think that's what the search committee saw in you or did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.
Speaker 1: First did that--
Speaker 2: I think so, I think they saw that I had, that, that, that that would be exciting and that, but it's also done with integrity, not just for the sheer sake of making people perk up but that because I really believe in that and that's what's going to take us into the future, is always staying curious, always keeping our finger on the pulse of what's happening now and what can happen in the future.  So I think that perhaps that's what they saw and that's what Ms. Jamison saw in my work and in me, which is why she chose me [as artistic director for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].
Story_ID: 435989
Speaker 1: So in the future, as you mature into this position [artistic director], can people expect to see the traditional Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] pieces like, 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Again, coming from the family I come through, everything is about tradition, coming from the black church.  Tradition is a big part of that, you know, saying the poem every Easter, tradition.  There, there, that's been ingrained in me.  I was raised by my great uncle [Willie Horne] who lived 'til I was in my second year at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and so I have that, old soul kind of feeling about things because of my upbringing and--'Revelations,' for instance, let's talk about that.  I think it was true in 1960, fifty years later, it is still true, the audiences still come to see it and experience it.  I was sitting in an audience, in the audience at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] you know, this was during the celebration of the fifty years of the company, and I remember some people sitting behind me and I'm usually annoyed when people are talking during the performance but the curtain went up on 'Revelations' and the children must have been no older than five or something, said to their mother, "Mommy, is this it?  Is this 'Revelations'?" That told me something about why this needs to be seen because now it has become a part of our cultural fabric of this country.  And so, the traditional has to be held sacred.  Moving from that, this company has always been about past, present and future.  Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey] and Ms. Jamison [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] have always been looking at these new voices and so that's why I think this company has lasted because at any moment when you see the concert, you see the performance, you are seeing past, present and future and I think that any great work of art, any enduring work of art has within it the past, the present and the future.
Story_ID: 435990
Speaker 1: Before you were appointed to this position with Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], this artistic director position, you had your own company, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Called Battleworks [Battleworks Dance Company]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And is it, was it difficult to put your own company aside and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but again, 2008 to 2010, there was time because going through this interview process, as you know, at some point you have to assume the position.  You can't just say, what if, but you have to say, I am.  And so, as I started to really go through that process, I talked to the dancers individual- individually, so they knew that this process was going on and that the possibility was there.  And so, we kind of went through this process so that by the time this happened, it had already happened.  Do you know what I mean?  And so it was hard because, you know, I created a family and these dancers have been so much a part of my creative output but what I also always say, and I do really mean it, is that we inspired one another because we jumped into this with no money, no grant, we just jumped into it because we thought we had something to say, and that people needed to hear it.  I couldn't pay the dancers for the first year or so but there we were, making dances, but the fact of the matter is that we really inspired one another and inspiration never dies.  So even though the company has ended, now what we do with that inspiration is where it really is at.  Do you know what I mean?  That's, to me, the most important thing and now, you know, one of my dancers is an amazing teacher and now she's going further into that.  Someone else choreographed a girl for--so, so it's amazing, and the other part of that is, that I truly believe that this is a calling, what I'm doing now.  This is not about a job, it never has been about a job for me, that I believe this is a calling and I look back on everything I just talked to you about in my upbringing to now, maybe I am preaching after all.  And so, when Ms. Jamison [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] asked me if I was interested, I knew in that moment that this was a calling and this is something that I had no choice in the matter, you know, I had to do it.  And so, the dancers understood that Battleworks and understand it now.  And so that's, that's where I placed that.
Story_ID: 435991
Speaker 1: When you look at the community today, the African American community in particular, does, what, what, I guess, information that--or how does the current events in the African American community inform what you do on stage and the message you try to give?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's that specific.  I think, one of the things that I think Alvin Ailey gave us, I mean, when I think of the choreographers that he chose and some of the works, it wasn't all African American based, if you will.  I mean, we did Jose Limon ballets, we did, it was all kinds of things.  And so, I think that, what I try to do is reflect the idea that I said earlier was a, "I am a human being and nothing human can be alien to me" [Terence].  I think that that is important for the African American community and certainly for the young people to see is that, "Oh, you mean I could do that?" When you look at Leontyne Price, I mean, "I can sing at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York], I can sing opera, classical music, I, that belongs to me, too?"  So that's, that's where I come from and what I try to do and hope somebody sees that and says, no, I don't have to, to just do that because they say that's all you know how to do.  You can if you choose to but I can do this too and this is a part of who we are.  And so that's my kind of worldview in where I try to go.  My, my dances, and even dances that interest me, have more to do with the human experience than any specific culture, race, is that all people's love, laugh, moan, live, die, that is really where I try to draw my inspiration from.
Speaker 1: With those options, what, what are you specifically more focused on do you think?  Or, is there any, is there any way, particular aspect of the human experience that you focus on?
Speaker 2: Not really because my, I think the work that I do is diverse because, you know, 'Takademe' [Robert Battle] is sometimes comical, sometimes serious but I couldn't say that it was about, you know, some deep experience.  Yes, it's a little about possession but not in, in probably a really deep way, it's more about craft and about musicality and the influence of Michael Jackson and the work, if you saw the particular ballet, but then I also made a ballet called, 'No Longer Silent' [Robert Battle] and I made that actually for Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] students a couple of years ago and that work had to do with composers who died, or were silenced during the Holocaust, and this composer was Erwin Schulhoff and I used the music and the subject matter was about the Holocaust, the war [World War II, WWII] and so there is that angle.  So, it's, it's hard to say any, that I do any one specific thing.  You know, I kind of, I like to, to sort of stretch myself and try new things all the time and that's probably what's going to be reflected in my choices when I choose other choreographers to come and work with the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] is that I'm interested in expanding the notion of how we see and how we view dance.
Story_ID: 435992
Speaker 1: I was talking to another dancer earlier this week and they were talking about the world, how dancers view the world as opposed to other artists, as they express themselves and dance being a more of a cooperative kind of an effort.  I don't know, how do you feel about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, well, I, I talk about that all the time.  It's a social community-based art form because this is the way we learn, you know, whereas generally, when I practice piano, I practice by myself, you know.  A painter paints usually alone, not in a group.  So, when I work with composers, I'm often envious because the composer, my friend, John Mackey, would go home, I worked with him many times, and he gets in front of his computer and he gets his keyboard out and he goes to town and there's the music and he gives me the music, then I have to go hire eight people for about three weeks and pay them all, so that I can make the dance.  So, but also it has to do with the way we learn.  We stand all together in a room and someone stands in front and we follow them and we learn to dance in a group.  So the idea of cooperation and community is so much, it's inherent in what we do and how we learn as dancers.  It's, it's a huge important thing.  That's why even in an audition process you're not just looking at who can dance the best but you're also trying to understand if this person can deal with other people.  That's a huge part of the success or failure, I think, a dancer, is that idea of cooperation and community because it's, it's always there, always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are your favorite dancers, past, and present?
Speaker 2: Well, good question.  Of course, [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, amazing, remarkable, she broke the mold.  Rudolf Nureyev, I love.  Alvin Ailey, of course.  Gosh, so many.  I remember trying to imitate Mikhail Baryshnikov, when I started out.  Bojangles Robinson [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson], you know, it's, it's a broad spectrum.  I think of the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] now.  I love Matthew Rushing who's now becoming the rehearsal director but an amazing dancer; and all of the dancers in the company are incredible.  So I would be here all day trying to name my favorite but, but some of what I mentioned have influenced me.  David Parsons, because, you know, you like dancers for different reasons and it's not all the same reasons, do you know?  Some you like because of their soulfulness and some because of the execution of the technique and the flawless nature that, some because they just reach out and grab you.  You don't always remember what a dancer does specifically, you just remember how that dancer made you feel.  And so, that's probably what, what I'm talking about when I say, somebody really kind of reached in and touched me.
Story_ID: 435993
Speaker 1: Is there a certain piece you're working on now that you can tell us about that, I don't know if the dance world has secrets or, or when they're working on things, they try to keep it from the other companies or what but, any (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I'm working on myself, no.  I'm sort of, you know, after this announcement happened, I haven't really been in the studio coming up with something totally new yet because I'm still trying to get myself around the newness of my life, and all that I'm taking in.  I'm really starting to look at other choreographers' works and starting to think about how I will want to color my first season as the artistic director of the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  So I'm starting to look at that.  I'm starting to listen to things and, and things are starting to, to come together but nothing specific I could tell you and be truthful about it.  I'm really looking at an overview of the entire organization that has to do with, you know, the first company, Ailey II, has to do with the B.F.A. program, the Ailey school, the extension program, which is people coming in from anywhere to take classes and stuff.  So I think for me, now, is really trying to get myself around the whole organization and now thinking of where I want to add my voice, is what I'm looking at, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, this may sound odd but just thinking of a way that [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison passed the torch, are you thinking about what's going to happen when you, you pass the torch?
Speaker 2: Maybe there was one moment when I thought about it.  I thought, huh, someday, you know, I'll have lunch, slash dinner with somebody, maybe ask them if they're interested, if I'm lucky and I play my cards right, which I intend to, but, no, right now I'm so ensconced in the moment that, that I haven't thought about it.  What I thought more about is the opportunity I have to find young budding choreographers, the way I was, and be able to give them an opportunity like the opportunities that I've had.  I really, I think that's probably the thing that just, just tickles me the most to choose dancers, to come and to give people an opportunity because, as you know, and I've said before, three weeks old, bowlegged, I was given an opportunity, I was given a chance.  And so, I think I've lived my life wanting to give other people a chance.  And so, that's, that's probably what I'm most excited about.
Story_ID: 435994
Speaker 1: What would you advise young people today to do if they're interested in dance or the arts?
Speaker 2: I would advise them to start now, don't wait.  It's the same thing about being mentored.  Don't wait for somebody to come to you, go to them, go to it.  If you have a vision, go to it.  If you have a fear of that vision, go even faster to it. What we learn in dance is you open your arms wide and you take your arms and you move them forward, forward, forward, forward until you find you're embracing yourself and I would encourage young artists to do the same.  It's a lifelong journey, it is not easy but the benefits are great and to not be afraid of their singular voice because no one else has it.
Story_ID: 435995
Speaker 1: What does your mother [Battle's second cousin, Dessie Horne Williams] think about your success?  Is she still with us?
Speaker 2: She's tickled to death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's tickled to death because, you know, I think she always, if she had her druthers, would rather be performing, you know, and, but at the time, it was about practicality.  She became an English teacher, which she was passionate about and loved for thirty-something years.  So I think she's seen me and say, you know, and now go for it, you know, and become an artist, that I think that that for her is special and I think she thinks back to her parents which were my parents [Battle's great aunt and great uncle], Anna Horne and Willie Horne, and she knows that she did them proud and I've done them proud.  And so, she's very happy, very happy.
Story_ID: 435996
Speaker 1: Just two more questions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --and these two are related, but I'm going to utter the question as a combination.  What would you like your legacy to be and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think I'd like my legacy to be that, one, that maybe I made some dances that people liked and, and that they remembered and that left them, and gave them some sense of joy and pleasure and made them think, that's one of the things. But also my legacy, which probably is tied into how you want to be remembered, is that I inspired people, that someday somebody will be making a dance and say, you know, I saw 'Takademe' [Robert Battle], it made me want to choreograph or I heard you talk about your upbringing and it reminded me of my own; and so I did something with that.  The notion that outreach is really that, you reach out and you affect someone else's life and you're able as Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey] has done and as he said, "Hold up a mirror to society and let people see how beautiful they are."  If I could be remembered as somebody who has done that, then resting in peace is exactly what I would do.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: I think they certainly chose the right person for the job.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, thank you.  Thank you, this was great.
