Story_ID: 475920
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is John Herman Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], J-O-H-N, H-E-R-M-A-N, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 15, 1934.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mount Vernon, New York.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professor of sociology and educator, however you want to state it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're in the Beaufort College building on the campus of the University of South Carolina Beaufort [Beaufort, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date.
Speaker 2: January 31, 2007.
Story_ID: 475921
Speaker 1: We're going to begin by me asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay.  Tell me, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say it would be blue, sky blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  What about food, what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I can't say that I have a favorite food.  I, I like, I like almost everything that's well prepared.  I would say if I had to have a favorite, it would be the sweet potato cobbler my mother [Lylace Michael Blake] used to make.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you go on vacation, what is your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: It would probably be central California, along the Big Sur coast.  I like the mountains, I like the ocean and I like the quietness and privacy in the off-season.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably late spring, early summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It would be one that is very familiar in the Gullah culture.  It's keep on keeping on.
Story_ID: 475922
Speaker 1: We're going to start by talking about your family and we're going to start on your mother's side.  Would you please state your mother's name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: My mother was Lylace Elizabeth Blake [Lylace Michael Blake].  Her first name was spelled L-Y-L-A-C-E, after the lilacs and Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Blake, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and her mother's name was?
Speaker 2: Margaret Michael [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know when and where she was born, Margaret Michael?
Speaker 2: I do not know when.  I believe it was in Rutherfordton, North Carolina, that's where my mother's family came from, that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about your grandfather or his name?
Speaker 2: I don't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't know him, never met him.
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you go any further back in your family tree on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not--no, I'm not able to.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.  Tell me about your grandmother, Margaret Michael.
Speaker 2: She was a very generous and kind woman.  My mother had many challenges as we were growing up and my grandmother, who lived in the Bronx [New York], and who worked in her daughter, my aunt's beauty shop, would come to our home, we lived in a storefront, every weekend and helped my mother with cooking and cleaning.  She had to take public transportation so she would take the subway to 241st Street and then the trolley over to, near our home, then walk the three or four blocks just to help my mother, and my most compelling memory of her is that she was always a helper and assisted, and a guide in many important ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember any personal interactions that you had with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, let's talk about your, your mother.  Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: My mother was, I glorify her and so if I talk in saintly terms, it's because I was profoundly impacted by my mother.  My mother was grossly overweight; she was obese and we lived most of my adolescent years in a storefront in Mount Vernon [New York] and my mother's greatest desire and wish was that her children would always be successful in life and her constant admonition to us was to go to school, pay attention, do well in school and stay out of trouble, never get on the wrong side of the law.  If you see things going wrong or people doing wrong things, you come home, even if you're not involved, you can be injured by some unforeseen circumstance so never be around trouble.  If you get into trouble, you get a criminal record that will follow you the rest of your life, and she would give us all of these admonitions which were often followed up by rather severe whippings, switchings, if we broke rules.  She did not go out much.  She took care of us in terms of the cooking and everything else.  We were on welfare and we had to deal with a lot of the issues of poverty but my most compelling memory of my mother is that she was a guardian and an advocate for all of her children.
Speaker 1: Okay, how much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't even think it was high school.  I used to think she had a college degree or several college degrees but at the time, I didn't even know what a college degree was.  So it was my creating that saintliness and, but, I, I don't even believe she had a high school education.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk about her growing up at all?
Speaker 2: I don't recall her talking about it much at all.
Story_ID: 475923
Speaker 1: Now when you said you would get a whooping for breaking the rules, what were some of the rules that she set down besides you had to get your lessons?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if we stayed out after the, after the streetlights came on.  If we were out playing when the streetlights came on, you came home.  If you had to be called, then you were going to get a whipping.  I don't recall other circumstances, but I just recall the switchings.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You mentioned storefront.  Can you explain what a storefront is?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a converted store where the windows had been painted green up to about 80 percent of the window.  The top was not painted so it could let some light in but people couldn't see in.  We lived in a tenement in Mount Vernon [New York], that's where I was born, and was raised in this tenement with no indoor toilet and eventually we were able to move out of that tenement into a rented house on another side of town but after we got there, the authorities were condemning the houses in that area and moving people out because they were going to build a housing project, one of those early housing projects.  My mother [Lylace Michael Blake] had seven children and they told her they were going to move her into another tenement where the first floor level was old con- old abandoned stores and they took those stores, painted the windows green, partly, and then put pasteboard to create rooms and what would have been the back room of the store where they had a little toilet, that was our kitchen, our toilet, there was no bathtub and that's where we lived for many years.  It was a profoundly embarrassing part of my life because I never wanted anybody to know I lived in a storefront.  And then in 1948 or '49 [1949], the whole tenement caught fire, three people died, nobody in our family, but fortunately our building was not, our, our building was not damaged except by smoke so we did not have to abandon the storefront, we continued to live there until the housing project was built and we could move into the housing project.
Story_ID: 475924
Speaker 1: All right, let's move to your father.  Tell me his name please.
Speaker 2: My father was named Joseph Henry Blake [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.].  Do you want me to spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes, you can.
Speaker 2: J-O-S-E-P-H, H-E-N-R-Y, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a senior because my oldest brother, actually my second oldest brother [Joseph Henry Blake, Jr.], was named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born on Johns Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know when?
Speaker 2: It was 1906, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He would have been a hundred years old last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, excuse me, can you tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen o'five [1905], I take that back.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o'five [1905], okay.  Now tell me about his parents.
Speaker 2: I never knew his father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His mother was named Ella Blake [Ella Manigault Blake].  Her maiden name was Manigault, M-A-N-I-G-A-U-L-T, and we called her Mother Ella.  I didn't know her well.  I don't think I saw her more than two or three times in my lifetime but I remembered her as a tall, willowy, very dark-skinned woman who had this wonderful gracious laugh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were they from?  Or where was she from?
Speaker 2: She was from Johns Island, South Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Also, okay.  Do you know your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: I think it was Joseph Blake but I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 475925
Speaker 1: Can you go back any further, even though you don't--you haven't met them or don't know them, do you know the names of your ancestors going further back?
Speaker 2: Well I've been working on the family history and I've been able to trace the family history back to about 1835.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: A slave family, living on a rice plantation on an island in the Savannah River.  I believe the plantation was called East Hermitage [Argyle Island, Georgia], it was the Manigault family and in the Manigault family documents, we've been able to identify an old lady they called Harriet and she was living in a house with her son, John, and her daughter, Judy.  Her daughter Judy was married to a man named Amos [Amos Manigault] and Judy [Judy Manigault] and Amos had three children, one was named Scipio [Scipio Manigault], one was named Mary, I don't remember the third name at the moment but it was that three generation family living in a house on this plantation, rice plantation, in the Savannah River that received their rations as one family according to the records and that old lady Harriet and her daughter, Judy, and then her son, Scipio, S-C-I-P-I-O, were the earliest ancestors we've been able to identify thus far.  Then Scipio, whose last name from his slave owner was Manigault, ultimately married another slave on the Manigault plantation named Lydia [Lydia Manigault] and we've been able to trace Lydia and Scipio in the manuscript census from 1870 on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We don't, I don't have all of the details now but those names, Harriet and Lydia and Susan, that was the other child's name, Susan, those three names of women have continued in my family right until the contemporary times.  Now in 1887, Lydia was living as a single parent on Johns Island [South Carolina] and at that time she purchased, we don't know how, for four hundred dollars, she purchased twenty-six acres of land on Johns Island in the community known as Red Top [South Carolina] and she stated to her children and grandchildren that they should never cut the land, it is for the unborn generations.  That twenty-five, twenty-six acre plot of land ultimately grew to over forty acres and my family still owns those forty acres of land in Red Top on Johns Island, South Carolina.  It's almost a straight rectangle, it's not an exact rectangle, but it's rectangular in shape with a marsh on one side and a lake on the other and it's in the most rapidly developing area of South Carolina and my family is now working on plans to continue to honor the legacy of Lydia Manigault through the land but also to carry that legacy further.  We haven't specified anything more than that but these are discussions that are ongoing.  What I want to say here is the preservation of the land and the centrality of the land to the preservation of the family has continued to keep us a fairly unified family over the many years.  My father, Henry [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.], my, the men in my family were always called by their second name, not by their first name, which I think is an Africanism but always called by their second name.  My father had two brothers and I believe seven sisters born on Johns Island and all of those men and women married and reproduced and I have lots of cousins in the Johns Island area and we're working on preserving this land and hopefully preserving the family because we consider the family the legacy that Lydia Manigault left to us but it went beyond Lydia in looking backwards to Scipio to, to Judy and Amos and to old lady Harriet who died of dropsy as the records show.
Story_ID: 475926
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me about your father [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.].  Talk about him.
Speaker 2: My father was an interesting man.  First of all, he was a hardworking man.  He was known throughout the community as one who worked hard.  When I first remember him, he was a leader, deacon in the Seventh-day Adventist church in Mount Vernon [New York] and he was always doing service for members of the church and I remember people always talking about Brother Blake as being on time, he was always on time.  If he was going to do something for someone, if he said it was going to be at 8:30, at 8:25 he was outside their door and they said he would come up and wait until 8:30 but he was always on time.  He was very hardworking.  He spent many years working at Fort Slocum in New Rochelle, New York.  He was a heavy equipment operator.  He was a truck driver and other tasks there but my father, like so many men of his time, was a, was a rolling stone and he had his activities and his other things that took him away from the family.  He left our family when I was very young.  I don't even recall when he left.  I remember the early days when he would be saying his prayers and then pinching the bed bugs and killing them before going to bed but then, some point or other before I can remember, he was gone.  As a matter of fact, when that tenement caught fire, he was not there and he was, he was footloose and I have at least one half-sister and a half-brother that I've never met, that I know of, and then my oldest brother [William Blake], whom I knew and loved, was my brother before my father met my mother [Lylace Michael Blake] and he has a different mother but in terms of his children and my children, it makes no difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said other activities took him away from the home.  You--what did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: I meant in the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father loved his cigars and Johnnie Walker Red and powerful cars and the ladies that came with them.
Speaker 1: How much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: Virtually none.  I don't believe my father went beyond the third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He could hardly write.  He could remember now and he'd read stuff, remember, I remember when I got my first academic appointment as a professor, assistant professor of sociology at the University of California, Santa Cruz [Santa Cruz, California] and that letter came while I was doing a workshop at the [U.S.] Census Bureau.  I did a two week workshop, seminar, at the census bureau, I'm a demographer by training, so I was at the census bureau for two weeks and the letter came offering me that position and I spent the weekend in New York in the Bronx with my dad and his wife and I showed him the letter and months and years later, he could quote that letter exactly telling people what I was offered and what the salary would be.  He was so proud of that but I remember him holding it and just looking at it and looking at it, and looking at it for, to me seemed to be an interminable time, then he gave it back and I didn't think anything about it, more, until I heard him quoting that letter.  So, you know, he didn't have much formal education, he could hardly write and he probably had a great deal of difficulty reading but he read that letter.
Story_ID: 475927
Speaker 1: So when did you reconnect with your father [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.]?  He left when you were very young.
Speaker 2: Well, we always had little connections every now and then we'd see him, he'd come around or we'd go to visit him where he was living, with whom he was living.  The night that building burned and we had to abandon it, all of us went to the house where he was with his lady and we stayed there for a couple of nights.  I don't know where my mother [Lylace Michael Blake] stayed but we stayed there for a couple of nights.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else you want to share about your dad?
Speaker 2: Well he was just hardworking, dependable and he liked to grow vegetables, as he put it (imitates father's pronunciation) vegetables.  My daddy grow some vegetables and if there was a little plot of land, he was going to plant some vegetables and I remember when I first got married, I was so proud of the place I had, I had a little piece of land out front and I put in a lawn, you know, I had me a lawn, you know like, like city people live, had a little picket fence and so forth, he came and he could not believe I was wasting that land.  He said, "You could put in some tomatoes and some cucumbers and some okra."  Yeah, I mean, putting no flowers and grass, it didn't make sense but he was always growing and every year we had to dig up the yard and plant vegetables and we always had fresh vegetables.  It was something we did every year in Mount Vernon [New York] and then when he retired, he moved back to Johns Island [South Carolina], he and his wife.  She was a mother of my oldest brother [William Blake].  They had been involved before my father left, so my grandmother [Ella Manigault Blake] apparently shipped him off to New York to keep him from his ways, he kept up his ways but he met my mother, married her in New York and we were all born there but they moved back to Johns Island, after he retired, and he started growing and fishing and growing, fishing and growing and he would make his peas and his okra and his corn and take 'em into Charleston [South Carolina] and sell 'em in the market.  Daddy, Daddy loved to plant, he loved to plant.
Story_ID: 475928
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: I have a wonderful set of siblings.  My oldest brother, William [William Blake], who was a half-brother, is now dead.  I met William at my mother's [Lylace Michael Blake] funeral.  I didn't know he existed but he was at my mother's funeral.  I was there weeping over my mother and people said to me, "Come meet your brother," and I'm trying to figure out, what brother?  But he was a wonderful gentleman.  My mother died in '65 [1965], 1965.  In 1967, I spent some time on Johns Island [South Carolina] and spent a lot of time with William staying at his home, meeting his family, his children.  He was a minister and he was a very fine gentleman.  I came to like him a lot.  He couldn't understand me.  I was a revolutionary with big hair and a full beard and dashiki and he couldn't figure out what that was about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was interesting but he introduced me to many good people that I interviewed for my research on Gullah culture.  My next brother was my brother, Henry, Joseph Henry [Joseph Henry Blake, Jr.], he was junior.  He was the one who really broke the path for all of us.  Dropped out of high school when he was sixteen but a woman in the church talked my mother into sending him back to high school so he could finish and she helped out my mother and Henry went on back to high school and went on to junior college.
Speaker 1: Now that's a very interesting story.  You need to elaborate a little more.  What was the woman's name?
Speaker 2: Oh let me, you want to know those stories or do you want to know about my siblings?
Speaker 1: About your brother but this was a good part of--
Speaker 2: Well, it gets all, it gets--her name was Lillian Tinsley.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we can do the story later if you like?
Speaker 2: It's when you want it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You have it, believe me.
Speaker 1: That's fine, all right.
Speaker 2: So Henry went to junior college in the South, it was a Seventh-day Adventist junior college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Huntsville, Alabama, it was known as Oakwood Junior Academy [sic. Oakwood Junior College; Oakwood University] and when he came back talking about what it was like going to college and all of his experiences, let me tell you that lit the fire on all of us.  We were all ready to follow his path and all of the rest of us ultimately finished high school and all but two of us completed college degrees.
Story_ID: 475929
Speaker 1: We were talking about your, your brother, Henry [Joseph Henry Blake, Jr.], and how he dropped out of school and then went to college.  Can you elaborate a little more about Lillian Tinsley (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well Henry wanted to help Mama [Lylace Michael Blake], because mom was having a hard time, on welfare, with seven children and unable to work herself and all of that and, of course, the welfare check always ran out before the month ran out and that was hard, I mean it really was.  My mother would never eat with us at the table.  She said she'd serve us and she'd sit aside and let us eat as much as we wanted and if there was anything left, she would eat it.  That would make anybody want to do more.  And so Henry, when he was sixteen, he decided he wasn't going back to school and I remember when he said to the truant officer, "I am not returning to school."  The man said, "There is nothing I can do about it."  We were so proud of him because he was doing what anyone of us was doing, would do, stopped school and help Mama and we were just waiting to when we could drop out of school and help Mama.  Well Lillian Tinsley was an unmarried, no family, member of our church, a domestic.  She--they were what we called days work and she came to my mother and said, send that boy back to school and I will give you what he could have earned if you will just send him back to school, and my mother took her up on it and sent Henry back to school.  Indeed, Ms. Tinsley helped to make it possible for him to go off to Oakwood Junior Academy [sic. Oakwood Junior College; Oakwood University] in Huntsville, Alabama and that just changed the future for all of us, all of us.  Out of my mother's seven children, all of us completed high school in one fashion or another, five of us completed baccalaureate degrees and four of us did master's [degree] and we got two Ph.D.'s.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's great.
Speaker 2: So I think that's one excellent record for a domestic and I, to this day, when I give speeches in nat- before national audiences, I will frequently dedicate my talk to Lillian Tinsley, the memory of Lillian Tinsley.
Story_ID: 475930
Speaker 1: Who is your next sibling?
Speaker 2: The next is my brother, Donald, who's two years older than I am, Donald Francis Blake [Donald Blake].  Donald has a Ph.D. in biology from the University of Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island], a master's degree in biology from Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and a bachelor's degree in biology from Oakwood College [Oakwood University, Huntsville, Alabama], that same Seventh-day Adventist college and Donald, like I said, is two years older than I am and he's been an educator all of his life.  He's still employed at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville [Virginia], but he was a model for me because he had a hope that I did not understand.  His, his view was, no matter how difficult the circumstance was, his, if you would ask him if he had a phrase, I would say his phrase would be, "This too will pass" and I remember as an adolescent, looking at circumstances and often being discouraged by them but realizing like what Donald said, this is going to pass, and so you know, I remember last year was this but this year is this so next year's going to be something else and it always gave me hope, that's my brother Donald.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I'm in there next to Donald.  Then two years younger than me is my brother, Daniel Arlys Blake [Arlys Blake], Arlys spelled, A-R-L-Y-S.  We always called him Arlys, he was never Daniel, like I said, you know, and he ended up going into the [U.S.] military, first into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and then into the [U.S.] Air Force, did twenty-two years, retired in Northern California where he is still retired, went and finished high school and community college but he lives in Vacaville, California.  Below him is my sister, Marvis, M-A-R-V-I-S, Marvis Sandra [ph.] Blake [Marvis Blake], she married a gentleman named Mike, M-I-K-E, and they have two children, he's now dead but she still lives in Queens, New York.  And then there's my brother, Sidney Ervin [ph.] Blake, S-I-D-N-E-Y [Sidney Blake].  Sidney wanted, was always attentive and good, a studious young man, finished A.B. Davis High School in Mount Vernon [New York] and wanted to become, go to medical school, wanted to go and become a doctor.  That avenue was not open to us for many reasons at that time and Sidney ended up going to Grasslands Hospital [Westchester Medical Center] in Valhalla, New York where he became a nurse and he's had a wonderful career as a nurse.  He lives with his partner, Philip Spivey in, in the Lenox Terrace apartments [New York, New York].  They own a condo in the Lenox Terrace apartments.  A wonderful couple, wonderful couple.  I named my first son [Sidney Blake] after my brother.  I have such profound respect for him.  Then there's my youngest sister, Regina, Regina Blake.  She lives in Portland, Oregon.  She's just retired, she became a nurse as well and she's just retired from nursing in Portland.  She still lives in Portland.  She's a walker.  She does these group walks and volunteers for a lot of things.  She's a very positive person.  Most of my family generally has a very positive outlook on life, some of them get a little moody here and there and some of them get real tempestuous, but that's not at all typical.
Story_ID: 475931
Speaker 1: So now I want to talk about your growing up.  Tell me what is your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I guess, I've got several childhood memories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One is of my father [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.], like I said, coming home, being home, listening to the radio 'cause that's what we did, we sat in the front room and you listened to the radio and listening to the radio, saying his prayers at night, the diligent, relentless search for bed bugs.  I'm just going to jump around if you don't mind.  I remember when we listened to the radio when Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was attacked and we listened to President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] on the radio talking about how he was going to ask [U.S.] Congress for a declaration of war and the kind of desperate and despairing look on my father's face and my brothers' faces, they realized we were going to be coming up for war.  It was too young for me to know anything much more than that.  My mother [Lylace Michael Blake] cooking all the time, seems to me that's all she did was cook.  It's not that she was irresponsible or anything but that was my most profound memory.  Frying things and being able to make things come out nice even though it seemed to be a challenge on a wood stove in a kitchen.  The conflict between my parents was probably the most profound memory, it's one that I have a hard time even talking about, physical abuse, physical abuse, that's a very compelling memory.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 475932
Speaker 1: And at some point, and I don't know when, I ended up living with another family, unrelated.  A gentleman my father [Joseph Henry Blake, Sr.] had known before he went to New York.  They both came from South Carolina and there was a gentleman by the name of Thaddeus, T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S, Wilson and Thaddeus Wilson [Thaddeus Wilson, Sr.] had become an elder, local elder, a layman in the Seventh-day Adventist church but he came from South Carolina, was working in the coal yard along with my dad, and he recruited my father to the Seventh-day Adventist church.  Elder Wilson as we called him, baptized my mother [Lylace Michael Blake] and just recently I was able to obtain her baptismal certificate from the Wilson family.  Well for some reason or other, my parents had me go and live with this gentleman, Thaddeus Wilson and his wife, Charlotte [Charlotte Chisolm Wilson] and they were what you would call an ideal couple.  In that time and age, you would have looked at them like you look at the, the--
Speaker 2: Cosbys?
Speaker 1: 'The Cosby Show.'  It would be along those lines except he was just as gentle as a lamb as she was a spirited, loving woman.  They had four children, Thaddeus Jr. [Thaddeus Wilson, Jr.], whom we called Junior Wilson, Eunice Wilson [Eunice Wilson Grayson], Hilda Wilson [Hilda Wilson Furlow] and Nathaniel Wilson and Nathaniel was the youngest and Nat and I were good buddies, we still are, we still are.  Hilda, some years ago when I had to go to New York and stay for a while, I arrived, called Hilda, went to her house, she gave me a room on the third floor, I lived there for four months, never charged me a dime.  My laundry was done, my food was prepared but I lived with them, every year, I'd live with them until I started school and then after I started school, in the summers, I would live with them and Mrs. Wilson, Charlotte Wilson, loved to hear me read, she loved to hear me read and whenever I would read and I would read so clearly and enunciate and understand, she would just hug me.  It was sort of like, if you read, you're gonna be hugged and I wanted to be hugged and I read.  In her own way, she promoted my learning and her children gave me a lot of love and support.  It was not like I was a competitor or interloper, it was like I was just another child.  Several years ago, University of Massachusetts at Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] gave me an honorary degree and when I was invited, all of the Wilsons came with their spouses.  Thaddeus Jr. was dead but Nat came, Hilda came, Eunice came with their spouses and they was proud of me as my brothers and sisters.  All my brothers and sisters were there too and my kids were trying to say, "Who are these people?  I mean they act like they're family and they relate to your brothers and sisters like they're family but who are they?"  And they didn't understand because I hadn't been able to give them an understanding but they picked it up that these are family and I don't know what to say other than people loved me and supported me and encouraged me like family but there was no blood relatives and it was just, just taken for granted, you do it and they were South Carolinians.  Now, all I can say is, that had a profound impact on my growing up and I've always felt it was my responsibility to reach out in the name of my mother and father and of the Wilsons.  So, when I became an adult, I took in a lot of children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I took in people that weren't related and when it got to the point where I couldn't support anymore, I became a member of the board of Save the Children [Save the children Federation, Inc.] and for eighteen years I worked on child relief and child development all over the world, that's why I wear these ties.  I always wear Save the Children ties because I believe saving the children and giving them a future is the best way to give us a future.  I'm sorry I got carried away.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's fine.  Well let's go back to your childhood.  So, you lived with the Wilsons in the summer or all year round until you went to school?
Speaker 1: As far as I can recall, it was all year round 'til I went to school and then it was every summer.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Every summer until I was a teenager.
Speaker 2: Where did they live?
Speaker 1: They lived in New Rochelle [New York]--
Speaker 2: New Rochelle, okay.
Speaker 1: --right next to Mount Vernon [New York] and then he became, like I said, a lay elder in the Seventh-day Adventist church and he was transferred to Buffalo [New York] and somehow or other, summer--every summer I found myself on a train going to Buffalo by myself, I had a ticket, I don't know who paid for it, how I got there or anything, I mean, you know, how will, who paid the transportation but I got to Buffalo.  And when I got to Buffalo, I was with Nat and, you know, we were, we were into our things.
Story_ID: 475933
Speaker 1: When you started school, you went back to live with your mother [Lylace Michael Blake]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you still living in the storefront?
Speaker 2: This was before we got to the storefront.  We were living on Franklin Avenue in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where it started and I started at Robert Fulton School [Edward Williams Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York] which was nearby, a neighborhood school.  Then we moved over to 8th Avenue before we moved into the storefront and over on 8th Avenue I went to Nathan Hale School [Cecil H. Parker Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: When you went to either Robert Fulton or Nathan Hale, what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Robert Fulton in the neighborhood was demographically, it was quite mixed.  There were quite a few Italians living there and, and other groups, Jewish people as I recall.  We all played together.  Some of my early experiences were with some of these other kids.  I had some profound experiences, some of them I can't even talk about.  They weren't very positive but they were children doing children's things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then when I went to Nathan Hale, we were living in a black community.  We lived on 8th Avenue which was one block away from 7th Avenue which was considered the heart of the, quote, ghetto, the black bottom if you will and 7th Avenue and 3rd Street were known for the bars, the joints and the things that went along with it.  I saw a lot of violence there, people cut, stabbed, died.  My mother wanted us off those streets.  She wouldn't let us hang around but you had to go to school and those are the places.  There were men, unemployed, who would hang out on the corner all day long, laugh and talk, drink wine, or whatever.  It seemed like they lived to just be out on the corner with their friends.  They all had a rap.  You could tell by the laugh who was on the corner and so forth and so on.  They had their ladies.  The women were going off to domestic work, the men would take 'em to the bus station and meet 'em at the bus stop but they didn't work except somebody come by and pick 'em up and they go, you know, haul wood or do something, task, for the day but mostly they just hung out on the street.  That's my childhood memory.  So many of these men drinking, drinking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, I never did that, never got into that pattern because I knew my mother would be very upset.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Very upset.
Story_ID: 475934
Speaker 1: Well tell me about elementary school.  Tell me about any teachers or anyone there that might have encouraged you.  Is there somebody that you can remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the names but I remember in Robert Fulton School [Edward Williams Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York], the teacher was just a wonderful teacher, just a wonderful teacher and I can't recall her name, I just know she made children feel welcome and worthy and I remember when we were moving and I was going to be transferring to Nathan Hale [Nathan Hale School; Cecil H. Parker Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York] she hugged me in front of the class and just saying, you know, how sorry she was I was going.  At Nathan Hale, I don't remember a single teacher and I wasn't there that long.  I guess the same, Lillian Tinsley, I don't know.  Somebody made it possible for us to go to a small Seventh-day Adventist school in Harlem [New York, New York] because we were all in the Seventh-day Adventist church so we, we started taking the subway from 241st Street and Lexington Avenue down to 125th Street every day where we went to Northeastern junior academy [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy] on 127th Street between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and 3rd [Avenue].  On the corner of 123rd Street and Lenox Avenue, there is a large Seventh-day Adventist Church called Ephesus, E-P-H-E-S-U-S, Seventh-day Adventist Church [Ephesus Seventh-day Adventist Church, New York, New York] and they had a small church school in a tenement building on 127th Street and it was considered important for young people to go to church school because you get character education.  You might not get every--anything else, but you get character education.  And I went to Northeastern Academy and then when they moved to the Bronx [New York] up on Jennings Street, we transferred to the Bronx and I went there until I graduated the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: What grade did you go into that school?
Speaker 2: I must have been about the fifth grade or so, fourth or fifth grade.
Story_ID: 475935
Speaker 1: Now that school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] I remember the teachers.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me about your experience there.
Speaker 1: The most profound teacher was a gentleman by the name of Nauford, N-A-U-F-O-R-D, O, Phipps, P-H-I-P-P-S [Nauford O. Phipps].  Mr. Phipps was a short, baldheaded man from the isle of Nevis [Saint Kitts and Nevis], N-E-V-I-S, and Mr. Phipps taught many subjects but mostly algebra and he related to us as young men.  He really felt it was important to help us understand the importance of developing good character in a Christian school.  I remember he came into the class and he looked at us one day and he looked at one of my colleagues, who is now dead, but we used to sing in a quartet, we did all sorts of things.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Mr. Phipps.
Speaker 2: No, I'm saying your friend.
Speaker 1: James Edgecombe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, James Edgecombe became a minister in the Seventh-day Adventist church but he's passed a couple of years ago.  I remember Mr. Phipps just looking around and said, "James," he says, "I'm praying for you," and I remember the kind of look on James' face, you know, this man is praying for me.  It's sort of like I'm tending for you, I'm your shepherd, if you will, that it had a profound, it hit James in a very profound way.  Well, we used to do things, we used to call Mr. Phipps, Inch, 'cause he was so short and we'd get into things then, you know, somebody'd be looking out and if they see him they'd say, "Inch."  He never knew what we were saying, all we were saying, Inch.  Well, that's, that meant, you know, Mr. Phipps is coming.
Story_ID: 475936
Speaker 1: Well, we'd do things like he'd come into the class [at Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] and there were these long light, chains with the globe on the end, lights, we'd set those to swinging and he'd come and he'd look, he'd go on and teach algebra.  But one day he walked into class and James [James Edgecombe] was beating Sylvene Carlyle.  Sylvene Carlyle, was a cute little girl in the class, we were all crazy about her and James is showing his love for Sylvene by hitting her over the head with a Life magazine and Mr. Phipps [Nauford O. Phipps] walked in on that scene and the look on his face was like somebody had driven a knife straight to his heart, straight to his heart and of course we stopped and everybody tried to get quiet and so forth and Mr. Phipps said, "You know, I'm not going to teach algebra today but I'm going to teach you because what you learn today you'll remember much more than any algebra."  And that day Mr. Phipps taught, and he gave us two admonitions.  The first was, "Boys, treat your women right, the race will never rise any higher than its women."  And that admonition is with me today, the race will never rise any higher than its women, and Phipps was what was it, Mr. Phipps that day will be what we call a race man.  Everything was seen in terms of how it impacted and affected the Negro, or colored people.  So that had a profound impact on me, particularly dealing with my love for my mother [Lylace Michael Blake] and seeing her and others doing, going through what they were going through.  I could go on for hours about that but the second admonition was something I didn't expect to hear and I didn't know and I didn't know how much I needed it.  Mr. Phipps said, "Boys, learn your history because you have no reason to hang your heads."  Well I didn't know I had a history.  I didn't know I was hanging my head and Mr. Phipps said that and I don't know what happened but somehow or other I asked questions and ultimately Mr. Phipps sent me to the Countee Cullen Branch of the New York Public Library [New York, New York].  Now you got to understand, we're in the Bronx [New York] and we'd been in Harlem [New York, New York] and we knew these streets but on the corner of 135th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard] was a Countee Cullen Branch of the New York Public Library.  I must have gone past there hundreds of times but I never knew what was inside but I went there and inside was the Schomburg collection [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and I remember walking in there and I saw the letter that Phillis Wheatley had written to President George Washington.  I saw artifacts from Africa and other places that I didn't know existed and the first book on Negro history I ever read was the 'Story of the Negro' by Arna Bontemps and when I read that and started reading about the Watusi and the Africans and all of that and then about America, I never stopped.  I, to this day, I have not stopped reading and studying and learning that history and ultimately teaching it and when I teach it, I am dead serious.  I don't play any games and I don't take no stuff about learning.  I read about George Washington Carver, traded for a horse and I'm saying, "They valued this man's life like a horse, not learning to read until late in life and then becoming the scholar he became," and I ultimately, ultimately, before I retired, ended up teaching where George Washington Carver studied and where he taught [at Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa].
Story_ID: 475937
Speaker 1: So I was talking about, you know, the Schomburg collection [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and learning about all this Negro history and what the interesting thing was the, we were right there on 125th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] where Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux] had his bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York].  Yeah, I don't know if you remember those things but, you know, you go there and Mr. Michaux would take you in the backroom where he had this, this corpse of Jesus to show you Jesus was a black man, and he put up his flags out front and people standing around in their djellabas and other things and debate Negro history, you know, and all of this stuff, it was incredible but what added to it was the Ephesus Seventh-day Adventist Church [New York, New York] once a month, as a part of their social activities, would have a Negro history contest.  It was like a Negro history bee so you stand there and they ask you questions and whoever could answer the questions, stayed up and if you miss a question, you sat down.  I don't think I ever lost one of those contests.  I got about five dollars every time but it wasn't that, it was just the love of learning, the love of learning and that's a passion I have.  It continued with me to this very day.  I learned my history and it helped me gain pride.  When I went to New York University [New York, New York], I was automatically, I mean, from the very day I arrived, I was put on the varsity debate team and in national debate contests.  I won awards for public speaking and usually my public speeches were around Negro history.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 475938
Speaker 1: You went to this school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] all the way to the twelfth grade?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Did you have any other--did you participate in any other activities?
Speaker 2: Oh, the student government--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and other things and I, I want to say that even though I, my greatest memory is of Mr. Phipps [Nauford O. Phipps], there were many others.  Mr. Darby [ph.], several other--one, there was one woman teacher who had a limp, I can't think of her name but I have it in one of my books somewhere, she wrote me a little note when I graduated.  Oh, they were all so wonderful.  They were Christian, and they taught character.  The downside was, it was very, very evangelical.  It was very conservative in terms of religion and we were taught that, as I recall, wasting God's time is a sin and one of the ways in which you wasted God's time was reading fiction and as I recall, we had English classes, but we never read English classics and to this day, I have difficulty reading novels and fiction.  It's sort of like I have difficulty getting into it, occasionally I do, particularly when it's, you know, by black writers but it's not the easiest thing for me but biography, autobiography, were very important.  They didn't encourage us to go to the kinds of events most young people went to, movies, dances and things like that but they would encourage you to go to the Hayden Planetarium [New York, New York] and the Museum of Science and Industry or Science and History [sic. American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York] and I would do that and I'd read biographies and autobiographies of hunters who would go out and bring back the animals for the dioramas.  Carl Akeley, A-K-E-L-E-Y, I read every book he wrote and reading all of that took me into another world.  It took me out of my ghetto.  It took me beyond my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other memories of high--of, well you went all the way through high school, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I guess one of the memories of was the time I did sin.  I talked one of the little girls into going with me to the Paramount Theatre [Brooklyn, New York] 'cause I wanted to see Billy Eckstine, he was live on stage and they had a movie there, you had a movie then you have a live show.  The movie was 'Lemon Drop Kid' ['The Lemon Drop Kid'] with Bob Hope and, and Bing Crosby [sic.].  So I got this lady--young lady, her name was Frances [ph.], we called her Fanny, I don't remember her last name, talked her into going to the movies with me, sin, but Billy Eckstine, rolled collar, (singing) "Everything I have is yours" and we got right down in the front row, sat there and watched that movie, bored me to death but after that was over, the microphone came up and Ben--Billy Eckstine came out there and Billy Eckstine was marvelous.  Billy Eckstine sang, but I was sinning, Lord got me because that young lady became so entranced with Billy Eckstine, when the show was over and the microphone went down and the place got dark, she looked at me like, "You still here?"  So Billy Eckstine and sin didn't get me nowhere with her.  So, I went on to other things (laughter).
Story_ID: 475939
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952], all right.  Now, before you graduated, who was the person who guided you or helped you prepare to go to college?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I was working at various jobs.  I'd been working, every since I was nine years old, throwing papers and--
Speaker 1: And where--tell me about your work experience.
Speaker 2: Well I got a job delivering papers at nine.  A man by the name of George Ugelow, U-G-E-L-O-W, he used to come by and pick us up and we'd ride the sideboard of his car and deliver papers throughout Yonkers [New York] and New Rochelle [New York] and other places, in the suburbs, and I did that until I was about fifteen or sixteen or so, then I got a job working in a drugstore in northern Mount Vernon [New York], delivering drugs and during lunch hour I'd work behind the lunch counter and a man came in there by the name of Mack Resnik, R-E-S-N-I-K, and Mack Resnik had a mail order firm and I would talk with him during the lunch hour, you know, we'd joke and so forth and he went to the guy who owned the drugstore and asked if he could hire me 'cause he thought I was pretty bright and the guy said fine and I went to work for Mack Resnik.  This is all before I graduated high school now.  And when I graduated high school, I continued to work for Mack Resnik doing all of the work around his mail order firm.  I learned to type, file, alphabetize a lot of things.  He had thousands of records because he was selling diapers or, diaper cans and products that really fit into the baby boom and it was at a time when he couldn't maintain all his records and I went in there and straightened out all those records.  Typed up a lot of stuff, put it all together.  I'd work day and night.  I wouldn't work the Seventh-day Adventist prohibited hours but I could work any other hours and, and it was a kind of a place where I could go in when I wanted to go in and Mack just paid me by the hour, as I recall, and I made a lot of money but I did a lot of good things.
Story_ID: 475940
Speaker 1: And he was the one who told me, "You ought to go to college."  I never thought about going to college.  There were people in the Seventh-day Adventist church who encouraged us to go to college but, you know, I was doing all right and he said that you could go to college.  So I went down to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] thinking I would apply there and go to business school and become a, get a business degree and they turned me down.  They said my high school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] diploma was not Regents approved.  So Mack [Mack Resnik] said, "Well why don't you ask them if you can take an entrance test?"  And I asked them and they said no.  They said, "You can't, you gotta get a high school equivalency diploma."  So I went to get a high school equivalency diploma and they said you can't get a high school equivalency diploma until you're twenty-one and the only way you can avoid getting one, can get one before you're twenty-one is if you're a veteran of the [U.S.] military.  I was neither and I wanted to get the high school equivalency diploma, the draft was up and I was registered for the draft and I went and volunteered to be drafted, not to volunteer to go into the service but volunteered to move my name up to the top of the draft list because as a Seventh-day Adventist, I could go, only go in as a conscientious objector.  So I had to wait until they were drafting me.  So I moved my name up on the top of the draft list, I went into the [U.S.] Army for two years and while I was there, I got my high school equivalency diploma and when I came out, NYU gave me a scholarship but I was able to send money to my mother [Lylace Michael Blake], that was my biggest thing, to take care of my mother and do more for my mother, but I was in the army during the Korean War.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you went into the Army that same year that you graduated?
Speaker 1: Right after I graduated.  I went in the Army in 1953.  I graduated in 1955, got married and quickly realized that the economic situation was going to be unstable if I didn't have more education so I went to NYU and they gave me a scholarship.  One of the ministers in the Seventh-day Adventist church added to it thinking that I would become an excellent counselor, missionary.  I did not know, I did not understand but that experience took me right away from that church, right away from that church.
Speaker 2: The experience at college?
Speaker 1: At college.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's back up and talk about your experience in the Army.
Speaker 1: Oh.  The Army was a wonderful experience for me.  My two brothers, Henry [Joseph Henry Blake, Jr.] and Donald [Donald Blake], had both been drafted.  They both ended up going to Korea and they were both medics which is what Seventh-day Adventist became.  As conscientious objectors, we did not carry weapons and we did not engage in combat but we were willing to expose ourselves to danger, to save lives, but not take lives.  So they went to Korea and I went into the service, went to basic training at, in Virginia, Camp Pickett, Virginia [Fort Pickett, Virginia], P-I-C-K-E-T-T, and from there I went to advance training at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas where I took advance medical training and from there I was assigned to Valley Forge Army Hospital [Phoenixville, Pennsylvania] for additional training, spent two weeks on every ward at Valley Forge Army Hospital and then I was reassigned to my permanent base, Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama.  Well Huntsville is where Oakwood College [Oakwood University, Huntsville, Alabama], the Seventh-day Adventist college is, so when I was not on duty at Redstone Arsenal in the infirmary where I was assigned, I'd spend time over at Oakwood College, you know.  So I had the church, I had the college and I had the military.
Story_ID: 475941
Speaker 1: But I also had a misdirected dream that I was a boxer and I tried boxing and I won the middle weight championship of my base [Redstone Arsenal, Madison County, Alabama] and there were three guys on the base who were sent to the Seventh Army [VII Corps (Seventh Corps)], I believe it was, boxing championships up at, in North Carolina, some military base and we went up there, it's a long story, but I got there and I got in the ring with another guy who thought he was a boxer, well he was, and I came back inglorious and found out I was on orders for France--for Europe.  So I ended up going to Europe and got to Bremerhaven, Germany and they reassigned me to a hospital in Poitiers [France], P-O-I-T-I-E-R-S, France and that was the most incredible experience for me because I was a maverick.  I didn't like running around after women.  I didn't like what G.I.'s did.  They would get off work, they'd go to town, they'd drink and they'd chase French women.  They had all these stereotypes.  I went to the library on the base and read.  I went to the training information and education center on the base to prepare to take the test for the GED [General Educational Development] but at the library I met this French woman, lovely lady, named Nicole [Nicole Rouillier].  She and her husband were students at the University of Poitiers [Poitiers, France] and they started taking me to the University of Poitiers.  So I'd hang out with the students and engage in things.  I was fairly good with French, having taken it in high school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York] and picked it up but I also, being a maverick, didn't go where people went to church, mostly Catholic churches.  I loved going and listening to the organs and choirs but I started going to a little Seventh-day Adventist church in town, Poitiers, and I met a man there named Mr. Rouillier, R-O-U-I-L-L-I-E-R, Rouillier, and he invited me to his home, which was in a little town, about thirteen kilometers outside of town and low and behold, he had nine children, a wife and his parents living in this old house like a small chateau and Nicole and her husband loaned me their motor bike and it ended up every Friday afternoon when I got off duty, I headed out to Nieuil-l'Espoir [France], the little town, and I spent the weekend with the Rouilliers.  I saw so much love and so much happiness there I said I wanted to go to college to help people have happy families, unified families, no violence, no poverty and when I came out I was thinking I wanted to go to college to become a social worker but then I got married and started working in a factory but within six weeks after I started working, I got laid off so I took my G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and my GED and went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and they gave me a small scholarship, and I got started.
Story_ID: 475942
Speaker 1: Tell me about your marriage.
Speaker 2: When I was still in the Seventh-day Adventist church and still in high school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York], I went to a youth conference and I met this incredibly beautiful, lovely young lady from Houston, Texas.  Her name was Bessie Jefferson [Bessie Jefferson Blake].  She was a nursing student at New England Sanitarium and Hospital [Stoneham, Massachusetts], and she had the most infectious, gracious smile and good spirit and I fell in love with that woman and I pursued her, even though I'm still in high school, she's in nursing school.  She'd been to Oakwood College [Oakwood University, Huntsville, Alabama] and she knew my brothers, now she's in nursing school.  Well after I declared my love, she discovered that I was two years younger and wrote me a note about robbing the cradle and dropped me.  Well, I didn't let myself be dropped and while I was in the [U.S.] Army, I wrote that woman a letter every day.  I did not miss a single day.  I wrote about my experiences, I sent photographs, I talked about things.  So when I got out of the Army, she was interested, or willing, or something.  By then she'd completed her nursing training.  She didn't have a B.S. but she was a, you know, a registered nurse and we married in Houston, Texas and came to Mount Vernon [New York] and we started our lives together.
Story_ID: 475943
Speaker 1: So now, with your wife, you still live in, in Mount Vernon [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they gave you a scholarship and tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Well two things.  One, Bessie Jefferson [Bessie Jefferson Blake], my wife, told me we were going to have a baby.  Well that wasn't exactly according to the plan.  We'd gone to Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America], we'd gotten all of the technology that was available then to avoid pregnancy but it didn't work completely in our case.  I had started as a freshman, and I was doing well and I decided I was going to take care of my family.  I wasn't going to let my family go but I wasn't going to let my education go, but in order to work and take care of my family and also go to school, it meant I had to work on Saturdays and Friday nights, a time the Seventh-day Adventist church said you don't work, and I decided if the church was going to come between me and my family and me and my education, I was going on without the church and so I left the Seventh-day Adventist church in 1956, and I have joined no church since then.  In college, I was running into again, wonderful teachers, wonderful teachers but they were not only teachers who respected me, they were teachers who challenged my mind and it's just like knowing, not knowing you had a history.  I didn't know I had a mind as good as it was or as good as they said it was and I had this one teacher, I had many of them, Alexander Baltzley in European history who just did wonderful things for me.  Margaret Benz in sociology and social work who helped me understand things.  Tim Costello [Timothy Costello] who was in the school of business but whom I be gotten involved with would invite me to his home in Staten Island [New York], Dr. Costello, all of these people, you just felt human and enriched around them but I guess the one who hit me hardest was a woman named Katherine Organski, O-R-G-A-N-S-K-I, and she taught a course in population and she taught social theory.  I took her social theory course and I, wonderful people I was studying about, I never knew existed and their ideas just enriched me but when she taught the population course, that was something else and I took that course with her and wrote a paper on birth control policy in Japan after the World War, after the war, and I wrote that paper and I remember writing it.  I had gotten a job at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] working at night and I'm using an IBM Selectric which was classic then, to type that paper and submitted it to her and she gave it back to me with an A and said it was of graduate school quality.  Well you know what I did?  I took her next demography course and there I did something else, I did a lot with the works of Gregory Bateson who was an anthropologist philosopher, if you will, and others but I was a different kind of demography but I--it was still demography.
Story_ID: 475944
Speaker 1: And I decided I wanted to study demography and she suggested I go to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to study with her mentor, Kingsley Davis but do you know I ultimately ended up studying with Kingsley Davis having him say the same things about my papers that Katherine Organski did?  And I studied with the three top social demographers in the country, Kingsley Davis, William Petersen, and Judith Blake, and they all admired my work.  William Petersen supervised my master's thesis.  He put me over the coals.  He made me re- I wrote it three times before I submitted it to him.  He made me rewrite it seven more times.  I wrote a master's thesis that was better than many doctoral dissertations, the problem was doing a doctoral dissertation after that but it continued to lift you to higher levels.  I mentioned that I had taken, studied Gregory Bateson, when I became a professor at Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] and built the college [Oakes College, Santa Cruz, California] at Santa Cruz, one of the people I had the privilege of employing was Gregory Bateson.  I want to tell you the world of ideas and higher education has been like a, an incredibly satisfying world to me.  I did the demography, I did the population stuff as an undergraduate, I studied philosophy with Sidney Hook.  Sitting in Sidney Hook's class, you had to think, you had to be challenging.  It was not mild stuff and another gentleman who had written a book on existentialism, I can't remember his name, but he was so good, he was so good.  He taught a course in the philosophy of religion and I wrote a paper for him, we all had to write papers, and he said I was the only one who wrote a paper on a religion that was not the one in which I grew up, I wrote on Daoism, but ideas and I kept doing that and I had these people encouraging me.  So I went to graduate school, being the contrarian I am, Africa was big, everybody was interested in studying Africa, not me.  I was going to be demography and I specialized in Latin America.  My doctoral dissertation is an analysis of the demographic consequences of the Mexican Revolution of 1910.  That was my doctoral dissertation but I'm still a grassroots kind of Harlem [New York, New York] guy so while I was writing that doctoral dissertation, I was doing a study of the Black Panther Party and I completed my doctoral dissertation in 1974 and in 1973 I published the autobiography of Huey P. Newton, 'Revolutionary Suicide' [Huey P. Newton and J. Herman Blake].  I was doing both of them, simultaneously, and at the same time building a college at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nobody ever told me you can do all that at the same time.
Speaker 2: So you did that.  Let's go back a little bit so I can get some dates.  Nineteen fifty-six [1956] is when you entered NYU [New York University, New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: I entered NYU in 1955.
Speaker 2: In 1955, okay, and you graduated?
Speaker 1: In 1960.
Speaker 2: This was your undergrad?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you graduated, your undergrad was in?
Speaker 1: Sociology at NYU.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then you went to grad school [at University of California, Berkley, Berkley, California]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that was right after you graduated?
Speaker 1: I never stopped.
Speaker 2: Never stopped, okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960] to 1965.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so what happens after you graduate, after you graduate in 1965?
Speaker 1: You don't graduate, you finish.
Speaker 2: You finish, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I went into the faculty at the University of California at Santa Cruz.
Speaker 2: Okay, Santa Cruz, all right, let's pick up from there.
Speaker 1: And I was at Santa Cruz from 1965, essentially, to 1984.  Now let me just add a word here, Katherine Organski, I mentioned her--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I distinguished myself as an undergraduate through my public speaking and through my work in the classroom and I was like in my junior or senior, I don't know what, Katherine Organski walked up to me in the hallway and she said, "Have you ever heard of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation [Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey], a fellowship?"  I said, "No, never heard of it."  She said, "I just nominated you for one," and this was a fellowship program that provided three years, essentially, of full support for graduate study and I entered and I won one and when you apply, they ask you to indicate what schools you would like to think about and I indicated Berkeley, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  So they sent my dossier to all of those schools when I was awarded.  So I never applied to graduate school, I was just admitted.
Speaker 2: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 475945
Speaker 1: So you told me that you were writing the autobiography of Huey P. Newton ['Revolutionary Suicide,' Huey P. Newton and J. Herman Blake].  Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, I met Huey long before the Panther [Black Panther Party] was ever established because he was a young guy around Oakland [California] and we were around there too.  You know, there weren't that many black folk into things, young people, you know, into these kind of activities and Huey was around.  He was known as a fiery little character and not only that, I, as a graduate student, was the head of the Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] chapter, campus chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and working with a minister, Bernard X, head of the Nation of Islam for Sacramento [California] and Oakland, maybe even San Francisco [California], Bernard X came to me about Malcolm X coming to California for the first time.  And so, Bernard and I, well I, the NAACP sponsored Malcolm on the Berkeley campus through the help of Bernard X and Huey came to that evening, sort of, you know, so that I'm identified as a person who introduces Malcolm and, you know, among these young people.  So you have these visual contacts but I was even closer to Bobby Seale.  So you just, you just see people around, you know them.  And then, when I started teaching at the University of California, Santa Cruz [Santa Cruz, California], in my first year, a guy walked into my office by the name of Sidney Walden [ph.], W-A-L-D-E-N, and Sidney Walden was a guard at Soledad State Prison [Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California] and he told me as a guard at Soledad State Prison he was trying to sponsor a club in black history and he asked if I would come over and give a talk or two, this is about forty, fifty miles from my campus and I went over to do so and I ended up just going on a regular basis, I think every other week or so, giving a full lecture on black history to these inmates.  You've never met people so anxious to learn as guys who were warehoused and they want to understand why they're there.  One of those inmates was Eldridge Cleaver.  So I got to meet and talk with Eldridge Cleaver well before he was released from prison and I have personal letters he wrote me while he was in prison and after he got out, particularly right after he got out.  He wrote me an eloquent letter describing the reactions he was having to just very normal things like the ring of a telephone.  So, you know, you have this reputation and you're around.
Story_ID: 475946
Speaker 1: Well then, Marvin Jackmon [Marvin X] and several other guys around the San Francisco [California] area established the Black House [San Francisco, California] and the Black House was the antithesis of the White House [Washington, D.C.] and we go over to the Black House, you know, on Saturday evenings and stand around and talk and argue, you know, and debate whatever politics and so forth and here were Huey [Huey P. Newton] and Bobby [Bobby Seale] around and this is when they started the Black Panther Party.  So we're seeing each other and I thought Huey was crazy.  He always had a bandolier, shotgun things, you know, and Bobby had a, had a .45 on his hip and I just thought these guys were crazy and I wouldn't have anything to do with any of that but at the same time when Huey's altercation with the police went down in Oakland [California], I was a professor at the University of California [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] and a colleague of mine, Bob Blauner, B-L-A-U-N-E-R, who was a professor of sociology at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Bob became involved in Huey's defense with Charles Garry and Bob became the scholar who helped Charles Garry with the voir dire when they're selecting the jury and Bob came to me and said they really needed someone to offer expert testimony on the culture of the black community and I became that person.  So, in the middle of the trial of Huey P. Newton, Charles Garry felt it was important, given the theory of the crime, to educate the jury about the culture of the grassroots black community and I was called as an expert witness for the defense and I gave testimony to that regard which some people credit as allowing the, the head of the jury, the jury panel, an African American man, who looked like he could have been Huey's brother, to persuade the jury that it was not first degree murder, okay.
Story_ID: 475947
Speaker 1: So Huey [Huey P. Newton] was convicted of, of involuntary manslaughter and rather than getting a death sentence, which he anticipated, the gas chamber, he was, he was sentenced to seventeen years in prison and he was sent to California Penal Colony [California Men's Colony] in San Luis Obispo, California where he was quickly put into solitary confinement because he refused to cooperate and do what normal inmates did every day because he said he wasn't going to work for twenty-five, thirty cents a day, he'd work for minimum wage and pay his own expenses and they put him in solitary confinement.  He could only have ten people on his communications list.  He could write to ten people and he could only have ten people on his visiting list, they had to be the same ten, only one of them could not be a member of his family.  So Huey and his family asked me if I would be that tenth person and I agreed and we set up a schedule where every Friday was my day.  I did this out of my commitment to the black community and what the Black Panther Party represented to the grassroots black community.  So every Friday I drove from my campus at Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California], often with the help of my students, to San Luis Obispo and I'd try to be there by nine in the morning and Huey and I would sit out in the courtyard or in the day room and talk from about nine until four [o'clock].  I could bring nothing into the prison except enough money to pay for lunch for him and me and my driver's license.  I couldn't bring a pad or a pencil or anything but we got into the process of talking about his courses, his academic work, our discussions were often around academic and intellectual issues.  We never discussed the Black Panther Party or any of that.  We were just doing these kinds of things.  He had loved studying sociology so I would take him through, you know, my course, talk about what I was doing.  He loved studying philosophy, and I had studied with Sidney Hook, you know, and I'd bring that stuff in.  We talked about it.  Plato, we talked a lot about Plato and things like that.
Story_ID: 475948
Speaker 1: Well there was a time when his mother made a mistake and she came with two of her daughters, as I recall, on my day because you see, if you visited with Huey [Huey P. Newton], he wasn't in solitary confinement so we each came on a different day.  There was one day when you couldn't visit, that's when his lawyers would come and they weren't on the list anyhow so it was keeping him out of solitary confinement.  So on my day we're sitting there, Huey and I talking, and here comes Mrs. Newton [Armelia Johnson Newton] along with one or two of her daughters, there's several of us and they came in.  So we were all there talking and in the course of the conversation Mrs. Newton got into talking about Gene Marine, who had written a book ['The Black Panthers'] about the Black Panther Party and this, that and the other and Ms. Newton said, "You know, that white man came and talked to me and then he went and lied on me."  She did not like the book.  She said, "He lied on me," and she's calling "Huerry"; she didn't say Huey, Huey--, "Huerry."  She said, "Huerry, Huerry, why don't you write a book?"  And Huey said, "I can't write a book, Dr. Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake] can write a book," and out of that interchange came the notion that Dr. Blake would do a biography of Huey Newton.  There would be a, quote, authorized biography.  So I picked up on the idea and started organizing my material, contacted Alex Haley for counsel and began collecting data on Huey Newton, mainly from him.  We talked about a lot of things and he thought he was going to be in there for seventeen years and he told me a lot of stuff.  Well what Huey would do was he would talk and then I'd come out of the prison [California Men's Colony, San Luis Obispo, California] and I had a tape recorder in my car and as soon as I came out, I would go over what he said and put it on the tape recorder.  Now our style of working with, we'd talk about something for two hours and I'd review it.  And we'd talk about something more and I'd review it and then before I left, I'd go down the list of issues and when I got in the car, on that tape, one of my students would be driving and I'd be talking on that tape, recording that account and that's how we began to do that.  And then in August of 1970, as I recall, his conviction was reversed and he was released.  It was at that time we decided to change it from an authorized biography to a first person account with me as, you know, Huey Newton as the author and me assisting but I wrote every line, every single word and I put it in the first person.  Now let me say that was a task I would never do again because you have to give up your own personality and your own ego and step into somebody else's body and I was never comfortable with that being a scholar, because you're not doing scholarly work, you're essentially just channeling somebody else's material and ideas and Huey and I had some strong disagreements because I felt there had to be some analytical approaches in there but he did not want that but I don't know how you do this without being analytical.  He just wanted it to be descriptive and he wanted it to be the kind of thing that would sell, he saw it selling like 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley], things like that.  It didn't but, I mean, it's not a good book but it's all right but that's how that came to be and I wrote it ['Revolutionary Suicide,' Huey P. Newton and J. Herman Blake], like I said, but we had real conflicts.  I learned things about him and about his father that he had forgotten or didn't know but he didn't want that stuff in there.  Oh, it was interesting.
Story_ID: 475949
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you contacted Alex Haley before writing this book ['Revolutionary Suicide,' Huey P. Newton and J. Herman Blake].  Tell me about the reasons for that.
Speaker 2: Well, as I got into the book, Dan Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], a dentist in San Francisco [California], who was also on the state education board [State Board of Public Education; California Department of Education], I think, and had connections with publishers, he came to me and said, you know, "You've got something that's really worth publishing, really worth publishing."  I'd given a talk at a conference in San Francisco and Dan Collins heard me, wonderful gentleman, African American, and he suggested that I, that I think about doing this for publication and he put me in touch with the ultimate publisher, I forgot the name right now but, he, he made that connection.  Well, I felt I needed some clues or some guidance in shaping a book and I learned that Alex Haley was living in San Francisco and I knew his address, I learned his address so I wrote him a letter and told him what I was doing and asked him if he had any counsel or advice he could give me and I sent the letter to the address I had, and I was in my bedroom one night and the phone rang and I picked it up and it was Alex Haley and he said, "Here's my telephone number, I want you to come see me, I'll help you in any way I can."  And I went and saw him, I was tremendously impressed.  He gave me some ideas about how he organized Malcolm's [Malcolm X] autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley].  He did not use a tape recorder, I was using a tape recorder.  He just didn't, he used an electric typewriter with legal size paper.  When Malcolm talked, Alex could type and that's how they, they did that but I used a tape recorder, I felt I could get what I wanted on tape and I think I did but Alex said, you know, "Fust come see me anytime you want, call me and every--."  He made himself fully available.  And then when Huey [Huey P. Newton] got out of jail [California Men's Colony, San Luis Obispo, California], I arranged a meeting one evening at Alex's home in San Francisco and I took Huey and I took David Hilliard and I took John Seale, Bobby Seale's brother, and I think David's brother.  The five of us went over and we sat and talked with Alex.  He fixed dinner for us, he cooked, and they just loved it and when they saw the secure condo in which Alex lived, they decided they needed something like that for Huey and that's what led to his apartment on the, on the lake in Oakland [California].  There are other parts of that that I cannot and will not discuss in terms of him getting that apartment.  I learned a lot that, to this day, I never said to anybody and I won't.
Story_ID: 475950
Speaker 1: Before we go forward, let's go back a little bit and talk about, if you had any involvement in the Civil Rights Movement as far as with remembering Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech, Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination, King's death, that era of '63 [1963] through '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I have memories.  When I was still a senior in college [New York University, New York, New York], I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Mount Vernon [New York] and I became chair of or head of the youth committee and when the students started the sit-in at the Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] in North Carolina, I organized protests against the Woolworths store in Mount Vernon and I had young people out there marching, saying, "Jim Crow must go," and people come and ask, says, "Who's Jim Crow?  Does he work here?" or something like this, you know.  But I was involved in that way and I would often take the young people to rallies in New York City [New York, New York] and other places.  That was my earliest involvement.  I did other things in college but not protest activities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when I went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], once again, I was involved with the NAACP and I was elected the head and I led some protests at Berkeley against the administration for allowing racist employers to come on campus and interview when we knew they weren't going to hire African Americans or Latinos or Asians.  So I was involved in protests at that level.  I spent a number of evenings, at times, arguing with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] over issues, arguing with Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] and others, you know, all young, foolish at that time and doing things but I was never involved in the major movements.  I would not go to the South 'cause I knew if somebody hit me, I had a temper, you know what I mean, and I had a family and I wasn't going to risk either one, my life or theirs, although I did it when I got involved with the Panthers [Black Panther Party], it's crazy.  That was one thing.  I remember when Kennedy was shot and one of the reasons that it sticks in my head was so many of those radical, I thought, revolutionary young people were reduced to tears.  Many of us didn't like Kennedy and we were--listened to el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz, then known as Malcolm X, who criticized Kennedy, and we were critical.  So I couldn't understand, I did not understand then the emotional link between a president and his people and I saw black students crying when that was, announcement came, we were all in the student union in Berkeley, when the announcement came, the president is dead.  I remember that but I was not in any way involved.  When he came and spoke at Berkeley, I remember when he came and spoke at Berkeley, I took my daughter to hear him but I took my daughter to hear anybody who was major coming to Berkeley.  She heard James Baldwin, she heard Kennedy and other things like this and my daughter now remembers things about people coming to our house, all of my children do, and they are so grateful for these memories because they didn't realize how important that was there.  The story of my daughter and Alex is just humorous.  She hates for me to remind her, Alex Haley that is.  So, so, that was that.
Story_ID: 475951
Speaker 1: I became involved with el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz [Malcolm X] in 1961 when we had him speak on campus [of the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and then when he came back in 1963, I spent virtually the entire weekend with him, followed him around and did all sorts of things with him.  I've written some of that up and remember his chiding, encouraging me, trying to recruit me, I did a forty-five minute interview with him which is on video.  The University of California library has it online but it's my video of Malcolm X in 1963, October of 1963, about six weeks before Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination and before Malcolm was suspended from speaking from, about Elijah Muhammad.  And I felt very close to Malcolm.  I never met Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], never met him but I was always proud of him but I remember when the March on Washington was coming up, we were pretty angry.  We were, like I said, talking about el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz, Malcolm X, and we thought King was palliative to the system.  He used words and talked about things that made people feel good and didn't move them to action.  So we were very angry and I remember, I said, I'd never go to that March on Washington.  The rumor was, it's going to be 1963, a hundred years from peace declares, the people here say or the emancipation and he was going to issue another proclamation of our emancipation.  It was a rumor but it had me so angry and I remember we watched it and I felt, I felt the emotion when he got to, "Free at least" but then that night we gathered at a coffee shop in Berkeley [California] and, oh, we mocked the man up and down.  "Here this man is so stupid that the only way he could see our freedom is in a dream.  How foolish can you be?"  Since then, I've become a very strong devotee of Martin Luther King, a complete and total advocate of the philosophy, as well as the strategy of nonviolence and I think he was one of the greatest people that ever lived.  I think the same about el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz and I talk about el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz being one of the most liberally educated man I've ever met and I talk about Martin Luther King in the same way and I write about them both but I want to add to that.  I also talk a lot about people people don't know like Esau Jenkins or Tom Barnwell [HistoryMaker Thomas Barnwell] or [HistoryMaker] Emory Campbell or Septima Clark [Septima Poinsette Clark] or Bernice Robinson, these are warriors who work in the trenches that people don't know and I want to do an essay on Esau Jenkins and Tom Barnwell, Johns Island [South Carolina] and Hilton Head Island [South Carolina], they are both cut from the same cloth and I knew them both and I was very, very much moved and impressed and educated by Esau Jenkins, but nobody knows Esau's name.  So I will talk about those great leaders to the extent that I can but I also want to balance that by talking about the people in the trenches who built the foundation for those great leaders to be leaders.
Story_ID: 475952
Speaker 1: I want to move to 1965 where something very tragic happens in your family about your mother [Lylace Michael Blake].
Speaker 2: Oh my God.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: My mother had a stroke, I think in 1958, and I want to tie that to something else.  When I was back at that school [Harlem Junior Academy; Northeastern Academy, New York, New York], that church school, and we had Mr. Nauford O. Phipps who gave us all of that counseling, advice, one day he was teaching and he said, "Boys," he always referred to the boys, there were girls in the class, he said, "I'm dizzy, I'm dizzy," and he held on, he was just very, very dizzy and almost fell down.  We laid him down on the desk and summoned help.  He had a stroke.  We were the pallbearers at his funeral and we cried.  My mother had a stroke in 1958.  She began to get dizzy and we got her to my car and took her to the hospital and I remember the doctors reacted immediately, you know.  She was paralyzed on the right side; she could no longer live independently.  My sister, my younger sister, Regina [Regina Blake], took care of her at home until Regina was unable to do so and then my mother went to live with my brother, Donald [Donald Blake], who was studying for his doctorate at the University of Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island] and after a while she left there and went to live with my brother, Henry [Joseph Henry Blake, Jr.], who was living in Harvey, Illinois, trying his best to make it through all of the challenges and confusion in his life and while she was in Illinois, she died, in 1965, and we were summoned because Mama was dead and we gathered and my family, brothers and sisters, my sister was in Hawaii, one of my brothers was in Puerto Rico, living, so we came from Hawaii to Puerto Rico, New York, Rhode Island, Chicago [Illinois], California and walked in that room and there she lay.  Nothing, is more devastating to any human being than to see your mother, who knew you before you knew yourself, and gave you life and meaning, see that cold lifeless body and your guidance was gone.
Story_ID: 475953
Speaker 1: You were talking about your, your mother's [Lylace Michael Blake] death.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's hard to know what to say.  I mean, I was already, you know, completing my doctoral work [at the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and I know how proud she was of me when I finished my bachelor's degree [at New York University, New York, New York].  I mean, she came to the graduation in a wheelchair, unable to walk, but when my class was called to be conferred, she grabbed the railing in front of her and pulled herself up like the degree was conferred on her as well as on me.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Then I wheeled her around amongst my professors and others and they greeted with her with, with a, as a conquering heroine.  Monsieur Bodin [ph.], my French professor, was in these magnificent robes from the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France] and when I said to, "Monsieur Bodin, I want you to meet my mother," he swept his hat off and bowed low, (speaking French) "Madame, je suis enchante de faire votre connaissance," kissed her hand.  My mother was so enriched and proud.  I had made her proud.  All of those admonitions and those fears and doubts and the struggle washed away in that moment, this great white-haired French scholar, heavily accented English, bowing before this ill-clad, obese princess of the ghetto and honoring her because of what I did. What you got to understand is that would have been nothing like what it would have been when I got my doctorate, but she died too young.  She was fifty-four years old.  That wasn't fair.  She hurt nobody and she made great contributions but she could not live to enjoy the consequences.  She lay there stiff and cold and I cried.  I cried because she was gone.  I cried because I felt she was unfulfilled and to this day I'm still trying to fulfill that whole thing.  In my earlier marriage, the wife said to me, "You know, I'm not your mother, I'm your wife," but I'm still trying to fulfill my mother, you see what I mean?  And I ended up going into therapy after two failed marriages because I couldn't understand and my therapist helped me to understand that I was trying to save the world, because I'm still trying to hold onto her and keep her memory foremost.  I've had a lot, I've had to make a lot of adjustments in my life.  I've never gone through a lot of things in terms of making it.  I'm not talking about hardships and things like that.  It's just that you think that getting a Ph.D., building two colleges, not one college, two colleges, and literally helping hundreds of young people to achieve when they could not have achieved.  Women who are on welfare, going to college and coming off of welfare and you do all of that and somehow or other you never seem to find satisfaction, you're constantly trying to make it work, make something work for somebody.  At some point, you have to stop and say, my task is done and I'm trying to make that adjustment now, I'm seventy-three years old, and I'm working like I was forty and I'm not and I say to myself jokingly, I say to others, "I got so much work to do I have to live to at least 120.  I got nine, ten books I need to write and you don't write books overnight."  So, anyhow, that's enough of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ask another question.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.
Story_ID: 475954
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California], you become an assistant professor of psychology of, sorry, sociology, is that right, at Santa Cruz?
Speaker 2: University of California at Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is a position that you'll, will hold until 1984?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about some of the things that you accomplished there, some of the research, some of the papers and some of the courses that you taught.  I think one that was very important was the values and change in a diverse society.  You want to talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, when I was appointed at the University of California at Santa Cruz, I was appointed in 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually assumed my position in '66 [1966] but it was, the appointment was '65 [1965].  I went to become a demographer.  I was a demographer.  My dissertation was on Mexico and I wanted to specialize in Latin American demography.  I remember as a graduate student reading a book called, 'Latin American Geography' by a Preston James [sic. 'Latin America,' Preston E. James] which was a geographic survey of all Latin American nations, it was an excellent book and I saw myself writing an equivalent in terms of Latin American demography because these countries were now doing censuses, and reporting vital statistics and just doing that kind of analysis I loved, taking numbers and making societies come alive.  I loved it.  So I went to Santa Cruz with the notion I was going to do Latin American demography and I started teaching there and within two years after my starting to teach, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and, you know, all of the conflagration and many colleges and universities began to see what they could do to make him dream, live, and the people at Santa Cruz--Santa Cruz is on essentially three thousand acres of redwoods and rolling meadows overlooking Monterey Bay, the most beautiful campus in the world and they were building by adding individual colleges; that's how they grew.  They didn't just have more and more students, they would put up a college that was a semiautonomous undergraduate college.  So, the plan was for the seventh college [Oakes College, Santa Cruz, California], scheduled to open in 1972, to be a college that focused on the urban experience.  So, local people began to protest, well, we need a black college, some faculty began to advocate for black a college.  I'm the only black faculty member, now.  There might have been two other minority faculty members, one guy from India and somebody from Asia, but these white faculty were saying, "Yeah, we ought to have a black college, black faculty, black staff, black students," and they said, you know, "This urban college ought to be it."  And I, I was opposed to that.  I was opposed to that.  Latino students were saying, well what about us?  And for one, you could have the next college, it could be a Latino college, Hispanic or whatever.  I didn't think that was a way to honor Martin Luther King but they talked about naming it after Malcolm X.  I didn't think that was the way to honor el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz.  Hajj Malik loved ideas.  We used to argue and debate ideas.  He'd say, "You put your water down, I'll put my water down, we'll let the community decide which water is clean," but he always said, "Let the evidence dictate the conclusion."  Now I would argue, "Well wait a minute, man, Minister Malcolm, you come in here with a conclusion, then you seek evidence, then you say, let the evidence dictate--."  Oh, we had these incredible discussions but I didn't think that was the way to honor Malcolm so I argued there ought to be a college that focused on the experience of, quote, minorities and that should include European immigrants.  Well, this is 1968 and I just started, you see what I mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 475955
Speaker 1: They asked me in 1969 to chair a planning committee planning the seventh college [Oakes College, Santa Cruz, California].  This was to be a group of faculty who would plan the curriculum, work with the architects on the design of the buildings and then ultimately recruit the faculty and students and that's what I did.  There was a Latino from Spanish Harlem [East Harlem, New York, New York] by the name of Roberto Crespi.  There was a Chicano who had been born and raised in Mexico, came as a bracero by the name of Rafael Guzman, Ph.D. out of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  There was an East Indian by the name of Dilip Basu from India, historian.  Rafael Guzman was a political scientist.  Roberto Crespi was in Spanish literature, had been defined as ineducable by the age of eleven.  At the age of twenty-five, twenty-six, he had a Ph.D. in literature from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and myself, and we asked another gentleman to join us by the name of Bill Doyle [William T. Doyle], tall Anglo, looked like Jack Armstrong, the All-American boy.  Bill never said much but he joined us and he was with us, biologist, did marine biology and we sat and talked about our ideas and basically we wanted to build a good liberal arts college with a traditional curriculum but a, a-traditional, not non-traditional, a-traditional student body and challenge them to excellence.  There's all this talk about taking over your own community, running your own community and Ralph Guzman and I said, "Well, if everybody's a criminal justice major or social worker, probation officer, you ain't going to be able to run your own community, you need some engineers and then you need some doct--."  So we began to stress the sciences.  Bill Doyle said to us, we've never been able to teach science in the college, we've always had to take science to a larger facility and based on his inspiration, we got the idea of developing a college that focused on the sciences but with the Latino and black and Native American population, poor white population, and I worked hard with them to get that college off the ground and it opened in 1972.  So my career completely changed.  Demography was out the window but in order to build this college and bring together these disparate elements in terms of student body, because they came from different communities and what we did not want to do was to transfer the tensions and hostilities within the community to the campus.
Story_ID: 475956
Speaker 1: Now in the meantime, while I'm doing this, I'm also running the streets of Oakland [California] at night with the Panther [Black Panther Party] and I'm looking at these Panther youth, some of the finest youth I ever met, just like my Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] youth, but one group had hope, the other group had despair and I felt I had to build toward hope and one of the ways we did that was developing this core course.  I just taught a course called, Values and Change in a Diverse Society, and essentially was race and ethnic relations but I took it to a more philosophical level by introducing the importance of communication, interaction and harmony while you worked or changed out of, out of diversity and this was a volunteer course and that was based on what I learned about Benjamin Mays at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Students talked about having to go and hear Benjamin Mays every week and Benjamin Mays' sermons became very strong motivational forces.  Well, I'm not Benjamin Mays and Santa Cruz is not Morehouse and you could not build something like that, you couldn't have required chapel, but you could have a core course but it wasn't required but I taught it and the students got into it and they got so turned on by it that they insisted that it become a require, and over many objections, the faculty finally agreed to make it required and we had about seven to nine faculty working together in this core course and we realized that requiring that course for the students meant that you required it for the faculty but it was even more important for the faculty because it helped us become even more harmonious and so we were working around these issues.  I was still the principal lecturer but the others were there.  They gave lectures, they debated me in class, then they all ran independent seminars and it became a way of building a sense of community, a real sense of community.  Now there's something else I did at Santa Cruz.  Oh, we'd go on for hours.
Story_ID: 475957
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you in the spirit of Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays] about your flower.
Speaker 2: Well, this I got--a practice I developed in my last position at Iowa State University [Ames, Iowa].  When I went to Iowa State University, and I went there following my wife, my wonderful wife, Dr. Emily Moore, when we married in 1960--I'm sorry, 1996, we said we would not live apart and I said, "Wherever you get a job, I'm going to follow you," and she was offered a wonderful position at Iowa State and then I said, "Well, find something for me and we're coming and we did."  And I got there and learned that that was the school where George Washington Carver did his undergraduate degree, did his master's degree and was appointed to the faculty and taught there until Booker T. Washington recruited him to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Well, I felt like my life had come to the point where the circle closed because I learned about George Washington Carver after Mr. Phipps [Nauford O. Phipps] sent me to the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  That's where I began to read about and fell in love with Carver and now I end up teaching on his campus, what is more, I taught in Carver Hall, named after him.  What is more in Carver Hall, or just outside of Carver Hall, was a statue of George Washington Carver, the only statue of any individual on the campus and I learned that as a botanist, he always wore a flower when he taught, a fresh flower, and I decided I was going to continue his tradition, I was going to honor that tradition.  So I began, not just the fresh flower, a fresh rose and I never stood before a class at Iowa State that I didn't have a rose in my lapel and always a new and a fresh rose and it was a way of honoring George Washington Carver and I'd be going to class and I'd go past his statue, I'd be with some students, let's go by and visit Dr. Carver and we'd go over and stop and I'd just stand there for a moment to collect and I knew I couldn't do poorly.  I just couldn't do poorly in his spirit.  So I felt that every class, every lecture had to be the kind of thing when students walked out there, they were glad to be there because I never took attendance, never required them to be there but I wanted to make that class so meaningful they couldn't afford to miss, and it was all in the spirit of George Washington Carver, so I honor him with this rose and since I left Iowa State, I have continued to practice.  I will not stand before a class or give a public lecture in most places without my rose.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have a florist.  Even the florist, yeah, today was the third time I did it because I've only been teaching here three weeks, in terms of offering a course, and they know.  And last week when I went in to get my rose, they put it on and they said, "You don't even have to pay."  Now why, I don't know.  I never told them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever tell them the story?
Speaker 2: No, I just went in to get a rose.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: I don't tell anybody about this.  When I go and teach, I've never mentioned it to my students.  If they ask me, I'll tell them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I don't go in proclaiming George Washington Carver--
Speaker 1: Carver, okay.
Speaker 2: --I just go in, hopefully, emulating him.
Story_ID: 475958
Speaker 1: So, you were getting ready to tell me the next thing that happened at Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California].  There was something else significant there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.  Well two things happened early on at Santa Cruz.  One was in the spring of 1967.  Now I started '66 [1966], right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the spring of 1967, I'm sitting in my office in Cowell College [Santa Cruz, California], this is even before we began to plan, it's before Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, this gentleman walks into my office, he was in the extension division of the Santa Cruz campus and he said to me he was the executive secretary of the Emil Schwarzhaupt Foundation.  Schwarzhaupt, S-C-H-W-A-R-Z-H-A-U-P-T, Foundation in Chicago [Illinois] and he said, Emil Schwarzhaupt was a Polish immigrant who'd come to this country years ago, made a lot of money and when he died, left his money to help integrate immigrants, or outsiders, into American society and as the immigrant population died out after the immigration restriction laws, they turned to, that money into helping other people on the outside, mainly African Americans, get in, and they had funded projects in Chicago and Rochester [New York] and other places run by Saul Alinsky and they funded projects in the Sea Islands of South Carolina, run by Myles Horton and Septima Clark [Septima Poinsette Clark] and they were looking for somebody to go to Johns Island, South Carolina and evaluate the long-term consequences of the citizenship schools program they had funded and they were wondering if I were interested, and I said, "Well, my family's in Johns Island."  The guy says, "You're kidding," and I had wedding invitations from two cousins sitting on my desk and I picked it up and showed him the Johns Island postmark.  Well, he fell off his chair.  So they hired me in 1967 to come to South Carolina to do a review of the work of Septima Clark and Bernice Robinson and Myles Horton, that's when I met Esau Jenkins, Herbert Fielding [HistoryMaker Herbert U. Fielding] and many others, and I came and I did that.  Well in the course of that research, I asked Septima Clark, who kept talking about success after success, I said, "Well, you know, one clue to success, one way of getting an understanding is to study failure.  Have you ever failed?"  She says, "Oh, yes."  I said, "Where?"  She said, "Daufuskie Island [South Carolina]."  Well then I knew I had to go to Daufuskie Island and it took me several efforts, attempts, but eventually I was able to get to Daufuskie Island, stayed overnight, met a lot of people and that started an engagement with Daufuskie that continues today, that was in 1967.
Story_ID: 475959
Speaker 1: So then I go back to Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] and in 1968 my colleague, Page Smith, the historian who was head of Cowell College [Santa Cruz, California], the first college there, wanted to start this thing where students would go into the communities and do research and he just thought you send them into the community, they do research and they bring it back.  I said, "Page, no."  I said, "No, you can't do that."  He came to me because, you know, I'm the black community, right?  I said, "You can't do that."  I said, "People go into the community and do their research, then they leave and report this stuff and the community's, nothing's changed."  I said, "We have to do something."  So based on that, I organized what I call the extramural education and community service program whereby we arrange to take students and put them in low income communities for a full semester.  They would get full academic credit but they would have to live in the homes of the residents, work on projects at the direction of the residents, not in funded things, we didn't want to go into federal projects or publicly supported things because very often the community were fighting those people, and they would have to do that for a full semester.  In order to get the communities to trust us, we had to guarantee that we would keep somebody there for five years, not the same person, but people coming back so you could have confidence you can build something and based on that, we started the project in 1968.  We sent two students to Daufuskie Island [South Carolina], they lived on the island for the whole semester and worked in the, for the people and it ended up we had students all up and down this coast.  At one point, I think we had seventeen students from Santa Cruz in Beaufort [Beaufort County, South Carolina] and Charleston [Charleston County, South Carolina] counties in different projects, in Ridgeland [South Carolina], Hardeeville [South Carolina], on Daufuskie Island, on St. Helena Island [South Carolina], in Charleston, all up and down, and in Beaufort, and that has led to a continued involvement.  My students helped organize the accounting records for the Sea Island Fishing Cooperative [sic. Hilton Head Fishing Cooperative] that Tom Barnwell [HistoryMaker Thomas Barnwell] founded on Hilton Head Island [South Carolina].  I had a student who had done this with her father's radio stations and she came down here and lived in the community and did this for the Sea Island Fishing Cooperative.  My students assisted in developing, in typing materials to start the Beaufort-Jasper Comprehensive Health Service [Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina].  One student [Kimberly Ephgrave] came here, she was eighteen, she reported she wanted to go to medical school, some white kid out of Southern California and she said when she came here she had an interest in medicine, when she left she had a passion for medicine, working in comprehensive health.  She lived in the black community, she was harassed by white police officers who once stopped the car she was riding in with a lot of blacks and looked at her and said, "Your ass is grass."  That student is now the associate dean of a major school of medicine [Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa] and is working to get her medical students doing the same thing.  What I'm saying, the circle has closed.  Eventually, three students from Daufuskie Island, in 1981, now, I started this program in '68 [1968], in 1981, these three students from Daufuskie Island came to me and said, you know we want to go to college and I just loved it.  I said, great, I've got contacts, South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg South Carolina], Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], they said, we want to go to your college.  I had to get them admitted to Santa Cruz.  I raised the money from an anonymous donor to pay all of their expenses, transportation and everything, including having their parents come when one of them graduated and they came to Santa Cruz but when they got to Santa Cruz, they had lots of friends because the students had been here.  So it wasn't like they were going into a strange community and it's that building of that kind of continued support.  Penn Center, St. Helena Island [South Carolina], I did all of that as a way of building toward the community, empowering the community.  It's one of the most important things I ever did.
Story_ID: 475960
Speaker 1: You had many students that you said worked in this project.  Tell me who Pat Conroy is.
Speaker 2: Well before I do, let me just say that, that woman I mentioned who became the dean of the medical--associate dean of the medical school, Dr. Kimberly Ephgrave, now a surgeon and associate dean of the University of Iowa college of medicine [Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa].  I didn't meet Pat Conroy until he was very famous but he met me through my students.  I started my students coming to Daufuskie Island [South Carolina] in 1968, and because of my commitment to the community, once a group of students left, another group followed so they could keep projects going without worrying about not having the support they needed.  We couldn't provide money but we could provide labor that was fairly well skilled.  So when Pat Conroy arrived to teach on Daufuskie, unbeknownst to him, my program was already going.  And so when the California boys, as the people called them, arrived, he was shocked.  Now one of the things we did when we started sending students to Daufuskie, the people defined what the students did.  You cannot go into a community and serve it and say, "I'm gonna do this and I'm gonna that," and where, where students got carried away and decided they knew what the community needed, they usually were failures and there were times when we had to pull students out of communities because they couldn't let go of their egos to really become servants of the community.  And when we sent the students to Daufuskie, my own feeling was the place they ought to be was in the schools, to help with the educational things.  That's what we, I do, I'm an educator, we can do education but the community said, "No, we need this, that and the other," and my students found themselves doing a variety of other tasks, including building outhouses which shocked Pat Conroy.  Why would white kids come from California to build outhouses for blacks while they sat on the porch?  But they were being tested.  But on the other hand, they were living in the homes of the people and they were getting an intuitive insight into the lives of the people from being in the homes.  I mean, if you send somebody out there and they're working a project all day, then they go back in the evening, into a residence where you got all students together and they play their music and do their thing, they're missing the important parts.  So community people would take them to church, social events and all this.  One young lady said she recalled she was, learned to cook and the lady was on the phone saying, "Oh, my daughter's in the kitchen cooking," and she, you know what I mean?  It's that kind of a thing.  Well, what I'm saying is when Pat Conroy arrived on Daufuskie Island to teach, he found those students not in the school, but doing other things but through his association with them and with the community, he brought them in to assist in the schools and they did.  When he took the students to Washington [D.C.], two students, Frank Smith and John Rickford, went with him.  Frank Smith is now a writer, living in New Hampshire.  John Rickford is now the premier specialist in sociolinguistics, the Martin Luther King professor [Martin Luther King, Jr. Centennial Professorship] at Stanford University [Stanford, California].  John Rickford, when he came here, wanted to be a journalist when he came to Daufuskie.  He ended up going to graduate school [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in sociolinguistics and he has done some extraordinary work.
Story_ID: 475961
Speaker 1: So what I'm saying is, it's service that is the motivating force and it is community empowerment and when Pat Conroy saw that, it didn't make sense to him.  Now one of my challenges and my disagreements with Pat Conroy is, if it doesn't make sense to him, he interprets it in such a way that it makes sense to him but it may not make sense to the person who he's interpreting.  And in his book, 'The Water is Wide' [Pat Conroy], I feel his descriptions of the people on that island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] go beyond reason and they caricature many of the people and if he had had an opportunity to know the people, he would not have caricatured them in the way he did but he made them make sense to him.  They talk about the students don't know that this, this is the Pacific, I mean the Atlantic Ocean washing up on these shores and they don't know this and they don't know that.  Nobody on that island ever got stuck on a sandbar going from the mainland to the island.  They tell me, they said, "Fessor, they rowed down there, they rowed down there, you just got to know 'em."  They knew the channels and they could negotiate those waters, he couldn't.  He could name it but he couldn't negotiate it and what I'm saying is, you put people down because they can't name it according to what you want.  And they'd say, "Oh, this is this kind of place."  "Oh, no, that's Cauley Cut.  We know Cauley Cut, we don't know some name on no map."  And what I'm saying, he constantly did this.  James Williams, now dead, had a clubfoot.  James Williams always rode a horse or had a oxcart 'cause he couldn't walk with a clubfoot.  Well the way Pat Conroy talked about James Williams, you'd think James Williams was a mute.  James Williams hated Pat Conroy.  Pat Conroy judged him and didn't know him.  I could take you out there, you'd meet James Williams, he'd tell you, "I made these peas."  He'd tell you, he don't like no chicken that, you know, from a pen, you know.  "You don't keep no chicken in the pen, the meat gets soft."  He could hold a conversation but he didn't hold a conversation with Pat Conroy so Conroy turned him into a mute and in his pseudonyms, he ignored the fact that those pseudonyms sometimes are too close to people.  So in terms of one lady, Edna, Edna Hampton, that's not her last name, her name was Edna and her mother--her sister's name was Blossom.  They lived side-by-side.  He named Blossom, Edna.  All the people say, "He didn't know our names."  They didn't understand pseudonyms, they didn't understand pseudonyms and it caricatured the people's lives, and I guess the best way to summarize it is I went to Ms. Edna's house one day and she had a copy of 'The Water is Wide,' she was sitting there looking at it, sitting there looking at it, and her response was, "Poor Conroy, sitting there watching them die and nobody to testify."  There's a message there.
Story_ID: 475962
Speaker 1: Willie Miller, who was the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] psychotic, and we have ways of incorporating people like that into the community.  They're not outcasts.  Willie Miller had a role, Willie Miller, an intelligent man, but Pat Conroy made him sound like somebody swinging through trees, like a monkey.  I remember I had a little old jap- jalopy, that didn't work, but I tried to get around, it didn't have floorboards and one night I was down the opposite end of the island, about six miles from where I lived, and this thing, one day, this thing just gave out and here we are, people trying to get it going, it wouldn't get going and here I am, a good six miles from where I live so I didn't know what I was going to do.  I said, man, how am I going to get back up on the branch tonight?  Now you ought to understand, you got dirt roads, you got rattlesnakes, you got alligators, you got water moccasin and, and other things and no lights.  Now how you going to make it from here to there?  And somebody said, "I'll take you."  I said, "Who's that?"  Willie.  Willie Miller walked me from one end to the other and I didn't run into any danger and as we walked we had the most literate conversation and I asked Willie, "Oh, no, you, you can't trust her, she, she do this, she do that," and he's telling me about people but I never talked to Willie because everybody said he was, they called him Crazy Willie and what I'm trying to say is, there's a lot of wisdom.  At one point I arranged for some of the residents to go and appear on a TV station in Savannah [Georgia] and talk about their lives.  These people had come out with the governor and they were around, you know, and they, they came to me, you know, you're a professor, you know, tell us about these people.  I said, "Hell no.  You come to me because you think I can interpret their lives, why don't you talk to them.  I'm not about to tell you a thing."  So the guy said, "Well if you arrange for some people to come over to Savannah, we'll put 'em in the studio, we'll interview them and let them tell their story."  I said, "Fine."  So I went around, "Oh, no," and people refused and finally one old deacon, Plummy Simmons [Walter Simmons], said he'd go, Deacon Simmons, and Albertha Robinson [Albertha Robinson Stafford], who was considered an alcoholic, a wet head as they put it, Albertha said she would go and people laughed.  "Bertha, Bertha get in there, Bertha get in there with that wet head."  I went around I see Bertha two, three times, she said, "Fessor," said, "I'm on duty now.  When I'm on duty, I don't touch nothing."  She didn't touch a drop.  Albertha's still living and her daughters and granddaughters and great-grandchildren, are still living.  I'm interacting with all of them but we went into Savannah, I think it's the same TV station that's coming to see me this afternoon, and Plummy Simmons and Albertha Robinson spoke eloquently about the community, the need for transportation, "We need transportation in water, we need transportation on the hill."  Now they were speaking in their patois and their style, but they were eloquent and articulate and what I'm saying is, if you go and see a person who is drinking and one glass of wine or two beers and they are, fall down drunk, you say that's alcoholic.  What I learned, and it's an important lesson for me to learn, was that people who were hopeless, turned to ways of bringing peace in their lives, the react- the rational reaction of rational people to irrational conditions, we like to say in sociology, and Bertha was a very bright, articulate woman but she was in a very constraining, frustrating relationship and she was constantly dealing with the demands of poverty, deprivation and everything else but when somebody gave her an opportunity, she said, "I'm on duty now," and when she went on duty, she became a noble warrior.  What I learned, what you have to listen eloquently, and you don't listen eloquently by asking questions or coming to conclusions, you just sit and listen.
Story_ID: 475963
Speaker 1: Let me give you another example.
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you this before you give me another example.  In Conroy's book ['The Water Is Wide,' Pat Conroy], his book was fiction and did--
Speaker 1: No it's not.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, he didn't use Daufuskie as the island name [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], he changed the name and--
Speaker 1: Yamacraw.
Speaker 2: Right and maybe it was because he did not get close enough to the people to really know the truth that he used that.  What do you, what do you think about that?
Speaker 1: I think that's, I just don't, I don't buy it all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't buy it at all.  He used pseudonyms, his way of not getting sued for caricature.
Speaker 2: I understand what you're saying what he did, but he did make it a novel so that just for that purpose of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --what your feelings are you know, so--
Speaker 1: I have never seen it as a novel--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I deal, every day, tomorrow night, I have a meeting with one of the young people, well, no longer young, one of the people who was in his class, just celebrated his fiftieth birthday, and they're still angry.  They are still angry.  Now, some are not, and I want to be clear about that.  He's helped them and in many respects supported them and they feel very grateful to him but others (shakes head), he reduced, he reduced the aspirations of one young lady to being willing to give up her body for a new red dress.  You can call that fiction if you want--
Speaker 2: Well, you know it wasn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but when you are, when I can identify the particular person, both individuals and the story is not true, I cannot buy that and Pat [Pat Conroy] and I get along, he's written nice things about me, but that doesn't change that reality.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted to put that on the record.
Speaker 1: Nothing wrong with that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 475964
Speaker 1: So go ahead, you were going to tell me another example (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, yeah, if you read the piece that Alex Haley wrote for the Smithsonian ['Sea Islanders, Strong-Willed Survivors, Face Their Uncertain Future Together,' Alex Haley], in it he interviews Thomas Stafford and Stafford tells 'em all of these wonderful stories.  Stafford was an incredible raconteur, wonderful raconteur.  Well, I met Stafford in 1967 and when Alex called and told me he wanted me to take him to Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], I sent him something like 80, 90 pages of transcript of my interviews with Stafford and he read those, Alex did, and he decided what stories he wanted 'cause, I mean Stafford, a million of 'em, believe me, how he went to cut a ghost one night (laughter).  Oh, you crack up, and I'm going to eventually publish some of this stuff but I sent these to Alex and Alex read them and decided what stories he wanted, then when he met Thomas, he just had Thomas retell the stories so he could get his lilt and all of that but Alex knew the stories 'cause I gave 'em to him.  How did I get 'em?  I met Stafford in 1967.  Do you know when Stafford sat down to tell me and give me an interview on tape?  Nineteen eighty-one [1981].  I'd been going to that island, working on that island, sending students and working with people and it wasn't until a serendipitous moment when I caught him in 1981 that Thomas Stafford agreed to let me interview him.  Every other time, I'd been turned down but when I got him on tape, oh, let me tell you, it was wonderful.  Another lady, I helped reclaim some land somebody tried to get away from her.  She told me to bring my tape recorder, "And bring your 'corder, bring your 'corder 'cause I'm gonna tell you the stories.  I'm going to give you good 'cording 'cause the Lord sent you," but you see, I served her, then she met me, it wasn't the reverse.
Story_ID: 475965
Speaker 1: So we were in 1968.  So tell me what else is going on.  I know that we talked about the Black American Law Students Association journal.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a young lady named Barbara Williams [HistoryMaker Barbara Williams-Skinner] from Richmond [California] and I don't know how I met her, I really don't, but I was doing community work in Richmond too at North Richmond Neighborhood House [Neighborhood House of North Richmond, Richmond, California] and other things.  I'd be speaking in churches.  You know, I was invited to go to places and give talks to motivate people, Black History Month, you know, all of that stuff, and I met this young lady who wanted to go to college and she asked if I would write a letter of recommendation and as I recall, I wrote a letter of recommendation for her to go to college.  I don't know which one it was, San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], Hayward State [California State College at Hayward; California State University, East Bay, Hayward, California], I don't know where she was but she went to college and, you know, you, you have limited contact, you see them, we were never friends, or close or anything like this and she graduated and then she went on to law school, I believe at the University of Southern California [sic. University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and she called me up one day to say that she and other black law students were starting an organization called the Black American Law Students Association, BALSA [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)], and they wanted to put together a journal and she asked if I would serve as one of the founding editors or staff of the journal, whatever you do, editorial board, review board, that's right, editorial, and I agreed.  And so I served on the editorial review board of BALSA until they got off the ground and they had others who could come in and pick up the, the stick, and to pick up the staff and continue going.  I never had much engagement with her or anything like this.  I just ran into her again, she's married and living in, I think, Washington [D.C.], Barbara Williams, dash something or other, I'm, I just really connected with her again two days ago after all those years.  I watched her and saw her career go as she worked for the Black Congressional Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] and other places and I'd just see her name in the paper.  I felt good that I, you know, had a little role to play, it wasn't a major role, but you do what you can whenever you can.  I've done it for, literally, hundreds as others have done it for me.
Story_ID: 475966
Speaker 1: You talked about the comprehensive health services.  Tell me how you met Tom Barnwell [HistoryMaker Thomas Barnwell].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (cough) Tom Barnwell was a community worker for Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] back in '68 [1968] and one of his assignments was Daufuskie Island [South Carolina].  Now, I'd gone to Daufuskie Island, I met the people, I stayed overnight in their homes and everything and started interacting with them.  Now, you see, people didn't write, okay, and you had no telephone so communication wasn't the easiest but there was two VISTA [Volunteers In Service To America; AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteers living on the island from California, from Berkeley, California, Henry [Henry Netherton] and Rhea, R-H-E-A, Netherton, N-E-T-H-E-R-T-O-N [Rhea Netherton], and through those VISTA volunteers, I arranged for our students to live and stay with family members because they always had to stay with family.  And you see, when you started this, people were thinking, well you know, you can't have these kids come from California stay with them, no plumbing and all that, but my point is, if you're going to learn how people live, you've got to live like people live and that's what they did.  Well Henry and Rhea Netherton became my communication link.  So I sent these two students, Doug Brown and Allan Fisher [ph.], to Daufuskie Island and they were living there and working and one day Tom Barnwell, as a part of his work at Penn Center, showed up on Daufuskie Island and here are these white kids, he didn't know who they were, and he started questioning them and they said, well Professor Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], Dr. Blake.  So when he got them to the mainland and they met with him on the mainland, they called me up one night and Tom Barnwell said, "Who are you and how are you sending these people over here I don't know nothing about it?"  And so that's how we met on the phone and he was starting the Sea Island Fishing Cooperative [sic. Hilton Head Fishing Cooperative] as well as meeting the challenges of developing something for the community in the health area 'cause he ran that for a long time.  And what I said to him was, you know, "We'll do the same for you and your community," and that's exactly what we did.  A young lady named Julia [ph.], I can't remember her last name; she was a beauty queen from Monterey, California.  She was very good at handling books.  She came down and worked in the Sea Island Fishing Cooperative, set up the books.  Other students, they became truck drivers.  All I ask is, you have them live in the homes of grassroots people, no more than two students in a house, and preferably only one, and they become involved with the community and the people in that manner, but they never become involved in the intimate life of the community.  If you start dating or trying to romance somebody, you're out of there because then you start meddling in areas where you could get hurt quick and I don't want nobody coming back in a box and we had very strict rules about that but what I'm saying is, we started that with the Sea Island Fishing Cooperative, the Hilton Head Island Fishing Cooperative, and Comprehensive Health Center [Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina].  My students helped type the proposal and do early work when they were hardly out of, out of a trailer.  They worked in the labs doing blood draws and things like that or whatever the community wanted them to do.  We did this in Sheldon [South Carolina].  They were starting a daycare operation in Sheldon for the young children and I said we'd put two students over there, they'd do the work in the daycare center so you don't have to worry about raising money to hire staff and that's exactly what we did but then we ran into a problem in Sheldon because they didn't have any transportation for the children.  They were going out to get the children in an open pickup truck and somebody would have to sit back there while they bump over the roads.  I said, this is ridiculous.  So I said to Frieda Mitchell, who was running this, I said, "Look, let's work out a deal.  We put our students in the homes of residents and we send you, or we send the residents the payment."  Students never paid rent or board, we paid it out of the University of California, so I said, let's work a deal.  You get the people to let the students stay free and we'll continue to send the payment but you put the payments on a Volkswagen minivan.  And they bought a minivan and we paid for it, transport the children.  This is serving the community.  I can give you example after example.  It's a very satisfying reminiscence.
Story_ID: 475967
Speaker 1: You said that Tom Barnwell [HistoryMaker Thomas Barnwell] was on the Penn--worked for Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina], you actually were on the board at a, at a time also.  Do you remember when it was?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact years, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But John Gadson became executive director.  John Gadson was, at the time, on the board and was chair of the search committee and when they were looking for someone after Courtney Siceloff stepped down, they wanted to have a black person to run Penn Center and I was building Oakes College at Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] and John Gadson called me and asked me if I would be a candidate for director and I told him, no, and ultimately John Gadson became the director and asked me to join the board and I did.  I think it was about 1969, 1970, and it was a very challenging thing because Penn was very, very, had very little resources.  Their facilities weren't in good shape and a board member can't run a thing on a day-to-day basis.  Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] was on the board.  Mick McGuire [Robert McGuire], who was a political science professor up at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], was on the board.  We were all struggling with this.  So I served on the board for a number of years.  It was very, very gratifying.
Story_ID: 475968
Speaker 1: So let's go back to 1972 where you are founding Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California] and what other reflections do you have?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we spent three years of planning.  The impetus for Oakes College got started with King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination in 1968, and they organized a planning committee in '69 [1969], which I chaired.  I use many of the principles of community organization and community development that I had learned from Septima Clark [Septima Poinsette Clark], Esau Jenkins and Myles Horton and Saul Alinsky and we engaged students in the planning process as well but you got to understand that Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] had room for twenty-seven colleges and so they gave us the space for the seventh.  They'd already put in the sewers and everything else but, on top, it just looked like a cow pasture, the cow dropped their grazing in some woods and so forth.  So the five of us sat down and began planning a curriculum and we began talking about what we wanted to see as an outcome with the students.  We knew we were going to recruit a different demographic than was traditional for Santa Cruz, most of the new admits to Santa Cruz were in terms of family characteristics like those going to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and academically, we're at the A minus or above level in high school, we wanted a different demographic, but at the same time we didn't want to get into trying to do remediation or any of that sort of business but we knew we had to be more intense and that meant we had to be more individual but sitting down with those five, we designed an academic program which was approved by the university and began recruiting the faculty, all of this is before 1972.  At the same time, we sat down with the architects and began to design the buildings in which this academic program was going to take place.  So we were recruiting faculty, we are watching the buildings go up while the university is recruiting the students and we opened in 1972 in temporary facilities with maybe about two hundred students, not many of them black or Latino.  Many people said, "Well where are they?" you know.  Well the point was, we had to build.  We didn't know exactly what we were doing.  We had to make mistakes and we had a small group but we grew regularly and by 1974 we had our facilities.
Story_ID: 475969
Speaker 1: Well, what we did was we engaged those students in their learning, very actively.  I say I built Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California], that's a, that's a misstatement.  I had the privilege of working with an incredible group of faculty, about 30 percent of whom were women and about 50 percent of whom were minority and the women, particularly, many of them were in the sciences.  The first four chemists we employed in that college were women, but all of the faculty were good.  I mentioned a Bill Doyle [William T. Doyle], he was very sensitive and he became my deputy provost and Bill Doyle being white, and looking like everybody on the campus, was good at working with the system.  I was outside, he was inside and we would sit and talk and he would tell me things that I would not have learned otherwise and we accomplished things.  Roberto Crespi, the Latino from New York [New York], really got involved with the students and he would not take anything less than their best.  Well, it took us a while but we reached a point where we had the lowest rate of graduation after six years but--after four years, I'm sorry, lowest rate of graduation of the eight colleges on the campus, after four years, we had the lowest rate of graduation.  After six years, we had the highest rate.  We had our students take more time but learn more effectively.  We had the highest rate of admission to graduate and professional schools and our student body was about 38 percent black and Latino and American Indian [Native American].  Fifty percent of our black and Latino students successfully majored in chemistry, biology, math, computer science and economics, 50 percent.  We took students, some of whom could not do long division, and they graduated and went on to outstanding careers.
Story_ID: 475970
Speaker 1: One of them, a fellow by the name of Martin Martin, from Newark, California was one of those early Latinos who had great, great difficulty with math, didn't know it, didn't understand it but the faculty worked with him, got him involved in their research, he graduated.  And he came to me before he graduated, we were working together, because he was admitted to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] and he was admitted to UC San Francisco medical school [University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California] and he couldn't decide where he wanted to go and I remember he came to me and I had a National Geographic magazine which had an article about a black physician in some rural area of Appalachia, the South or something, and he was doing an outstanding job but he was black and people considered, you know, maybe he wasn't good enough to be any other places, he had an M.D. from Harvard and people were saying, "You don't get an M.D. from Harvard and you're second rate."  So I showed that to Martin and I said, look, you're Latino, or Chicano as we said, you want to practice in California, you don't want anybody ever questioning your credentials, like mine were from the University of California [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  Nobody ever questioned my credentials.  My mentor, in terms of my doctoral dissertation, Neil Smelser is one of the top sociologist in the world.  They don't question your credentials.  So Martin Martin went to Howard, I mean Harvard.  In his first year, he was in the upper 10 percent of the medical school class, couldn't do long division when he came to us, and after two years of medical school, instead of going to clinicals, he went to the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at Harvard to get a degree in administration or something because he figured when he ultimately ended up back in California, he was going to become involved in public service so that Kennedy School degree was helpful and then he finished his M.D.  He is now associate professor of pediatric gastroenterology at UCLA medical school [David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], but what is important is that Martin Martin never forgot his roots.  So when I was at Iowa State University [Ames, Iowa], and I was working with Latino students and black students who wanted to go to medical school, wanted to become pediatricians, and they'd get discouraged, I'd pick up the phone and call Martin Martin and put them on the phone with Martin, and they could see and talk to people who'd been where they were and those young people were mentored by these older students.  It's a part of keeping the cycle going.  We did that, I mean, we could count literally hundreds of cases that came out of Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California], in general, and Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California], in particular.  The chief of staff at the Medical University of South Carolina [Charleston, South Carolina] is one of our graduates.  Her name is Sabra Slaughter [Sabra C. Slaughter] and I could go on.
Story_ID: 475971
Speaker 1: Well let's go on talking about the things that you accomplished after that.  Now, can you talk about working with Alex Haley and, and being friends with Alex Haley and there's a, there was a project that he was involved with, the Kinte Library Project.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, Alex, you know, his story was very widely reported, accepted and, you know, his movie and books were just outstanding and a chap at the Carnegie foundation, actually, it's called Carnegie Corporation [Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York, New York] but it's a foundation, by the name of James Dwyer, Jim Dwyer, a black guy, thought it would be great if this could be replicated so he called and talked to Alex and made the connection and working with a woman by the name of Gloria [Gloria Primm Brown], I forget Gloria's last name, she's, was a program officer at the Carnegie, graduate of Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] in Washington [D.C.] and a children's librarian until she went to work for Carnegie.  He put Gloria working with Alex and she wrote the proposal and they gave Alex, I don't know, almost a half a million dollars to see if he could duplicate his project, his experience, and it became known as the Kinte Library Project.  The idea was to have scholars go to different aspects of their lives and their communities and gather materials and put them in this major archive but once again replicating Alex's search.  And so, Jim Dwyer got a couple of his friends involved, some grassroots scholars, and then decided on some others.  It turned out to be a real fiasco.  Alex was titular head, and really was responsible but Alex thought if you bring a group of black scholars together and they have all this money, they'll just come together, figure out how to do the thing and move forward.  He--Alex is an individual, Alex is a very private individual, very private individual.  He was not prepared to lead a group of academics and as any dean or president will tell you, leading academics is like trying to herd cats and these brothers, mostly men, ripped him off.  I saw academics, scholars, who have received substantial sums of money, to do his research, look Alex in the eye and say, "We're not going to turn it over to you.  You're going to steal it for your project."  I kid you not.  He was so bitter, he just walked away from it.  He was going to start this Kunta Kinte foundation.  He dropped that name but he had to complete this thing and get reports into Carnegie so he turned it over to me and I assembled the guys, we held two meetings out at Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].  Alex would show up and encourage us but he was on the side.  We had different people doing different projects.  I have all of the material in my files, all of the material.  One guy was tracing the genealogy of musicians out of New Orleans [Louisiana] and I've got some wonderful stuff on the genealogy of musicians.  A guy by the name of Paul Sluby [Paul E. Sluby, Sr.], S-L-U-B-Y, who was a helicopter pilot for the Washington, D.C. police, did some stuff in Washington and Sluby was good at tracking stuff in graveyards and he tracked his family history through a series of barbershops.  Lots of times our family history is held together by businesses or land or other things.  Another guy did slave ships and slaves coming into Boston [Massachusetts].  We were all up and down the East Coast.  I was doing the Sea Islands and I wrote two reports on it but basically it was a group of scholars who should have been responsible and should have done a job and the vast majority of them just ripped the whole situation off.  I mean, some of the grassroots scholars, they were wonderful people but they didn't know how to do anything and it's a shame because it being grassroots was not the problem.  What the problem was, they pretended to do what they couldn't do.  One guy was always talking, was always talking and I called one guy, I said, "Man, where's your report?"  "Oh, man, the brakes are off and it's going downhill.  The brakes are off and it's going--."  I finally said, "Well, damn Sam, is anybody at the wheel?"  That's all I ever got was the brakes are off and it was going downhill.  It was sad.  I put together enough to write two good reports for Carnegie but Alex was embittered.
Story_ID: 475972
Speaker 1: But the other side that drew us close together, he and I, and I used to do my writing at his farm in Norris, Tennessee.  Whenever I was going, he always gave me a cabin there.  Whenever I was getting ready to go, I'd fly into Knoxville [Tennessee], Alex would meet me at the gate.  People were shocked.  Who's this man coming to meet, Alex Haley coming to meet this man?  And meet me at the gate.  We'd walk, Alex never had any pretentions, never had any pretentions and we'd go out there and I'd do my writing but I tell you, he was private.  I never saw his private quarters where he did his writing on that farm.  We'd meet in the farmhouse, talk, had meals, then he'd go to his place and I'd go to my place.  I never saw that.  And then, one time I was scheduled to do something or other.  I--no, Alex called me and said he'd been asked to do a negro history program in Knoxville and he wanted to speak for this group but he had to go out to the West Coast, Seattle [Washington], I believe it was, and he asked me if I would fill in for him, gladly.  He went to the West Coast and died and that negro history program became a memorial and I gave the keynote at that memorial and then I escorted Cicely Tyson at his funeral.  Alex Haley was a wonderful individual.  I stayed in his room when they were making 'Roots' and we spent many a night just sitting there.  You know, I'd listen, I didn't talk and he would just talk about what was going on with him and people kept trying to attribute qualities and ideas of him that didn't exist and he would just say, "Nobody really knows who I am."  And I never asked him a question, we would just, I would just sit and listen.  We'd sit there late at night, the red light would be blinking on the phone 'cause he never answered the phone.  He was a profoundly private and quiet man with no pretentions.  That's why he called me and did what he did.  James Baldwin had done the same thing for him and you just pass it on.
Story_ID: 475973
Speaker 1: You said that you talked with him during the time he was writing 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] or, or actually filming the movie [TV miniseries, 'Roots'].  He had a hard time working through a lot of the scenes, why was that?
Speaker 2: They were so emotional.  I said, "Alex [Alex Haley], I don't know how you do what you do."  I said, "I don't know how you do it."  It's not like you sit down at the typewriter and it comes out, this is what I would say.  It's more like you grab chunks of flesh out of your arm and you scribble this blood across the typewriter roll and the words come out.  They'd be shooting a scene down there on Skidaway Island [Georgia] and I just hung out and, you know, nobody knew who I was.  I was living in the room with him so, you know, I wasn't on anything and I drove the car.  I mean, I was like his chauffeur.  I was on sabbatical that year, see, so I was on Daufuskie Island [South Carolina] and he called and said, "Come on over," and I did.  It was wonderful.  So nobody know, knew who I was.  I'd just be on the set and I'd be around him.  Sometimes I'd sit in his chair and the chair had Mr. Haley on it and I'd sit in his director's chair but they'd be filming some of those early scenes and I'd see Alex, he'd just kind of get up and he'd walk behind some of the set and I'd get up and I wouldn't exactly follow him, but I did, and he'd go behind the scene and he'd just cry.  He'd just bawl and people would say, "Where's Mr. Haley?"  I said, "He's all right."  That's all I'd say, "He's all right."  When it was over, he'd come back, we'd go get in the chair or go do what he's going to do.  And there were some conflicts between some of the actors and the director and other kinds of things and Alex didn't get into it.  He just let them, professionals, particularly the director, do his work.  I thought the director was inappropriate, he was British and I thought this was the worst for him, who the hell is--that man, he did some brilliant things, things I would have never predicted, things I never understood but when he did it, it was absolutely brilliant and I realized, this is a man who knew how to convey ideas through film and I better leave him alone 'cause I don't know.
Story_ID: 475974
Speaker 1: Now when the film [TV miniseries, 'Roots'] is completed and years go on and you stay friends with Alex Haley and just as you go to where he's working on his film, you bring him to your work on Daufuskie Island [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know how to do that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we had, all this had gone, and then first of all let me just say two things about this and I want it to be known, I have never read 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley].  I can't get past the ninth chapter, I can't.
Speaker 1: Tell me why.
Speaker 2: I hear Malcolm [Malcolm X].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I'm reading this, these are words, but I hear him.  I see his finger, and I just get so emotional.  I loved the man and I never watched 'Roots.'  I couldn't watch it.  The other day they played a little excerpt from it on NPR [National Public Radio], on News & Notes, just that scene where they're whipping Kunta Kinte, trying to get him to change his name, and I listened to that and I said, "Goddamn," because, you know, name is so important and that's a part of what this whole thing is, who are you?  Identity.  I couldn't get through it.  So I've never watched 'Roots' but I've always been close to Alex and we've done many things together in different places at different times, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and other places, not that we planned it, it just worked out.  So when Jeanne Moutoussamy [HistoryMaker Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe], Arthur Ashe's widow, did this book of photographs on Daufuskie ['Daufuskie Island,' Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe], and I'm in it, I'm in, I think, the last photograph, it's a group photograph.  When she was doing this, when she finished it and it was going to be published, Smithsonian magazine wanted to do a story and they commissioned Alex to do it, and Alex called me and said, asked me if I would take him.  Well the first thing I did was, like I said, I sent him the transcript about Thomas Stafford, then I, we met in Atlanta [Georgia].  I flew from San Francisco [California] and he flew from Los Angeles [California].  We met in Atlanta and then I brought him over, we chartered the boat and went.  He paid for everything.  He stayed in my house.  The house we're at, Pat Conroy lived, I bought that house.  I still own the property, the house burned down, but we stayed there and he describes it very, very well.  Well Alex is generous and kind and Alex went to every home on that island.  He visited every home on that island, not just the black community but the few whites that were there, we went to their homes.  Oh, they just loved it.  They took pictures and everything and everybody who had deviled crabs would say, Alex bought so many deviled crab.  I mean, Alex had more deviled crab when we left the island, he had it frozen in a refrigerator container and we got to the Savannah airport [Savannah/Hilton Head International Airport, Savannah, Georgia], we got there the night before, we're going out the next day, he talked to people in the motel into letting him put those frozen deviled crab in there and he said he wasn't going to share them with nobody and I don't know how many, how many drafts he took that paper through, that article ['Sea Islanders, Strong-Willed Survivors, Face Their Uncertain Future Together,' Alex Haley] through.  There's several things that impressed me about that article.  One, things that I saw every day and took for granted, Alex brought into the picture.  He knew how to paint, if you will, a scene with words and when I read his material, I said, "Oh, God, I see this all the time but I don't see it," you know.  It was insightful for me, and Alex--I thought it was ready and I kept saying, "Alex this is good, this is good."  He said, "No, it's not ready, it's not ready," and they butchered the article.  Alex's article was much longer and it had to be cut down and I can understand that but that article would make you think there wasn't a single white person on that island.  The article he submitted was not that.  He told the truth, he told his story, they created their story. (Cough) Sad but it got me a lot of notoriety, I mean, you know, Smithsonian's not a bad magazine to be in.
Story_ID: 475975
Speaker 1: Let's see now, that was in the early '80s [1980s], in '84 [1984], you leave Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had done so well at Oakes, been so successful with an extraordinary faculty, doing good fundraising, community development, all sorts of things, but the problem was, every time we graduated students, we graduated 150 to 200 students, 30, 40 of them might be black, another proportion Latino, but there weren't as many as I felt I wanted to touch.  So I decided, one, I was going to step down as provost at Oakes College and I could have gone back to the faculty and I had so much sabbatical leave built up that for the rest of my career, I could have stayed at Oakes, I was full professor and I could have worked six months of the year and taken off six months at full salary, for the rest of my career, that's how much sabbatical I had accumulated and I was pretty well loved there so I could go back and be a teacher, however, I wanted to have a greater impact on black students so I sought a position, a leadership position, in a historically black college [HBCU] and I ended up being appointed president of Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] and that was the biggest mistake in the world, for Tougaloo and for me.  One, I didn't know enough about myself to have done the job right and two, Tougaloo wasn't ready for the vision that I had.
Story_ID: 475976
Speaker 1: You were going to tell me about your experience at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Well, Clark Kerr, the quintessential college president of the 20th century was one of my mentors, and Clark and I use the same phrase when we talk our presidencies.  That is, I left my presidency the same way I entered it: fired with enthusiasm.  I went to Tougaloo really wanting to focus on building an academic, intellectual community that would provide upward mobility through intellectual achievement for Mississippi students.  Tougaloo was on hard times, it had suffered serious declines in enrollment and it was literally trying to buy students to come to Tougaloo.  I did not realize and did not understand that many people wanted me to come to Tougaloo from the University of California [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California] because they thought I would attract back to Tougaloo those outstanding, high achieving students who came to Tougaloo when they couldn't go to the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  That's not what I was interested in.  My position was, if they can go elsewhere, they should be encouraged to go elsewhere and we should reach down in the well and bring out those who haven't been able to.  This college has a historical contribution in that regard and we should reach those people and I was good at it.  I had done it at Santa Cruz so that's what I wanted to do at Tougaloo.  There were many people who had no interest in that kind of a mission or that kind of a vision.  That was number one.  I found myself up against serious financial constraints but even more, a cultural dynamic of negative self-perception that was willing to accept mediocrity, and I found that in key administrators, and I found that in the board of trustees.  One of the first things I did when I got to Mississippi was I contacted the former, not the former president, the president of Alcorn State [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi], Herman Washington [sic. Walter Washington], who was a Tougaloo graduate and Herman Washington told me that my biggest problem at Tougaloo was going to be the believability barrier.  People don't believe they can be good.  Then I contacted William Winter, the former governor of Mississippi who had done so much to improve education in the state and I recruited him as a mentor with the hope, eventually, of recruiting him to join the board.  He came and gave talks to my board at dinner meetings and the first thing William Winter said to me was, "Dr. Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], your biggest challenge in Mississippi is the believability barrier," the same thing Herman Washington had said but William Winter was talking a broader context.  I did not understand that, I did not understand that.  If you have an opportunity to bring the resources and get people to grow, why would they not?
Story_ID: 475977
Speaker 1: But very early on, one of my top administrators looked at me and said, "Dr. Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] is a poor college, it's always been a poor college and it'll never be anything else."  Now when you've got somebody like that who's heading the business operation, the college hadn't had new microscopes in ten years, didn't have microscopes.  The chemistry department had a three hundred dollar a year budget for expenses.  I said, how do you run an academic institution like this?  Their whole position was, that's what we have to do.  The first thing I did was I went to a corporate entity and I got a grant to get microscopes for our biology program.  How're you gonna take biology without microscopes?  I, I can't tell you how many small minds I ran into.  A faculty member who said, "The students are getting worse, the books are getting longer and the semester is the same length.  Now how do you teach worse students, longer books in the same amount of time?  They can't memorize that."  I said, "You don't teach people to memorize, you teach people to learn."  He's still there, I'm gone.  The development director said, "We wrote a million dollar proposal, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], a million dollar."  I said, I used to work for IBM.  I was on my way to New York, I said, I'll go by, give me a copy of the proposal.  I get on the plane and I start reading the draft, this proposal that he had already submitted it.  I get to the end of the proposal, here's the list of the board and the administration.  Board members who were dead were on the list and I get to the administration, the previous president's name [George A. Owens] had been crossed out and my name was written in in pencil.  So I get to IBM and I said, the guy greet me and all that, you know, I, used to work for IBM, I was a charter employee, a service bureau corporation and a wonderful exchange and then we get to the proposal and I said, "Well I was going to ask if you would regard it as a draft because I think we need to rework it."  He said, "I was going to suggest that."  I had to get rid of that development director.  I got back, he said to me, he said to me, he said, "Well Doc--Doc, they don't pay attention to that stuff so I won't worry about it," and it was written like, "Please give some money to this poor little college in Mississippi."  I said, "What you talking about?"  Do you hear what I'm saying?  I could give so many examples but the bottom line, as the board came to realize, it was trying to mix oil with water.  I went to the board, I said, "You know, we haven't given salary increases to these people and our faculty are making less than the public school teachers."  And one year I studied it, there was a salary freeze, except three people got increases in spite of the freeze and when I came to understand that, there were other things. There were other things I had to do to get rid of people.  One guy was wiretapping the phones of the university and the only reason I discovered that because I learned he was appropriating money he should not have and we forced him to resign and then we went into his office, he had a whole wiretap system.  What I'm saying to you is you cannot do education when you got to do this other stuff.
Story_ID: 475978
Speaker 1: In the meantime, the retention had gone down [at Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], okay.  Freshman to sophomore retention was running between 40 to 50 percent and I went through all of these statistics for ten years trying to get a sense of it.  I got seven faculty to work with me and we introduced a program like we had at Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California], a freshman year program, holistic, call it invitation to learning.  I got so much pushback.  People said, "Wow you going to have something like this?  How is it going to transfer?  What people are going to call--?" I said, "Look, we have to get students intellectually engaged."  I had just participated in reproducing that report involvement in learning.  So the seven of us developed an entire freshman year program, all the courses the freshman took for their first year and we started by sending them two books before they arrived, 'Coming of Age in Mississippi' by Anne Moody and 'Black Boy' [Richard Wright], saying read these two books before you come.  We got 'em free and we sent 'em free.  We had people calling up, saying, you want me to read and school hadn't started?  Yeah.  I don't want to come to your school.  Others called and said, if this is what you're doing, I want to be there but you see, we're beginning to sift already.  The students arrived, the residence halls opened on a Sunday at noon and they started coming in with their parents, at four o'clock we had a session in the chapel on those two books with the five faculty making the presentation.  They had their first academic experience before they had their first campus meal.  We're saying, we're raising the academic ante.  I can tell other things, the bottom line was, we put those students through that program and at the end of that year, of the freshman who entered that year, 89 percent came back for their second year.  We did it the second year and the retention went to 91 percent.  It had never been above 50 percent but our whole position was, people come to college to learn.  You engage them in learning in a meaningful way.  Others said, "Well they don't know to write, they don't know math, they've got to go through all this remedial stuff."  Remedial stuff is just reinforcing all the negativity of high school and it is a putdown.  I taught a seminar and I assigned books designed to help them deal with their identity.  So one young man who wanted to beef up and go play football someplace else, in my seminar, became the expert on Ralph Bunche.  "Who Ralph Bunche?"  He became, when he realized who Ralph Bunche was, he never left.  I had the students write a hundred word essay every day.  Every day you had to bring in a hundred word essay, but we didn't grade it, we didn't criticize the grammar or the spelling, I was looking for fluency but if you've got to write a hundred word essay every day, your community, your environment becomes your data.  So you see something happening over here, "Oh I need to," you know what I mean, that gives you a different relationship to your environment.  By the end of that first semester, there were students saying, "I'm no longer paralyzed by the blank page."  So they came back the second semester, I said, "Well, you did it the first semester, you do it the second, now I say you got to write two hundred words a day."  "Oh, Dr. Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake]," but you see I explained to them my philosophy of learning which I'll give to you maybe as a way of tying some of this up.
Story_ID: 475979
Speaker 1: My philosophy of learning, which I developed as a result of working with the Black Panther Party and teaching at Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California] and seeing how those students achieved, my philosophy of learning holds there is no known limit to the capacity of the human mind to learn, grow, develop, and change.  There is no age limit, there is no gender limit, there is no race limit, there's no, we know no limit to the mind.  And so, when you step in my classroom, it is my job as a professor to challenge you beyond your perceived limits but in the process, I'm challenged and I got to work harder, that's why I work so hard preparing lectures and not only preparing them but delivering them.  This is not drama; it's communication.  So, the whole environment becomes learning.
Story_ID: 475980
Speaker 1: And I'm constantly dealing with people who are saying, "This is a poor college, it'll never be anything," and I'll close with what I consider to be a very dramatic example of that.  There's a wonderful private school in Jackson, Mississippi called St. Andrew's Presbyterian School [sic. St. Andrew's Episcopal School].  It is an integrated school.  It was formed in 1947 by parents who wanted their children to go to integrated schools, but in 1947 in Mississippi, if you wanted your child to go to integrated school, it wasn't a public school.  So they put together this private school with liberal scholarship resources but it's an expensive school if you don't get the scholarship, and I sent my son, but we had two alumni at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] who put their child over there and he did brilliantly well.  They teach four years of Japanese and this young man got into the Japanese really well so much so that he went to Japan for a year.  They flew over and met with him, they thought it was wonderful and he was interested in international relations.  So I said to them, and I said to the young man, "This is brilliant," and I called my friend, Tim Healy [Timothy S. Healy], who at the time was president of Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.], I said, "Tim, got a perfect candidate for you."  He said, "He's admitted."  I mean, this is what you do.  His parents rose up in anger at me.  They said, "We wanted him to go to Tougaloo."  I said, "We can't even give him two years of Spanish.  What's he going to do at Tougaloo?"  Then they said, "Oh, you're putting down our college?"  I'm recognizing our limits.  I was fired.  He went to Tougaloo, did extremely well, he was straight A all over the place and then got a job while he was still a student in the local department store, utterly bored and started charging things he was taking to other people's accounts and he went to jail.  His parents ultimately said, "We should have listened to you."  I'm into promoting young people's success and you don't bring them in and treat them like they're disciples.  And I could give example after example of what that place was like.  It was, the last thing in the world it was, was a place where educational excellence was cherished but the external perception was very different.  So when I resigned, one board member, in recognition of my work, endowed two full scholarships in my name, one for female and one for male.  They still give those scholarships in my name.  When I left Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California], they endowed seven graduate scholarships in my name, seven.  People, when they graduate, get the first year graduate study in my name.  At Tougaloo, two students every year get a four-year scholarship in my name.  That's what a board member did.  Another one cleared the way for me to go to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].  There were some who recognized what I did.  There were others who were determined to get me out of there but I wasn't interested.  You know my major criticism was some of those faculty.  You know what they criticized me for?  I didn't have any plaques on the wall.  People get a plaque and put it on the wall and one of the board members said, "You don't have any plaques on the wall."  I took them to my storeroom, I had four boxes of plaques.  I said, "What am I going to do?  Where am I going to put 'em?  What's the significance?"  Those plaques don't say what's in my head.  If you not got plaques on the wall, so what can I say?  I don't do that.  I don't do that.  That doesn't make me any better, what it does is I place the emphasis on what's inside.
Story_ID: 475981
Speaker 1: I'll tell one final story, because it summarizes what I was doing.  I kept saying to my staff, "We have to reach these young people academically."  And one Sunday I went to chapel and the chaplain afterwards, this woman, after the service, this woman came in, older woman with a student, and they were dressed in rather casual clothes, dungarees, they weren't dressed in chapel clothing, they hadn't been at chapel and they went in the back with the chaplain, talked with the chaplain.  I sat and waited 'til they came out and we called the chaplain, Chappie [ph.], and he became one of my tormentors too.  He really wanted to get me out of there.  I said, "Chappie, what was that about?"  He said, "Oh they were here to deal with that situation the other night."  I said, "What situation?"  He said, "Well you know, she had a problem with a young man."  I said, "Really?"  So I went and I called the security and I asked for a report and they brought me what they had collected.  Apparently, the two of them had gone out in the woods and got amorous and then she changed her mind and he beat her up, and she went and filed a complaint.  Well, he went and filed his own story to get his side in.  And I'm reading this thing, you know, "She did this--," and this is what he wrote, you know, he can't half spell, "And I did that and then I put my hand here and she did this, and then she said, no, and I slapped her," and all this sort of business.  So I see this thing and I call the dean of students who is a female.  I said, "Why hasn't something been done about this?"  We had some corrective action.  She said, "She deserved it."  That's what she said to me.  Ultimately, I had the man removed from campus.  I said, "You can't violate the integrity of the community and expect us to go on," and I had to fire the dean of students.  But how do you get education when you're doing those kinds of things?  And people, I had students go before the Jackson [Mississippi] chapter of the Tougaloo alumni and complain that I was denying the black man of his traditional prerogative to correct his woman.  When I say I was not prepared to deal with the culture, do you hear what I'm saying?  The alumni called me up and said, "You keep your no-no shits out."  They didn't support it but when I got rid of the dean of students, she called in her sorority friends and I caught hell but you see, often in those situations, you can't tell the whole story because of personnel restrictions so you got to take it.  That was a sad experience and there were HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] presidents who urged me to sue the college [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], sue the board and I wouldn't and there were media who called me and wanted me to talk about what it was like.  This is the first time I've ever said anything to anybody about what it was like.  I would not talk.  Now maybe I should have said something, but I wasn't going to do that because, frankly speaking, I was at fault too.  I should have never accepted that invitation and I go down there with my ego, thinking I know how to run a college and raise money and get students educated, and I did but I didn't know a damn thing about dealing with a culture and a situation where people did not believe they were worthy and we had the kinds of problems we had, nope, I didn't belong there.
