Story_ID: 26588
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Malworsth Brian Blake.  And it's spelled M-A-L-W-O-R-S-T-H; middle name is Brian, B-R-I-A-N; Blake, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story behind your first name?
Speaker 2: You know, my father always says that, you know, well, there's an official story and an unofficial story.  My father said that to get that first name, he had to run miles and swim through large rivers, swing across various valleys and he got honored with that name, and he gave it to me for free.  But I guess the official story is that his aunt gave him that name, and I'm not sure where she got it from, but I've actually--I've returned the favor.   So my dad's Malworsth Blake, without a middle name; he gave me Malworsth Brian Blake and gave me a middle name, in fact, my middle name, Brian, my mom liked, I guess the show was called, "My Three Sons," Brian Keith, was one of the actors for it, so she liked Brian Keith, but they negotiated.  And then my sons, both of their middle name's Malworsth, so I have a Brice Malworsth Blake, and a Brendon Malworsth Blake, so no origins in any ethnicity that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you think the name was invented?
Speaker 2: I think it was, I think it was.  And I have--so, you know, my parents, I guess, only a couple of generations from literacy, so my aunt didn't read or write, so we go back and we try to discuss, you know, well, where did it come from, and again, my dad had seven brothers and sisters, so they all have very different names, but his more different than--the rest of the names are pretty standard, so he has a name that's largely different.  You do a Google search, it's probably one of--there's three of us, or four of us now.  You don't find that name any other place but with the four of us, which I've appreciated as a scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth was October 13, 1971, and I was born in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Currently, I am a professor of computer science; I have joint appointment in electrical engineering and human genetics, but I also serve as an administrator for the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], I am a vice provost and dean of the graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Today's date is June 3, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the conference room at the University of Miami's Graduate School.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 26589
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm-up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.  I'm tremendously fond of bread pudding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is interesting.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: I just, you know, coming up in the South, bread pudding is pretty popular and perhaps about a decade ago, I rediscovered bread pudding in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Since that time I've been going across the nation trying different bread puddings and there's a couple of places I could recommend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is, perhaps, I guess, blue, I kind of switch between blue and purple.  Purple is one of my fraternity colors, but blue's been perhaps my best color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I've always liked fall, because I do like the changing of the season, I like the, you know, being from the south, in Savannah, it gets really warm so you look forward to the fall when it gets sort of spring like and it's kind of new beginnings for, you know, if you look at the academic year, but it always feels like a new beginning in the fall to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like, for various reasons, if I had to rank the number one place I like to go, I like New York City.  I think it's a place where you can, it's a melting pot, lot of action, it's one of those places I probably wouldn't enjoy living, but I really like visiting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not going to be able to repeat it well, but one of my favorite sayings came from Theodore Roosevelt, when pretty much, I'm not going to repeat it, it's a longer saying, but the gist of it is that, he'd rather be the person that fails fighting valiantly as opposed to being the person that sits in the background and complains and never really engages in something that can potentially fail.  So, it's my favorite one to use in email, but unfortunately, it's too long to memorize, but that's the gist of it, because I think I've always appreciated those who try hard, even if they don't--even if they don't succeed, as opposed to those who might, you know, the ones who would always complain and not give it their best shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26590
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history; I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Jeneva Frazier Blake and it's J-E-N-E-V-A; Frazier is F-R-A-Z-I-E-R; Blake, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mom's date of birth is January 4, 1950, and she was born in Estill, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Estill?
Speaker 2: Estill, E-S-T-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, what do you know about your mother's side of the family, I mean, how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?  Are there any stories about their occupations or activities?
Speaker 2: You know my mom and dad's side is very interesting.  The parents that I know as my grandparents are probably not my biological grandparents.  So, my mom's mom passed away before I was born.  She also, I think, lived the majority of her life split between Estill, South Carolina and New York City.  I didn't know much about her.  I think my sister might have overlapped with her, maybe a couple of months, and my sister, being about two years older than I am.  And my mom's father, at least, who she knows as her father, really was her step-father, and he was a carpenter.  His name was Robert Taylor.  So that's who I've known as my grandfather throughout that time and then when my mom's mom passed away, he remarried.  So both my grandparents--Abolina(sp) Taylor was what I knew to be my grand mom from, you know, from a young age, so you know, both were not biological, but if I go back into Robert Taylor's history, he was a carpenter, and I remember speaking to him, not too long before he had passed, and he was saying that his father was a sharecropper in Estill, South Carolina.  So they go back quite a distance in South Carolina.  So I did meet my biological grandfather on my mother's side once or twice and there weren't--wasn't great.  My mom interacted with him a couple of times, but, you know, she really respected Robert Taylor, who she knew as her dad throughout her childhood, so I think he--I couldn't give you his full name, but I know that he, I think, was African by descent and he hadn't--he wasn't--I guess, his lineage in South Carolina is not as deep as everyone else in my--
Speaker 1: In the United States?
Speaker 2: --Right.
Speaker 1: He would have come over--is there a story about where he came from?
Speaker 2: No.  I need to look that up; I don't know for sure.  I know he came over, and I get this sometimes when I meet people, because they can see features--they could see some features in my face I don't know about, so and they would say, no, no, you definitely have some of this in you.  And then when I had the opportunity to speak to him at, frankly, I spoke to him at Robert Taylor's funeral for the first time, and at that time, that's when I realized that he was more of an African descent, but I'm not sure what the background was.
Speaker 1: Could it be that he's got a Sea Island lineage, Gullah Geeche?
Speaker 2: You know that's what--he didn't have a number of the Gullah folks, but he didn't have that diction, the speech, but definitely could have been, to see him, you'd think that.  He's a little taller than my dad, which actually, has come--I get my height--I'm a little taller than my dad, too, so I get my--and when I met him, I realize that he and I are the same height, so I know I get the height from him, but unfortunately don't have, you know, the far back lineage from that.
Speaker 1: Did he have an accent at all?
Speaker 2: He had a slight accent, but you know that's not uncommon in South Carolina, so, but it was more of a southern accent than I could pick up being more of a Gullah or Geechee accent.
Speaker 1: I know the Gullah Geechee they refer to as Africans a lot because of their culture.
Speaker 2: It makes a lot of sense.  He moved--he didn't stay in South Carolina, he later moved to Florida.  I think he was living in North Florida, perhaps Jacksonville.  At the time when my grandfather passed and then my mom is deceased as well, so she's been deceased for six years now.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  So, your mother, was she raised in New York?
Speaker 2: My mom, actually, was raised in Estill, South Carolina, but she had--she has relatives in New York City, I think particularly, New Jersey area.  So when she first graduated from high school, she went to New York and worked as a telephone operator for a couple of years in New Jersey.  I think she said that she was in and out of New York, but they were actually living in Jersey City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26591
Speaker 1: So did she [Blake's mother, Jeneva Frazier Blake] have any stories about growing up in Estill [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: You know, her and my dad, they always trade stories about--so Estill's a farming town, so many of the--as a youth the job that, I guess, when I grew up the job to have was to work in a fast food place.  When they were coming up, the job to have was actually working in the field, and they always talked about how he could pick more cotton or he could--so Estill was a huge cotton soybean town, manufacturing, shippings, all those sort of things are the jobs, so I know that most of the jobs they would do as coming up was very much related to farming, you know, so a lot of that was manual labor, mostly so.  That's one of the bigger stories, they also tell the traditional stories about how far it was to school and how we had it more--as kids we have it much better, we get driven to school and dropped off and to walk to school an such like that, so, yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: So your mother, like, she went to a segregated school or black school in--
Speaker 2: In South Carolina.
Speaker 1: --In South Carolina--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Before the immigration days.  Do you remember the name of the school, because it's usually named after some historic person?
Speaker 2: That's a good point.  You know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I take it she finished high school, right?
Speaker 2: She did, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And went to New Jersey, became a phone operator?
Speaker 2: Indeed, yeah.
Speaker 1: She had a decent education, at least, to be a phone operator?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So in largely--I don't know, my mom never went to college, so she actually, once she finished high school, took a couple of jobs.  I guess she was working in Jersey City for a couple of years before  her and my dad--and they all knew each other in high school, so she knew my father well before that time, but I think, I guess we'll get to my father, but he actually went to the military and then they reconnected and were married just a couple of years out of high school, so my mom was married to my father in, I think when she was, gosh, probably 20 years old, 19 or 20.  And then pretty much they were married all the way through until she was deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26592
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Jeneva Frazier Blake] share with you any aspirations that she had to go to college or to do something other than what she did?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I don't know, she was mostly all the way through, I'd say middle school, she was mostly either a servant's housewife in the home or homemaker and somewhere around, I guess, when I went to middle school, she started working more closely with my father who actually has been sort of the serial entrepreneur all the way through.  So she worked--he actually had a couple of service stations, she worked with him during that time, pretty much being almost like a manager for one of the service stations.  And then by the time I was heading off to college, maybe a couple of years before, she opened her own store; she had a lingerie shop in the mall, in Savannah mall, in Savannah, Georgia, that's one of the new malls.  And she had that shop for--she pretty much was the owner and manager of that shop for a decade.  In fact, it was in the mall most of the time and then I think, I guess, around the tenth or twelfth year of the shop, she moved it to more of a strip mall that was closer into town.  I think once she had worked with my father with regards to working in service stations, she really wanted to start a business of her own, and she did and it did very well, successful for many years.  So those were her biggest aspirations.  She--there was nothing that she didn't make for me with regards to any number of things through school, through sports, all these things she--there wasn't anything she didn't make.  She definitely--I do appreciate her as being the person that just kind of supported me through almost everything.  I remember once her telling me that she felt like there's nothing--she's like, you've been able to, just in school, being successful, you decide what you want to do, you'll be able to do anything you want to do.  So I remember that vaguely, because at the time I was trying to decide well what should be my profession, I always felt supported like that, so definitely strong influence from my mother growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26593
Speaker 1: Well, let's get your father.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Malworsth Blake, and it's M-A-L-W-O-R-S-T-H; Blake, B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is April the eighth, 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born in--
Speaker 2: He was born in Estill, South Carolina, as well.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: So, another interesting thing that my dad actually had seven brothers and sisters, and his mom, Cloe Blake, she worked, I think, in a factory in Estill, South Carolina.  But of his seven brothers and sisters, I hope this it's appropriate to say he had multiple fathers, so as close as--there's two of his brothers that are really close and they're from the same father, same biological father.  But his mom never got married that I'm aware of.  But I did have a relationship, albeit, infrequently, with my dad's father, who was Alexander Tyson, and he was kind of a jack-of-all-trades, mechanic in Estill, South Carolina.  So, although my dad didn't have close relationships with him, he actually held him in quite high regard.  One of the things that I think--one of the things I can trace back to all three of us is the ability to kind of--to take things apart and put them back together.  So, I've always been mechanically adept, you know, in household things, in cars, all these mechanical things, I think is his kind of, come down the generations.  I think his dad's lineage goes back the same path.  In all cases they were raised in a farming town so, I think his father also was a sharecropper in Estill, South Carolina, so beyond my dad's dad's father, really I don't have any background before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26594
Speaker 1: Now, did your father have a chance to finish high school too?
Speaker 2: He did.  He finished high school and he got an associate's degree from Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any stories about growing up in Estill [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Same things, you know, he has any number of stories about, and my dad's a little bit more charismatic.  He has a lot of stories about what he did growing, and most of it is around farming, you know, they talk about working in the fields, they talk about the--his stories are largely around having seven brothers and sister, so he will tell you they grew up mostly in poverty and that his most interesting story is that they have food until Tuesday, and then they--they will have food all the way until Tuesday and then Thursday is when they get paid again, then they have more food.  So he has always said there's a lean time between Tuesday and Thursday and with seven brothers and sisters, he says that you had to make sure you eat when you have the opportunity to eat.  So definitely he grew up mostly in poverty like that and had always been a tremendously hard worker, so he's worked, and of the seven brothers that he has, there's a, I guess, there's two that are older than him, but then there's almost a seven or eight year gap between those two, so for the next five, he was considered to be the elder, so many of his brothers and sisters say that he was kind of like the--tended to be sort of the older brother, the one that kind of run the house through that period of time, so, very responsible, you know, always, you know, my dad always has this thing I called stick-with-it-ness.  He always finishes things, and as a kid, I learned a lot from that.  We would be working from 7:00 a.m. till midnight until something got done.  So I learned at a very early age the benefits of hard work, the benefits of not--of working as hard as you can and not--never having this, you know, putting in every effort to prevent failure, so he's been--that's the kind of mentor he's been, you know, coming up for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26595
Speaker 1: Now, where is Estill [South Carolina], say in relationship to Charleston [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: It's kind of all there.  Estill is more inland, but it's about an hour away from Savannah [Georgia].
Speaker 1: From Savannah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's interesting because you go up 95 and then it's a little bit more inland.  Charleston is actually up 95 another--say another hour and then it's more toward the coast, so it's kind of--that's the relationship.  I think from Estill to Charleston it's probably no more than another hour or so, so it's--that's the relationship.  So moving to Savannah really--I don't even think it's an hour from Estill to Savannah.  Savannah was the big city and then Hampton, South Carolina, was the closest--South Carolina a big city in a sense to Estill.  I used to joke with my dad and say that Estill is a one-song town, as you're driving in, if you listen to a song, you would drive out before the next song, because it's very small, two lights, very small town.
Speaker 1: South Carolina is one of the states where, I don't know if it still is, but was one of two states where the black population exceeded the white.
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed, it probably still is.  And Estill is very dominant.  It was mostly a black population that I'm aware of, you know, and a lot of--not a lot of, even to date, not a lot of more commercialized businesses.  Most of the businesses were started right there by people who lived in Estill and who've been there for many years.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26596
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My parents--
Speaker 1: They grew up in Estill [South Carolina].
Speaker 2: --Yeah, so they went to school together.  So my dad [Malworsth Blake] is about two years older than my mom [Jeneva Frazier Blake], so, and then my dad, having seven brothers, or six brothers and one sister, she was sort of a step sister, it's kind of interesting, you know, I have one sister who's a little bit older, so she's about two years older in age, but just a year older in school, but you know, I can appreciate the impact of having eight people, you know, have eight people with the Blake name in school, so I think they were pretty well known, because they had such a big family, and they all went to the same school, so my mom knows my father very well, she knows most of his brothers very well, so a lot of that's through the time, through just kind of being raised in the same city.  They have a lot of stories about interactions they've had and silly things they did growing up, so many of their stories are kind of, you know, ad hoc, where they'll say, well, you remember that time when your brother Alec did this, and so they really grew up in a tight nit community, if you will.  Actually, my mom is my dad's second marriage.  And he has an interesting story in that is that he was married--he married my mom when he was twenty-four, but he got married earlier when he was 20-21, just before getting into the military, and, you know, is pretty much very sad.  His wife was killed in a train accident, a car, in a train accident, when she was pregnant, so he doesn't talk very much about that, so I don't hear, I haven't really gone deep into that story, so I know that he was married to her for only a year, a year and a half, they had a little one in the train accident.  A train hit the car and they both died, so he, for, I guess, for a year and a half, two years, things weren't quite the same.  Apparently, when I trace back, eventually went overseas to Germany where, and one of his trips back is when he actually reconnected with my mom, and they got together and, I guess, they were writing letters.  A lot of the stories they talk about is him writing letters from Germany and then seeing her when he came home for break, because he was in the [U.S.] Army at the time.  And they eventually got married and then she moved over to Germany and that's when my sister was born, and my sister was born in Germany.
Story_ID: 26597
Speaker 1: So, one of the things that was interesting is my dad [Malworsth Blake] was so, I guess, had so much sorrow from the loss of his first wife, but apparently there was--and I hope I'm getting this story right, I think there was some insurance that came when she died and that insurance actually, he gave most of it away, but he used some of it to start his first business.  So his first business, largely, came from some of the misfortunate that happened with his first wife and that just seeded the business.  When you look back, his first business, he actually--and this is after he actually had an honorable discharge from the armed forces, he came back to Savannah [Georgia] and then started the service station businesses.  At that time you could actually have service station business where you were a manager.  You just couldn't be a manager, it's your service station, but you would actually get taxed by whatever, I think, at the time, I don't think it was Chevron then, but it was some distributor, I can't remember the distributor, they were the ones that would start the businesses.  They would actually see the beginning of the businesses and put people in to manage them and then they would--really it was all about selling the gas and then you would get almost like a salary from working in their service station.  So he started two at the time, and then one just naturally did better than the other, and he stuck with one.  But over the years, I think, when I was growing up, I guess, all the way until I was six years old, we lived in a very tough area at the time, and I didn't really appreciate it until going back over the last couple of years, I'm like "oh yeah, it's a little bit tough."  So that service station pretty much was the foundation of how we've kind of went from what I consider to be very lower, you know, very kind of depressed neighborhood to sort of a middle, middle class.  I worked in that service station as early as seven.  Frankly, I can remember some of the stories of actually pumping gasoline, and when I was seven years old, I would get a lot of tips; I'd get one dollar tips.  At the time I remember it was common, I remember going to my dad and said, okay, here's your gas money, he'd say, okay, what's the other money there?  I'd say that's my tip money.  So worked at a really young age there and again just work I think, just build over time so.  So he started those service stations, my mom generally stayed home with us on the days that I wasn't working or in school, and then as we got older, she began to help around that service station, and then they just build.  Eventually he started that business built into another--liquor store business and then he started purchasing homes, kind of built into a real estate business, and then as he merged away from retail, he started doing more contracting around the homes that he had purchased and he had 60 or 70 homes in Savannah for a time.  And then from that he kept those homes but then he started working with this--and then he began to appreciate more work with his hands so he started doing this, lately it's concrete business where it's kind of a new--I don't know how new it is, but it's new to us, it's stamped concrete, where the concrete looks like tile and looks like other things, so he's actually the prime distributor of those materials and that service in the area of the region around Savannah.  So that's been his latest business, but throughout the times you could see he's evolved into various businesses at the right time, so yeah.
Story_ID: 26598
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you think about your parents' [Jeneva Frazier Blake and Malworsth Blake] personalities, their talents, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take after--it's a mixture. You know, my mom was very empathetic.  She had a gift for being able to step into other people's shoes and try to understand how they felt, and she was able to react based on that.  So that empathy was kind of central to her personality.  Everyone knew her and loved her for that because they knew that she would immediately understand, so I have some of that from her.  I think I relate very well to people, and I think that comes from interacting and just naturally having such a close relationship with my mother.  My dad is just a hard worker, type "A" push, push, push, and I think the combination of the two, I get a lot of that.  I've always been--I've always appreciated being able to be--to get an education and being able to work as an engineer, work as a professor, because when I think about that in contrast of the hard work that I had coming up, it just seems easy.  I feel fortunate to be able to work hard in these environments because the work is so much easier than the hard labor I've seen, you know, when I was coming up.  I have a good friend in high school, and we'd sit--Savannah [Georgia] is really hot, Savannah, Georgia, 100 degrees everyday from May through September, and I can remember being in high school during a May month--a June month, and I was looking out the window and seeing a lot of--we could see workers on the roof, tarring the roof.  If you've ever been in a hot climate, you can see like waves, those heat waves, so, I remember us looking out there, and said, we're going to definitely get an education that will allow us not to be able do those sort of things, because it couldn't be any hotter than tarring a roof in Savannah, in June.  So, definitely--but that's the sort of hard work that was instilled from my dad.  Really, we did a lot of things, so, I've learned how to use tile, I've learned how to work with the plumbing, I've learned how to, you know, working around the gas stations, not anything I couldn't tell--I could tell you anything about working around the gas stations, so I've learned all these things from the hands-on, so even to date, you know, I feel more comfortable working hard than I do not working hard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26599
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us.  Do you just have the sister?
Speaker 2: I just have one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's older.  She's Kimberly Theresa Blake.  K-I-M-B-E-R-L-Y; Theresa, T-H-E-R-E-S-A; Blake, B-L-A-K-E, and she was born April 15, 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what does she do?
Speaker 2: She's a school teacher right now.  She got her undergraduate from Armstrong--shoot, let's take that back.  She started her undergraduate at Armstrong State College in Savannah [Georgia], and finished at Columbia College in Columbia, South Carolina, and then she later got a master's in education online.  I can't remember the institution that she got it from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she's worked in either high school or elementary schools in Savannah for her entire career.  Right now I think she works at Portworth(sp) Elementary School, which is right on the outskirts of Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26600
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, you and your sister and your mother and your father in the house, all, basically.  So there weren't any other relatives living with you?
Speaker 2: No, we're pretty--considering my dad had seven brothers and sisters and some around Savannah [Georgia], we have anywhere between 27 and 30 first cousins.  So, coming up we had very strong connections with the cousins that were, I guess, son and daughter of the closest brothers of my dad's, so we had some interaction there, a lot of interaction there, but generally in our household, it was just the four of us, so.  My sister, we grew up relatively tight growing up, now we deviated a little bit, but mostly I still talk to her at least once a month.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26601
Speaker 1: Now, did you grow up in the same neighborhood most of the time?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, we were in a relatively depressed neighborhood all the way until I was six years old, and that was kind of on the west side of Savannah [Georgia], which is, again, perhaps the more rough side of Savannah, if you will.  And then after what I remember the (unclear) that we went to--when I turned seven we moved to an area that was over on the east side, which was kind of the new emerging area, kind of middle class, I guess, we had a smaller home with, I think we had two or three bedrooms, very small home before my seventh birthday, and then we moved to a slightly bigger home, which had three bedrooms, an office, a garage and a bigger yard, the corner lot and such, and we stayed there until I was in, I guess, ninth or tenth grade.  And then at that point we moved to yet another home, that home was much bigger.  We moved to an area that was a more affluent area on, I guess that would be considered the southeast side and it was called Skidaway Island, so it was actually an island right outside of Savannah, so you had to cross a bridge to get to it, and there it was a much bigger house.  I think we had five bedrooms, big yard, it was a gated community, so, each--
Speaker 1: Spell that "skid"?
Speaker 2: Skidaway Island, S-K-I-D-A-W-AY.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the community is called the Landings, it's a golf neighborhood, so it's pretty much a well established neighborhood.  It was relatively new at the time, but it's one of the nicer neighborhoods, I think, in Savannah [Georgia].  And from that point on, like I said, we pretty much stayed there all the way until after I graduated, and then we moved to a couple other places, but there were just trying to get into a more central--Skidaway Islands is kind of on the outskirts of Savannah, so it really had a large--it's interesting when I look at it, it's a long commute for Savannah, not such a long commute, if you consider New York and Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and those areas, you know, you drive much further.  So, yeah, they--so each of those phases in my life, I'd say seven years and then another seven years, I guess another ten years, we actually moved until he got into a better situation, mainly based on his entrepreneurship and my mom's support.
Story_ID: 26602
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: So, sights and smells and sounds.  So, when I think about--so different areas, so when I think about--I think about our first home, I think about being in a place that's relatively small, I think about having a really close interaction with my mom [Jeneva Frazier Blake], I think about, you know, I think about really small-room type corners, I think about plastic over the couches in our first home.  In our second home, I think about, and there, I think about very tight community, so some of the sounds where we'd hear more--in our first home, we'd hear more cars passing, I don't know if that was because the home was a smaller place, but you hear more of the outside, and it was closer to the city so you heard more, you know, perhaps more sirens and such and maybe there was more action there as well, so you just hear more.  I remember that being distinctive in our first home.  In our second home, I remember it being more quiet, and I remember actually enjoying the--we would do a lot of playing in the woods because there was a lot of wooded area and a lot of unfinished area around the neighborhood, so during that period, we, you know, I remember having all different types of hide and seek and different, just different interactions, and in the neighborhood, there were--it felt like we had more freedom so we--maybe we did.  Any given day you could go outside and you can go find friends and you can play and you do a lot of outside play, so a lot of sports; we used to play sports around the seasons, if you will. So that's kind of--I remember moving in our final home when I was in high school, and maybe at that point, you know, you didn't have as much interaction.  I remember it being a little bit more--I did realize at that point that we were in a place where it was a lot more secluded, so not very many black families in the neighborhood, although it was relatively large, just not a lot more interaction and at that point I developed friends, and I was driving, so it wasn't such a big deal.  I remember that being sort of more--still quiet, but yet not so much family life in and around the house, you know, aside from Sundays, when we were--we typically throughout my life, we've always eaten dinner together on Sundays, not so much throughout the rest of the time, because the business owners, I remember that being dominating, Thanksgiving, Christmas days, you know, can be on an off, just depending on who we could have to cover the businesses.  So, I hope that's close.
Story_ID: 26603
Speaker 1: Now, was church of big part of growing up [in Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Indeed, yeah.  I was raised in a Methodist church, AME [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: Townsley Chapel.
Speaker 1: The Town--
Speaker 2: Townsley, T-O-W-N-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  So, it was just around the corner from my first home.  So, we would--I remember my sister [Kimberly Theresa Blake] and I, we would--my parents [Jeneva Frazier Blake and Malworsth Blake] would get us up early and get us dressed and then we would walk with some of the older kids to Sunday school at Townsley Chapel, and then they would meet us for the main--for the eleven o'clock service.  So, we'd get there say, a quarter to ten, have Sunday school and then they'd meet us for the major congregation, if you will, so.  That was our church all the way through; no matter where we moved that was still our church.  We would actually come back and, you know, it was a church home where we knew all the--even to date we know all the people who grew up in that church, and the pastors that evolved over the period of time.  An interesting piece of this is that I just took my youngest son to get baptized in that church.  So, and this was early this year.  So, definitely, that's been the closest thing to a church home.  In fact I've had various churches that we've attended and it's been Baptist or Methodist, Nondenominational, as we've moved to various cities or whatever, but that's been the--that was a church home for me growing up, has a lot of memories, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it one of the older churches in Savannah?
Speaker 2: It is.  I think it's probably one of the older, so, there are a large number of Methodist churches there.  I don't think Townsley Chapel was the oldest, because they got the oldest Baptist church there.  I think it's First African Baptist.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  That's actually the first, because they used to say Bethel AME, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is the oldest, but then recent, you know, dialog has been that the First Baptist is AME.
Speaker 2: Yeah, AME is probably the oldest African American church in Savannah.  In fact, they go way back.  If you tour that church it actually had a holding for the underground railroad, so that you have a historic connection to slavery there.
Speaker 1: Yeah go back to pre-1829, I mean 1828.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so, and there was another Methodist church that was a bit older.  You know, the AME is pretty much in a congress of Methodist churches all in a region.  So, the pastors, a lot of times, will exchange from church to church, so any visit from other Methodist churches in the area, so it was kind of--you were pretty close to all the Methodist churches, maybe not Baptist, but very tight-knitted.  Savannah is one of those places where, I think we mentioned it earlier, that even though Chicago [Illinois] is a big place, you kind of know people by their family names, same with Savannah.  Someone asked me, are you from Savannah, and they'll say I have relatives in Savannah, and I'd immediately ask them what's their name, what's their last name, because then, a lot of times the generation that I know are sons and daughters of, or mothers and fathers of generations of what the other people know, because there's only--it's pretty much a core group of families that have been, I guess, mainstays in Savannah for many years, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26604
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: So, my first school was--I went to kindergarten at--gosh it's escaping me.  Actually I went to kindergarten at sort of a small school, I think it was Mrs. Jones, it's pretty much a small school where, you know, other kids that look like me, were there, before first grade, that was the kindergarten.  It was in pretty much a neighborhood community.
Speaker 1: It was started by a lady in her home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was in a building, but it was mostly--you knew the school by the person that ran it.  I think it was Mrs. Jones.  It was first a daycare then kindergarten.  And then I went to--gosh, wow.  I can see the school, only for my first year.  My first year I went to a school in west Savannah, and then we--then we got--after my first year, I can't see--
Speaker 1: Because you moved when you were six, right?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah.  I would normally--I should have looked that up.  The name of that school, I can't see the name right now, I can see the school, but it was right in the west Savannah [Georgia] area and then by--and that was the second part of my kindergarten, I think.  I think it's the first six months I was with Mrs. Jones.  When I was in that school for kindergarten, it was a public school.  And then in first grade, that's when they started integration, forced integration.  So, we were bused all the way across town.  In fact, we would--and that was actually Windsor Forest Elementary School I went to, which was clear across town.  And I didn't know what that meant when I was a kid.  I just knew that it meant that I had to ride on the bus in the morning like 25 minutes.  I couldn't understand it, when the school, that some of my other buddies went to were like, right down the--
Speaker 1: I don't think you would have known at the time, but did they select certain students to go to, I mean, to be bused or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good point.  I never knew.  That's just one of the things I would have to ask.  I know that--I know that the--I think it was selected--I don't know if it was select students or select districts, because I think my cousin, who lived right across the street, he actually went with me.  So he also--let me take that back, I don't think he did.  It was kind of mixed, you know, some of my friends who went to integrated and there were others who were not.  So, I only went to Windsor Forest Elementary for one year before we moved to our other home on the east side, and from there I went to, you'll appreciate this, I went to Eli Whitney Elementary School.
Speaker 1: The inventor of the cotton gin?
Speaker 2: Right. So, I went to Eli Whitney Elementary School for--all the way through until sixth grade and very distinctively aware of what Eli Whitney has done.  And it's pretty interesting when you go back because I talked about my parents, the cotton gin and what it did, and they would talk about--they talked about it differently, how they actually picked the cotton from the thorn with their hands, so, there was a--there was a dichotomy there between what they had done and what's invented by Eli Whitney at the time, and so it's kind of interesting timing back to some of the stories that they had coming up and how many bales of cotton they had collected and, you know, how--what type of job it was, and my dad always would say he'd collected the most cotton than anyone, and my mom would say, no, no, no, no, no.  They'd go back and forth with that.  So, Eli Whitney, I remember distinctively starting there because it was really close to home, I didn't have to be--it wasn't a 30 minute drive, it was right up from our new home.
Story_ID: 26605
Speaker 1: So, is this an integrated neighborhood, or was it?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood I was in was integrated to start, and I think I've gone back since and over time it's become less integrated, it's become more, it's more black population now than there was when I--when we arrived there, it was kind of very mixed, but still it was a large black population there.  But it was very much--
Speaker 1: What would you think the percentage was when you started there?
Speaker 2: When we first moved there, I think we were--it had to be about 50/50, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of more--I think the--I think--there were a lot of longshoremen there.  So one of the, perhaps, maybe not white collar jobs, but a blue collar job was well respected in Savannah [Georgia] was the longshoremen, so those were the people who worked--as you imagine Savannah was a port city.  So longshoremen would be the ones that would actually unload the ships and put them on trucks, and then all the trucks would come out of Savannah heading to different parts of the country.  So if you were a very senior longshoreman, it was a very lucrative job.  You could do very well.  So there were a lot of longshoremen that lived in the neighborhood and there some other--there were other teachers that lived in the neighborhood, so it was kind of, I don't know how to define it now, but it definitely was sort of like the lower middle class community, if you looked at it from that perspective.  And then there was--it kind of didn't--race didn't drive people there, I think it was more of the economic piece of it.  And over time, I think, what happened was the houses didn't--they kind of stayed the same.  I think over time, it was a natural depreciation of the homes and then it became more of an entry--even further than entry level.  I think even today there are still a lot of school teachers that live in that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 26606
Speaker 1: So, yeah, but Eli Whitney [Elementary School, Savannah, Georgia], I stayed there.  I think in second grade I arrived there and then by the third grade--it's pretty interesting too because that was the first--I didn't spend a great deal of time, or not time that I'm very aware of at the sort of the school that I was integrated into.  But this school was a lot more--it was completely--when I first started it was kind of half, half.  It was very similar to the neighborhood it was about 50/50 black and white when I started.  And one of the more distinct memories I have is in second grade.  I've always been a hard worker, and I've always done well in school, but I remember in second grade, specifically, I had a--I turned in an assignment and then the teacher said that I didn't turn it in, and I said, no, I turned it in, I turned it in, I turned it in, and she--I remember it being so clear, I said, like wow, it was the first time I've ever had it where someone just completely didn't believe me, and I didn't understand it, because I wasn't the type that--I wasn't at that time, I don't think I was a story teller, but it was the weirdest thing--it was the weirdest sensation to have someone tell you you didn't do something, and you know that you did it.  So to tell you--I remember distinctly because she told me in such a way that there was not, you know, there was nothing in her that made her think I was telling the truth, which was kind of weird, because I never experienced that.  So it turns out that she was posting assignments on the board, all the ones that were turned in, and my assignment was on the board.  So it turned out there was another student in the class that had completely erased my name and wrote in her name.  So it was completely her name written in on top of my name.  It was erased, not even in a great way, so when you saw the name written over the top, if you were paying close attention, you could almost see my name written in underneath.  So--
Speaker 2: So I guess she didn't spend a lot of time, it was quick?
Speaker 1: Quick, yeah.  So I remembered going up and take a look, and said that's my assignment, you know, and again, she completely didn't believe me.  And this was weeks after, my mom [Jeneva Frazier Blake] had thought I had--she thought I had turned it in, maybe she thought it had got lost, but it was after that period and then, you know, I think it happened--it didn't even happen at a time when my mom was there at the school, so when I pointed it out to her and showed her, she realized that it definitely was my assignment.  In fact, it was so interesting because the assignment got a really good grade.  So it was kind of one of the ones she had posted up as having, you know, being really good.  So it turns out that there was another young--I'm not sure it matters but a younger white girl in the class that had actually, I guess in a sense, that would be considered cheating, had put the assignment up and I remember the state changed from that day with that particular teacher.  So it was--that was kind of my first interaction when I felt like--felt like there was some prejudice there.  I really did feel--when I went back and looked at it, I really felt like there was--she had prejudged me before, and it was really early in the class.
Story_ID: 26607
Speaker 1: So you didn't have that kind of a feeling that the school you were bused to?
Speaker 2: I mean I wasn't there long enough to kind of have that.  But I definitely didn't have it in kindergarten or those places where it was mostly predominately black.  It was kind of this first experience where I felt like, whoa, there's something there, you know, is just felt, you know, I didn't understand it.  So, from that class I moved into, I forgot what it was called, kind of a gifted class, you know, where it's kind of a small class, and I tested into that for the second grade year, and third grade year.  Now, here's another interesting story coming up is that in the fourth grade year, I didn't test into it, which was--I guess I took another test and it was relatively borderline, and I remember being moved to a different class.  And I remember it being a tougher class, it was a little bit more homogeneous, so there were more black folks in that class.  And I remember distinctly because I was walking in the class, I had to walk to my seat, and I remember barely being able to walk down the aisle.  I remember it being so much more tight.  So many more students in the class, I remember walking through the aisle, and I remember some of the guys that I had known coming up, who we played sports with, because our neighborhood used to play massive footballs games against each other, so we'd ride our bikes, twenty of us to another neighborhood, and we'd have this big football game, community against community, if you will.  So I knew some of the guys from the other communities just because of that.  But I remember them, you know, just tapping me on the way down the aisle, I remember gosh this feel so much--I remember it being warmer, and I remember the teacher being so much more stricter.  So, and I remember getting in the class, and I was like, gosh, this doesn't feel right.  So I must have come home and said something to my mom, and then she went back to school and said, well, you know, how did he not, you know, the score seemed really tight.  I think she heard that other students who were kind of borderline on the test got the opportunity to retake it.  So, and I don't know how she had heard that, but she went and raised that and then I don't know if it was some intervention from having been in that class, but I retook the test and really did well on it.  So, and then moved back to the class that was more of the gifted class.  It really was a difference.  It was like the atmosphere seemed different in the classes.
Speaker 1: Would you say, given the benefit of the doubt, you didn't get the benefit?
Speaker 2: Neither times.  I mean, I tell you.  I talked to my wife who was raised in Jamaica, and she didn't have, you know, they're very homogeneous there, even though everyone doesn't look the same.  Everyone kind of has a similar attitude.  I really learned a lot going through--my senses became more attuned to what--I remember distinctively when I heard the word prejudice, I must have been in like fourth or fifth grade when someone was--it was actually one of the--we used to bus to Eli Whitney, and there was a neighborhood just adjacent to ours, which was probably less, there was more white than black.  I remember some kid mentioning prejudice and I was like, yeah, I didn't know what it meant at the time.  So I remember he asking me what it meant, and you know, we having that conversation.  But after that day, oh, prejudice is a bad word in fact, he considered it a bad word when he said it.  And he kind of knew it was a bad word, or thought it was a bad word.  But I remember going to class and thinking about the experience that I had, and I felt like, wow, that's probably the prejudice.  So, definitely--those are two distinct memories I had in elementary school where, just as you said, it really felt like I didn't get the benefit of the doubt in either case, and she moved on.  One of the things that I appreciated, and I tell people this all the time.  I appreciate that if there is prejudice, it's open, it's not this, you know, you get further along, you get into--I akin this to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia];  Washington, D.C. they're probably prejudiced but it's really underneath the cover, so you don't really see it.  If there's prejudice in Savannah, when I was growing up, you could see it, it was written across--it was written openly, so you kind of knew where people was coming from, and I thought that to be somewhat refreshing.  And I think people in the South work together despite the fact there was prejudice.  In fact, everyone knew about, no one really liked it, but people appreciated other people based on different things, not just on that one attribute, if you will.
Story_ID: 26608
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a big math guy.  So, all the way through grade school, I was math.  Never had a problem with math, always liked it.  So that was perhaps my biggest subject all the way through high school.
Speaker 1: All right.  Are your parents [Jeneva Frazier Blake and Malworsth Blake] good in math?
Speaker 2: My dad's really good, you know, he's very good at math.  My mom was not so much, and my dad was good at math in a business orient, sort of way, so, he wasn't a person that could help me at calculus in high school, if you will, but he was the person that, I mean, for example, setting--I learned a lot from him from entrepreneurial sense, setting profit margins, sort of keeping track of inventory, accounting practices; always joked that when I was in early high school, he would actually have me do a lot of the accounting for one of the businesses, and it was kind of like I could choose which one, either I was going to be doing it for the service station or for the liquor store, but it was mostly handling that.  At a very young age he had me doing things that were very high responsibility and, you know, really felt high risk, so he put a lot of responsibility on me really early, and from that I learned to kind of take responsibility very seriously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's interesting.  When you think about what you're doing now, do you think you benefitted from being able to see a practical use for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, for sure.
Speaker 1: --Applied use for mathematics?
Speaker 2: Indeed, yeah, and very entrepreneurial.  So we would do things that were really interesting.  So you buy--you get to decide on what products you wanted to buy to stock the convenience part of his service station.  Based on what you saw was being purchased in the past, and you could actually set the prices, based on what you think people would buy them.  I mean, we didn't do a whole lot of market analysis looking in other parts and other places, but you could tell there were parts that people preferred and you could appreciate the fact that you could get a higher profit on one or the other, so just the notion of how profit margin differed.  So like we knew that the profit margin on gas was like seven to ten percent.  You didn't make a lot of money on the actual sale of gas.  But then the profit margin on the groceries in the store could be 50 percent, you know, so you could actually mark it up higher and then to be competitive for things like beer and sodas and stuff that had to be lower.  So, how you arranged your shelves and how you use your space would be based on how you could make profit on certain things.  So I learned a lot about how--and that all actually came back to being a researcher when you start looking at, okay, what area of research would you veer into based on the impact that you make it, you know, how can your research be applied to society, and I've always looked for places where I could actually take something that I've done once and actually use it in a lot of different domains.  And I guess we'll get into that a little bit in looking at research areas, but I think that's one of the things I benefitted a great deal from working in the service station, you know, as a--and actually getting the opportunity to do a lot of things.
Story_ID: 26609
Speaker 1: One of the interesting things I did, when I was in fifth grade, my dad [Malworsth Blake] bought this Apple IIe.  It was one of the early MacIntosh, one of the early Apple machines.  He said--he was so excited, he was like I'm going to use this to do all my accounting, it's going to save me time and all this stuff.  I think he might have got on that thing maybe two months, before it started collecting dust.  And we had a converted garage into a family room, so in fifth grade, I just picked it up and basically just started writing programs on it.  I think by the time that I graduated from--we had a different machine by then, but by the time I was kind of in high school, I had hundreds of programs I'd written on that machine.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you get started with writing programs for an Apple IIe.  Now, this is in the garage.  Now, there's a missing part of this story, you just picked up and just started writing programs?
Speaker 1: I'll tell you the background.  So the Apple IIe was there, and then I, in fifth grade, it had a couple of games on it, you could make these small programs to add things.  The basic--it's interesting, the programming for Windows machine, it has like this DOS, very kind of rudimentary programming language, if you will, as the basic underneath the operating system.  Those early machines, they just had basic programming language.  So the programming language was actually the operating system language.  So if your basic was the first programming language, most people learned it was kind of C, C++, basic, was just the foundation.  So you could write small programs right from the command line on those Apple IIes.  And I wrote a couple of things, I kind of add two numbers together and things like that.  But how I really learned to program on that was that it had a couple of games on it and they were not games like we would know them today.
Speaker 2: What were the games?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Breakout was on there, which was like a bar and a couple of balls, and then it had other--so it had, what was it called, Westward Ho was a game on there.  Most of the games were text-based.  So this was a game that you had to move across the country with a lot of goods.  It was kind of like a simulation, if you will, but you could decide what you were going to bring and what you're going to--it was kind of those societal games.  There was another game on there that was a computer simulation for stocks.  So you can-- another simulation of you had to make choices about what stocks to buy and what particular time, and the simulation would run, and you could actually grow different things.  So, and I played those games, only a couple of those.  So, you know, I got excited about games and particularly about, and these weren't like the games, like I said, this was not WE or Nintendo, or anything like that, these were like kind of text-based games, if you will.  So I subscribed to, I think it was called PC Computing or PC World, it was a magazine.  So back then, if you remember it, they had disk drives that were relatively new.  They used to have a disk drive where the disk was about the size of a sheet of paper and then about the time I got on the machine, the disk was the size of--it was five and a quarter, so it was kind of like this size. (indicating)  So, and those disk couldn't hold--they could hold some programs, but not so much.  So what you would do is, you would order the magazine, and the magazine would come with all the programming language in it, and you'd have to type in the program line by line, and then you'd have the game.  So that's kind of how you got--you could either buy it or you could actually subscribe to a magazine that would actually give you games.
Speaker 2: How did you get acquainted with PC World Magazine, was that at school?
Speaker 1: I guess so.  I'm trying to think when--I started subscribing to that in fifth grade.  My fifth grade was early for computers back then.  Now, it's not so early.  But I think I must have seen it somewhere.  There was another buddy of mine in the neighborhood who also--I actually had Apple IIe and he had the Radio Shack version, it was a Tandy TR80, he had the other computer.  So he and I would go back and forth about how you would do it.  Probably some interaction there, we discovered the magazine.  And once I got that, I think how I started learning the programs, I'd write this coding in, I knew nothing about what was going on, and then what would happen would be over time, it was all basic language, over time I'd begin to pick up what things mean.  And the reason why you'd have to is because you're going to make mistakes when you type it in, and it wouldn't work, and you had to try to figure out--you could go line by line, but sometimes the program would be written wrong in the--so you would receive it wrong, so you couldn't get it to work because there was some error in it, so over time you would begin to realize, okay, I think I've caught all the errors, so it must be something else.  And you begin to see some of the things that are breaking down, and you begin to read it a little closer, so it's almost--I think that's how people can pick up other languages, too.  They watch TV and they look at text and over time, if you look at the subscripts that show on TV over time, you can kind of pick up what the language means because you're kind of comparing what happens to what's being said.  And that was very similar for me, how I learned BASIC language basically through that, and over time, I just got better and started doing that.
Story_ID: 26610
Speaker 1: And then in sixth grade, my mom [Jeneva Frazier Blake], again, realized that I had picked up a desire to work with computers and in between my sixth and seventh grade year, she sent me to a two week summer camp to officially learn BASIC programming, which was a breeze, because by that time, I had learned most of it by myself.
Speaker 2: Now, this is remarkable.  This is a great thing, you know, that your mother picked up on that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.   And what's interesting about that is that you don't--when you're a kid and you're going through life, you don't think about that as being, you don't think about that as being they have picked up on it, you just think it's randomly done.  You think maybe you suggested it.  But I'm sure I didn't suggest it.  So I actually went to a camp, like I said, I went to a camp that was--
Speaker 2: So this is 1960, I mean '81' (1981), '82' (1982)?
Speaker 1: --Yeah, it would have been, yeah, yeah, it had to be somewhere--I was sixth grade--
Speaker 2: You were like eleven?
Speaker 1: --Eleven, yeah, yeah, so that would be '81' (1981), '82' (1982).  And, again, the camp was really basic when I got there. Like I was doing things--since I was writing the games, I was doing things with graphics in basic.  And they were only doing things like add, subtract, print to the screen.  So, I mean, it was great, the goal, but there were some things that I'd been doing in writing--
Speaker 2: You were ahead of the class?
Speaker 1: --I remember going.  I was like all this is a good deal because it--but I remember that--
Speaker 2: Who sponsored the camp, I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: --It was, I want to say it was Bartlett Middle School, which was a--
Speaker 2: So it was a local school?
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  And it was on the south--
Speaker 2: Like a summer program, you go for two weeks?
Speaker 1: --Yeah, yep.  And they would drop me off, and I'd stay all day, and they'd come back.  So it was on the south side of town.  So, we stayed on the west side of town, initially, which was really tough tide, and then the east side was a merging side, it was closer to the beach, and it was new, but it was still sort of mixed.  The south side traditionally, was a part of town that was mostly white.  So whenever I did something related to technology or related to sort of the gifted programs, it was always on the south side of town, if it wasn't on one of the college campuses.  So I did that.  I remember doing that.  It was my first experience in computers.  The very next year I did a summer camp.  This was when I was in--
Speaker 2: Seventh grade, right?
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  No, I take that back.  So seventh and eighth grade, did I do any computers?  I don't think I did any computers in school--in middle school.  I think it was still most of what I was doing at home with various magazines and with Apple IIe.  But then my first year of high school, I actually did a computer simulation camp at Savannah State College the summer between ninth and tenth grade year.  And it really wasn't--it was a little bit disappointing because it wasn't programming.  They actually taught you about doing, again, one of these marketing simulations where you had to make decisions about what you buy and what you sell, and I remember distinctively winning at first place.  And people couldn't understand, they ran a simulation with me and various groups multiple times, and every time I took it, I would come out first, making decisions about what to buy and what to sell and when.  And that was one of those things where I knew it because, for one, we had a game that was sort of similar to that game that was on my first Apple IIe and then that's what I did with my dad.  By that point I was doing full inventory for one of his businesses, so I kind of, you know, really, that put a lot of--I had a tremendous background by the time that occurred.  But it didn't happen with a traditional computer programming type of courses that I had before, you know, the one that I had in sixth grade.
Story_ID: 26611
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit to the tail end of, I guess, middle school, was there a favorite teacher or mentor in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In sixth grade, it comes back again, there were two Mrs. Jones.  I guess Jones is a common name.  Mrs. Jones was the gifted class sixth grade teacher.  And at that point, gosh, I think, in my sixth grade, I was president of student council.  I remember giving my first speech in sixth grade, and someone teaching me how you had to greet people by their seniority. I remember learning that in sixth grade.  And even today I look at it now, we go to, you know, I give talks and even today still you kind of recognize a person as part of your speech and I remember I see that, obviously, I've been trained to do that since that point.  But I trace that as the first time that someone sitting me down and said you need to recognize this person and this person and this person and this person, how you start your greeting.  So, being president of the student council, student government, or whatever it was called then, in sixth grade, I was also in the gifted sixth grade class, Miss Charlene Jones.  I've got to look her up sometime, but she had a class, and in the class me and one of my close buddies, actually had a social science fair project about paper-making.  And we got first in the city, first in the region and then I think we got third place in the state.  So we actually went to social science fairs in Savannah, and then a social science fair that was somewhere outside of Savannah.  And then we went to a social science fair in Atlanta, Georgia.  And I remember travelling with the teacher for that social science fair.  But I remember that class being very distinct.  But she was such a--you know, I had teachers before, but I had never--I hadn't had very many teachers that were black and young and the way she innovated in the class, I remember that distinctively having opportunities there I hadn't had before.  She pushed me very hard so, by sixth grade, I don't think I was making any "Bs" or anything like that.  I remember getting prompted very significantly in that class.  And I didn't appreciate it at first, but then later I looked back, I'm like "wow" she's probably the only person that pushed me through that school.  So going into middle school, I think I got pushed again.  I could see her face the name is not coming to me in English, where I'd never been challenged much in English.  But I had an English course, it was where I begin to realize that, you know, I wasn't as good as I thought I was in English.  So seventh and eighth grade again, I did really well.  I don't think I--actually I remember distinctively, I actually got some "Bs" in eighth grade.  I remember I got--I'll tell you, this is the type of dad my dad was.  I can see the situation already.  I got all "As" the first quarter and then I got five "As" and two "Bs" the second quarter and then, I guess they weren't quarters but periods, there were six periods.  And then the next period I got, I think it was like, maybe it was six "As" and a "B" and then five "As" two "Bs", and I fell off the highest honor roll or something like that.  However, in my mind, I'm like well, you know, I'm still the person I've always been.  But I remember my dad, he was actually changing a tire at the service station one day, and he sat down and he said, "oh, how did you do?"  Apparently, he had talked to my mom, so he already knew how I had done.  And I said I had made the honor roll and it wasn't the high honor roll that time.  So, he said, well, it wasn't the high honor roll?  And I was thinking in my head, I'm like--and I was, you know, friends and sister and cousins, you know, I've always had, aside from other cousin who was actually really good as I, I always had very high grade.  So I remember him prompting me saying, you know, if that's the best you can do, you know, it was very much like, it almost felt like I was being admonished for it, and I felt--and I remember feeling just irritated, I'm like "wow" I always make good grades, and you know, a couple "Bs" here and there, you know, I'm really good at what I do, and I remember taking it to heart.  I was like "wow".  And I remember trying to use comparative language to say, well, you know, my sister never does this, my cousin never do this, and he really brought home, it's not about them, it's more about you.  So I remember taking, I don't know if it was out of spite, I didn't get any more "Bs" after that point.  But I remember that's the type of person he was.  He would push you and push you and push you.  So I remember that in middle school.  In middle school the same way, I actually had--I think I was president of the Beta Club at the same time I was president of the student council, together, and getting sort of the overall award for all the courses there.  I think that's when my parents realized, they're like, okay, we're going to send you to something different.
Story_ID: 26612
Speaker 1: So that's when I went to Catholic--I never had a behavior problem but the best school, and perhaps still the best school in Savannah [Georgia] was Benedictine Military Academy, which was kind of a Catholic military school. You didn't sleep there, but it's kind of like private school.  And I really got challenged that first year there.  And it was again, this was when I moved from being sort of predominantly black, even though it was integrated to being less than ten percent black in a very small place.  And there was amongst a lot of those students who were most affluent in the city, so it really became--that was more of a challenge then.  That's when I began to really learn to study, because I really didn't feel challenged before that point, I don't think.
Speaker 2: --Okay.  So these are the Benedictines, one of the military schools?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Sounds like a very serious place?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was.  It was very--you learned very early.  I never (unclear) to military school like you see on TV, but it really was.  You got there really early, it was a no nonsense place, and it's when I learned the phrase, collective liability.  Because I remember specifically, we knew this to be the case, I remember--because you learn through that if your entire company or squad got in trouble, everyone got in trouble, it wasn't isolated to one person, so everyone's responsibility to make the group better.  So I remember in our--it's probably my junior year, there's a food fight in the cafeteria and we couldn't, you know, there were like seven or eight black guys.  It was all guys, too, all men's school.  So there were seven or eight black guys in there.  We were like, and as the food fight started, and we were like, no, we don't want any of this, so all seven of us walked out.
Speaker 2: That's something, this is a cultural thing.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: This is a cultural thing.  I experienced this in school.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: And I talked to other black people, black people don't fight with food.
Speaker 1: No, not at all.
Speaker 2: Not even as teenager, we don't do it.
Speaker 1: No, it's too much respect for food, I think, maybe so.  We walked out and they continued.  I mean, it just got crazy, they got fruit punch all up on the ceilings, I was like--so we couldn't understand why they would even go--why they were going to even do that because they knew we were going to get in big trouble for that, and everybody get in trouble.  So we walked out and then we knew it was going to be, you know, and it's not like they were going to say, you fought, you fought, you fought.  The entire--everyone that was on that lunch was going to get in trouble and we knew that.  So we hoped that us walking out and not participating, that we can go back later to the principal and say look, none of the black guys participated in this.  That didn't work at all.  So we all got in trouble still.  But I remember that being that collective liability thing and they explaining it to us, so, I mean, and that school was the type of thing, I mean, that was-- that was running with rifles on top of your head that was running around the track doing sit ups and pushups after every lap; that's the type of punishment place it was for things like that.  So, yeah, it definitely was a different type of place, but you did learn.  Most of the things my parents have encouraged me to do, it really worked into an area where you learn responsibility.  There after your first year, you got responsibility for squad, after your second year, you became responsible for like a company, your third year, you'd become responsible for, no, the third year, kind of a platoon, and then a company and then you may be like a battalion commander, and then you get responsible for other students that were younger than you were.  So it was definitely--I did appreciate the military school, because you begin the, you begin to take upon, even as a dean now, I feel like I have to be--take responsibility for all the things that happen within the grad school, even if there's something that wasn't done directly by me.  So definitely, I think that was a building that was a very, sort of a foundational formative place in my development was just kind of being at that school, and then learning.  You know, I learned a lot of things.  I remember my first year [at Benedictine Military Academy, Savannah, Georgia], there was no phrase for Ebonics back then, I think, this was a little ahead of Ebonics.  But one of the things that, a cultural thing, in Savannah is that if you say "ask" you say "axe", axe them this, axe them that, axe them this, so I remember the white kids in class was calling me the axe man, and I didn't realize I had not been in the school yet that anyone has ever told me that I was saying "axe" instead of "ask".  And so I can't tell you how difficult it is to re-learn how to say a word or two that's come natural.  I mean, first you begin to realize when you're saying it then you begin to slow down saying it and say the right thing.  So it takes a long time before you can just naturally say "ask" instead of "axe".  So I learned to say that.  I can remember them saying, for whatever reason I was pronouncing "sword", "sword" with the "w" being pronounced.  So I remember in my first year, they were like, "oh, it's the "axe" man, the "sword" man.  So, that was--I don't know if it was--back then I didn't like it because I felt like I was singled out, and I was probably one of the few that didn't come through--I came to private school from public school, and I don't know if that's the blame, but I didn't get--there was no one in any of the schools I had been before that told me that the way I was saying things is wrong.  It was the--how I was identified in high school that made me begin to start trying to correct those things because how, you know how tough it is.  You're all boys, so you're going to get--they're going to be riding you every day.  So I got better at that, but I look back it, I'm like "wow" I'm so thankful that I had that time where you know, I can't tell you how many, I still don't--if you saw me and my dad, there were years we looked exactly alike.  My dad looks, relatively young, still.  So we look exactly alike, but he still has sort of a Geechee accent, so if you put us side by side, we look alike, but don't quite sound alike, and I think a lot of that is because going through high school and just, you know, I've never had the southern accent, but definitely had to learn to speak, at least be able to speak multiple languages, can slip back into more of the dialect from growing up, but definitely, you begin to realize that people are paying attention to how you say things.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting point.
Story_ID: 26613
Speaker 1: You said there were other--there were like four or five other black students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were about--I think our graduating class was close to 120 and we had about 10, 10 students.  There were some that started and didn't finish and some that actually transferred in, so I think we were anywhere between eight and 10 most of the time I was there.  My best friend--two of my best friends were there.  So, Ebbon Borne, he's actually--and we actually had--it turned out we had the--it was told to us that we were the strongest class of black students they'd had for many years and many years after that, too.  Because if I ran down the list who was there, my best friend, he actually became a doctor, in fact, he's practiced here in Miami, in Fort Lauderdale for a long time.  In fact, I'm going to see him this coming Friday.  My wife and I are going to stay--he's in Atlanta now, so.  He became a doctor, he went to Emory.  I went to Jordan Tech he went to Emory so we stayed really good friends through college, because those institutions are really close.  My other good friend, he went to Xavier [University] and got a Pharm.D., and he's practicing in North Carolina.  There was another friend there who actually became a lawyer.  There was one other--two other guys that started businesses, one became a police officer and then two others I can't say haven't done as well.  But we had probably the  highest concentration that year, and I don't think it was just black students, but concentration of black students that went on to get sort of M.D., Ph.D., Pharm.D., types of degrees, if you will, J.D.s.  So it's a really strong class.
Speaker 1: Was there any black instructors there?
Speaker 2: There was one, Sgt. Major Harrington.  He was the only--and he was actually sort of an assistant military instructor, but he was the only black instructor we had there.  Most of your courses were taught by Fathers.   So there was most Latin, religious studies, physics.  Math was taught by a layperson, so they did have women teachers that came, and so I think two of my math courses were taught by two different teachers who were brought in.  Political science by a brother, World History was taught by one of the coaches, who was a male teacher, so, but all white and they were either a priest or a layperson or--and I don't think Sgt. Major Harrington taught a course, he was more of an assistant instructor, and he actually was the--he did a lot of the supplies and such for the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  So, yet, not a lot of influenced there.  I had black teachers before in elementary and middle school, but not so much--and that was the first time I didn't have black teachers and then it kind of continued, no black teachers.  There were a couple of black professors at Georgia Tech, (unclear), maybe one, but my schedule just didn't allow me to kind of interact with the black teachers.  I think I didn't have any.  There were some that I was really trying to get, I think Professor Yancy is there, she became later a president at one of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but we just trying to get in the schedule, because I remember everyone was trying to get those classes so it's difficult to get them.  Same thing, it got even worse, by the time you--once you start doing a graduate degrees in computer science then even seeing black people becomes a falloff over time, so, definitely.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a favorite teacher at Benedictine?
Speaker 2: At Benedictine, probably. Let's see, I think it was my math teacher.  I'm trying to think, what was her name?  Wow, the name's not coming to me, I can see her face, but my algebra teacher probably was my favorite teacher there.  I must have finished like 110 average, but it was--I learned a lot in that class.  I did better in geometry, but the algebra teacher was--trigonometry teacher was--I did appreciate her the most, I think, there.  And then Father Anthony taught both Latin and computer science, so in high school, I got back into computer science.  I took two years of basic and two years of Pascal, and Father Anthony taught all those courses, and I took two years of Latin.  So I guess Father Anthony would have to be a--he was my home teacher.  He definitely was one--another teacher that stuck out to me; eclectic, very eclectic, but interesting teaching style.  I think it related to me very well.  His teaching style was very, sort of hands-off, it was very.  It was kind of peripheral to learning, almost as if he--it probably has rubbed off on how I teach.  He kind of inspired you to be there and gave you the right resources, but he wasn't the type person that you, he wasn't the best as far as teaching the material, but he was really good at telling why it was important and getting you inspired into learning it and then having the right resources available for you.
Story_ID: 26614
Speaker 1: Okay.  Benedictine [Military Academy, Savannah, Georgia].  What's your assessment of how they prepared you for computer science at that time?
Speaker 2: Really good.  I mean, I had a very strong background in computer science coming out.  In fact, there they told me that I actually had--I think Father Davros (ph.) was the one that told me that, you know, you could do computer science now, but engineering would be more lucrative.  So I went to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] in electrical engineering although I loved computer science because they said you could be a computer scientist as an electrical engineer and then you'd be qualified for more things.  So engineering was just a more respected field at the time.  Since then computer science has come on really strong.  I thought I was very well prepared for computer science, and the math made me very strong for engineering.  And again, I think that's probably one of the more--going to Georgia Tech in electrical engineering was a lot stronger.
Story_ID: 26615
Speaker 1: Was there anything special about graduation?  Did you graduate with any special honors from Benedictine [Military Academy, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, not so much.  I think I graduated either seventh or eighth in the class.  And they actually have a--so ten or twelve of us were named outstanding seniors, so I did get--I was honored and recognized as one of the outstanding seniors there and just various things.  I didn't make--I wasn't the valedictorian or salutatorian, but mostly just, you know, interaction with different recognitions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is this 1988?
Speaker 2: Eighty-nine (1989), yeah.  One thing they did well there, I always say, that they gave me access to things like the first year I was in this computer simulation camp, the first summer.  The next summer I went to Georgia Boys State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Boys State, now that's a program where it's a governmental type (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  I think I ended up being, I want to say, I ended up being a mayor there, but not a senator.  I think I was in the city council and then became a mayor.  The people who went further would be, you know, become a senator and then go to, I think there's a Boys Nation or so.  So, yeah, that was a really good experience.  But I don't know if I would have gotten in any other places.  I didn't know very many people from Savannah at the time that was there, once I got there.  The third year I went to Model UN [United Nations] and I represented Libya.  So that's when you become a representative of a country.
Speaker 1: --So you represent Muammar Gadhafi [Libyan revolutionary and politician]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Indeed.  It was pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you have to study his policies and his concerns?
Speaker 2: You know, at that point, you pretty much look at what your country produces and the population and I don't think I studied to the depth of the various political things at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they didn't expect you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, and this was a little bit ahead--I think this was still about five or six years ahead of that whole conflict.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: At least to the extent where it became very highly national.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the plane being shot down over Lockerbie, Scotland was big news.  That was close.  I think you got out just before the incident happened.
Speaker 2: This would have been '86' (1986) would have been the time I went to Boise State or '87' (1987) or '88' (1988), somewhere around than, '87' (1987).
Speaker 1: Just before that had happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I know George Bush I, was president when that happened, Herbert Walker was--
Speaker 2: Right.  So that, you know, that actually was in a number of the science, the summer science--they had other things that ran concurrent with school year, so it was like a science thing that happened after school and on Saturdays.  I was involved with that, so any number of things.  The school worked really hard.  I always said it was coming out that year, I think I was more the--I think I had the highest GPA [grade point average] of the black students, so, which interestingly enough afforded me a lot of opportunities, I think, for many of these things because I was one of the first names that would always come up.
Story_ID: 26616
Speaker 1: Now what about sports, did you play any sports?
Speaker 2: I did.  I actually played--I got into sports relatively late, at least organized sports.  I didn't mention this, but I actually played mighty might--I played Wee Wee, Pee Wee, Mighty Might Midget football in third, fourth, fifth, I guess, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh grade.  But then I stopped playing after my seventh grade, because I was a late bloomer.  So I stayed--I mean I'm about six feet tall now, but I must have stayed five foot two or something forever.
Speaker 1: Because you were lighter weight, much smaller.
Speaker 2: Around seventh grade is when I realized that I wasn't growing as fast as the other kids were.  That's when the hitting start hurting.  So I was always fast; I've always been really fast, but not a--but just didn't get bigger, and I think I must have grew almost a full eight or nine inches the summer between my sophomore year in high school and my junior year.  I remember distinctly because nothing fit, I had no outfits that fit.  At the beginning of summer everything fit, end of summer, nothing fit.  And that's when I got more interested.  I ran track my first year freshman in high school, and I played in the ban which is one of the pictures I'll show, but then I lost interest in the contact sports.  I never really--I played--I had fun with pickup basketball, but I never really got serious about basketball.  My junior year, I'd gotten bigger, so I wanted to play sports again, so, at that point though I missed all of the--I think I played spring football one year, and I tried out for the basket ball team but wasn't quite good enough for it, and I continued to run track.  I think I ran track my freshman year, no, sophomore year, didn't run my junior year, because I was doing other things, and then I ran my senior year.  And then I considered running track walk-on at Georgia Tech, but then I got into a fraternity and I decided not to.  And then after I graduated, I started running again.
Speaker 1: What was your event?
Speaker 2: I ran the 400.  So in high school, I probably ran, I think my best time in high school was sort of around the 50 flat or somewhere in the 50.
Speaker 1: Running 400 is--sorts people out.  You talk about your father teaching you to be a finisher, it takes a finisher to finish the 400, the discipline to sprint that long.
Speaker 2: It's a gut check.  So, yeah, I ran--my best friend was a little better than me at it.  So I ran that for.  My senior year is when I started running a lot better, I got a lot stronger, ran a lot of relays.  I always thought that better race was 200, but they had a--they had a 200 specialist that came in junior Olympian, you know, it was hard to really get any time in the 200 because he was really good.  I think he was better at it.  Never got a chance to train in that one, but I always felt like I was--even running the 400, I was a better 200 runner than the 400, so I think, I want to say that I probably missed my calling there, but.  And then I ran the initial walk-on at Georgia Tech, and then again, I pledged fraternity my first year, so, by the time I got into that I said, well, do I really want to run and then my last year at Georgia Tech, I ran in a couple of intramural track meets running in a quarter.  I think I broke 50 with no training.  Then I realized, okay, wow, I may have missed it because I think I ran like a 49/80 or something without, I mean, it's  literally--we played intramural football and worked out and all that stuff, I hadn't had any you know consistent running training, if you will.  So after I graduated, I started running amateur as an employee for Lockheed, and they were sponsoring me, so I was running at the corporate meets, I ran a lot of all comer meets and such, open meets.  And I got my time down, I think I was running somewhere open 48/2, 48/3.  So I continued to run all the way through.  That was one of the things that I continued to do.  Even now I run but not competition.  But I ran the corporate thing probably for from the time I graduated all the way until 2001, 2002, in that area, so, yeah.  That's the closest I've had to sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I have a son who's fast, he's really fast, so, definitely, I will get to live vicariously through him.
Story_ID: 26617
Speaker 1: And you said earlier too something that's really important.  Your father is really a hard worker, but your mother was at every event.
Speaker 2: Every event, yeah.  My dad, not so much.  He worked really hard, and being a business owner, it's very difficult, because everything you--and I think that's probably why I never really wanted to be an entrepreneur at heart, because you are the last person to, you know, you got to keep, at least, not at retail, I never really wanted to be in retail, because I think your best times are when most people get the most family time.  So I always felt like, well, do I want to--I kind of wanted to be the person that's at most of my son's events.  And arguably I work hard now so I get to attend a lot of events, but it's still not at the level that I like.  But I think I'm kind of in between now, between, whereas my mom was at every event.  I think my dad might have made a couple of track meets.  He's the person, though that took me out to the football field, so he got me into the football at a younger age, but over the years, like I said, I got, distinctively smaller than my peers, and then I don't think he was as supportive near the end so I lost the desire for a period of time there, and I was obviously doing well academically, so I didn't have the--not that it's mutually exclusive, but I just put more emphasis on the academic side for a time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26618
Speaker 1: Well, graduation, 1989.  So, how did you decide on Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]?  What kind of counseling did you have at Benedictine [Military Academy, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Counseling.  I didn't really get great college counseling, I don't think.  A lot of my college counseling--I served on the missions committee at Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] for many years, I see files coming in, and I can see things that have been highly counseled applications.  I didn't really get anyone that told me how to apply.  I remember applying, basically, getting a stack of envelopes from colleges in my bedroom, making a decision and applying right there in my bedroom.  My parents had never been to college, so I didn't have a whole lot of support from that perspective from people who knew specific from inside what you had to write and what's the best way to say things.  So, I think my interactions been mostly, (unclear) just being around people who knew the inner workings.  So the second-hand knowledge I gained from there.  So, yeah, I think--I'll tell you what really worked out was that they did point out things I wouldn't have known before.  So I didn't mention this, but I forgot.  Between my, I want to say it's between my junior and senior year, summer, I went to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].  They had a two-week minority introduction to engineering [MITE] which, if you find engineering graduates in HistoryMakers, you're going to find that a lot of engineers went through a program like this.  Georgia Tech had one, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had one, Purdue had one, it was kind of a minority introduction in engineering.  I remember the person that ran it, her name was Marion Blalock at Purdue at the time.  And it was a great program.  In fact it's probably a dozen kids who were in it with me now I still know today who ended up going to Georgia Tech or Purdue or MIT, any of these schools that were in that two-week program.  But that was very telling for me.  For one I learned a lot about different fields of engineering, I learned about which schools were good for engineering and as a result I ended up applying to Purdue, I applied to Georgia Tech, I applied to MIT, I applied to Mercer University [Macon, Georgia], which interestingly enough, where I got my master's, and I applied to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I think, those were the five and got into everywhere.  Actually MIT, I didn't get into initially, I was on a waiting list.  I found out like in the summer, but at that point, I had already decided.  Really it was kind of between Purdue and Georgia Tech, most of the time, and I figured if I got into MIT, I'd have to think about it in a sense.  But after being at Purdue, that's the only reason I wanted to go to Purdue is because I had been there for the summer and I enjoyed it and had a good time, but that experience probably wouldn't have been the same going there as an undergraduate.  But what had happened was Purdue gave me a scholarship that made it equal for me to go to either Georgia Tech or Purdue at the same price.  It was so cheap back then, I think I paid, I think the both room and board was $5000 a year for--so you get your entire degree for $20,000.  Now you can't even get one year for that same amount.  So I decided to go to Georgia Tech because it was close, I had relatives, my dad's closest brother lives in Atlanta and then Georgia Tech I had visited and I liked it, so definitely that's the decision point.  It turned out to be a really good decision.  I think Georgia Tech is a phenomenal school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26619
Speaker 1: So you joined Omega Psi Phi [fraternity]?
Speaker 2: I did.  My first year, I actually got--it was all very new to me, going to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], being away from home, and then I had no experience for fraternities aside from seeing the movie 'School Daze'.  So School Daze I saw, and I actually, was surprised they put this on film, but I actually considered being Alpha early, but then I met a lot of the fraternity brothers from Omega Psi Phi while I was there, and you know, it suited me so much better because, you know, the mix of actually having sort of this strong drive, and they're very charismatic, but yet the brothers on that campus were the leaders on campus at the time, so it was a really good mix of two things.  So I joined them my first year.  My first year went really well, I had reasonable grades, but still lower than my high school grades.  My second year was a really difficult year, so it took my third year to actually sit down and get some good counseling about time management then I started doing well again.  But I did have a really rough time in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Was it the social (unclear) that kind of took a (unclear), you know, because here you're away from home for the first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the first year went fine.  I think the year--the semester that I pledged I even had really good grades.  But I think maybe--so you carry over a lot of knowledge in your first year for things that you learned in high school, so you still have a little bit of a foundation that's there for you in your first year.  And in your second year, it becomes new knowledge in a sense, so you have to begin to really apply yourself.  So I agree, I think time management was a big piece of it, but I also think that everything was relatively new.  So a combination of joining a fraternity and being active socially and then I engaged in a lot of things.  Like I became a resident assistant [RA] pretty much in my--just after my first year, and I stayed an RA for the entire time.  So that was there, I was undergraduate research assistant, and I worked in various part time positions there, so I kind of--a combination of all that, being a fraternity and then taking new classes.  It took me a while to understand.  I was this person that would study from midnight to 2:00 a.m. every day, and that was probably not the most effective way to study.  So, I think over time I began to realize how to prioritize things and how to set aside time and how to have--how to make the time that I was studying most effective.  And then, like I said, by the third and fourth year, I kind of gotten into a rhythm and started making much better grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26620
Speaker 1: Were there any special instructors or mentors at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Let's see, who would be--the chapter advisor for our fraternity, Tom Parker, he was the person, Tom Parker, he was actually the person that I sat down with when I thought things were not going well.  And back then you had those Franklin planners, like right now everything is electronic.  Back then you had like a paper planner you can map out every day, you put in priorities, so pretty much I learned how to set A and B priorities and map out each of my days.  That was very helpful.  I think I was managing my time before, but it was very much without documenting anything and that made it, I think it made it difficult to keep to those timings because I liked so many different things.  So he was a strong mentor there. I'm trying to think if there was any particular--college is interesting, you have a teacher just once, many times, so--I don't know if there was any particular one, see if there was any class that stuck out to me that was better than the other.  I did take a--I did have a programming class.  Russell Shackelford is well known around the country for computer science education.  But he taught a Pascal course there.  That course was really tough, but later I took a Fortran course that I thought was really good.  So the programming courses again, I shined in computer science throughout the whole time, so even though computing was sort of a concentration underneath electric engineering, I did well in all those courses.  In fact, I did undergraduate research--two different undergraduate research projects, one was in electrician engineering with Professor David Schimmel, and that was actually using programmable chips, and it was kind of more of a logic design type of undergraduate research.  I did that for about a year and a half.
Story_ID: 26621
Speaker 1: But then, this was probably more interesting one, I did a semester long research assistantship with one of my computer science professors, and effectively what I was doing was I took something I had learned in one of my dad's service stations and developed an application.  So when--in service stations, I guess the [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency [EPA] requires you to monitor the levels of your tanks at least several times during the week, because if your tanks ever were to get damaged, they want you to find out before the gas leaks out and gets into the water basin.  So, every two days or every day, you'd have to stick a long--if you've ever been to stations with these long poles, they stick them in the ground and they take in the level and they're measuring it, then they're taking a reading from the tank to see how much gas they've actually pumped out and they're actually corresponding them together to say, well, okay, did we sell as much as we received.  So that was pretty much a manual process, you had a sheet of paper to help you calculate it.
Speaker 2: So that's to see if the gas has leaked out, I mean, there is some kind of a--
Speaker 1: Yes, so you keep track of what you received that week, you stick the tank so you can get exactly the level of gases in the tank and then you take a reading from the pump to see how much, because it has a running cumulative total, so you just take--you subtract from the last time, you can kind of see how much you actually pumped out.  Now, again, I was like--we had developed several iterations of paper forms so that you could fill out, it required you to calculate the inch to the amount in the tank total, it required you to keep track of the last time you took a meter from the pump.  There were different size sticks and that would actually have different readings with regards to inch to amount in the tank.  So the software I wrote actually took in kind of all that stuff, you went out, you stuck the tank, put in the total, see which stick you used, you go to the pump and get the basic reading, say which pump you used and it actually do the entire calculations and print it out and save it, so the next time you do it, you don't have to keep track of anything.  So I wrote that software for my dad in Pascal I remember, and then I did it the same time I was taking--getting credit, so I didn't get paid for it, I got credit for it also as a research assistant.  And then later I ended up presenting it to some of the members of the Georgia Association Petroleum Retailers and other stations wanted to use it.  Now entrepreneur as I was, I did not take advantage of that, because we talked about, and it's called GAPR, Georgia Association of Petroleum Retailers, we talked about presenting the same software at the NAPR, which is the National Association of Petroleum Retailers.  And you know, you're in college and fraternity and all these things and you didn't realize what you're sitting on.  Years later I was like, "wow" I had software that could be tremendously marketable, and I had service station owners telling me they would use it.  So I went back and it turns out, I don't know if you know the service and convenience store, Circle K.  I remember when I moved to Florida for my first job, I went back as--well, let me check and see, I have the software, I could actually do it.  It turned out Circle K had already done something like that for all their (unclear), I must have missed the boat.  So, yeah, that's one place where I actually--what I learned in Georgia Tech interactive with what I had known in my childhood, you know, as far as working in service stations, and on computing, it was kind of interesting combination at time, because it brought together a lot of things I learned over the years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  These opportunities speak, and you were in a perfect position to take advantage--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --Because you weren't working for a corporation, that would have been your work, if you had patented it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my dad was very happy with the software, using it.  He'd have me come and tweak it and do things.  But you know it just didn't occur to us to go any further.  I mean, we did speak and he wanted to use it mostly--he was going to share it mostly with his colleagues, you know as a thing, but it would have taken a little work, because it was customized to our configuration station, the number of tanks we had and the number of pumps that we had and such.  So it had to be configured a little bit differently so it could be--it had to be rewritten so it could be configured by each of the stations, based on their configurations.  But that was minor compared to the work that went in it, and at those times it wasn't so easy to program like Pascal, it wasn't very easy to program how you print, so you had the old dot matrix printers; they didn't have a great interface, so you actually had the--when you printed things you had to pretty much format it yourself.  So you didn't get the benefit of--I mean, you couldn't have a Microsoft, Word or office type of formatting that immediately printed, when you're printing for your program, you had to say, okay, you had to put in the tab spots and everything, so that part of it was, you know, it's pretty indepth programming, you know, those sort of things.  These days you can do that sort of thing.  You know if I left here today, I could probably go home and tomorrow have something similar, because it just the high level programming that we use is so powerful.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So those are your two undergraduate projects?
Speaker 1: Right, that were kind of related.  I think the electro engineering base was the--it was a far stretch.  I worked on it, but I never really got the same level of understanding that I've always had in computer science and computer programming.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26622
Speaker 1: But I finished there [at Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech), Atlanta, Georgia] with a electrical engineering degree.  I couldn't get a minor in computer science, but I had effectively concentration because I had taken, I think, five or six different classes in the area.  As an undergraduate, the first couple of years I worked in mentoring.  So I went to Purdue's [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] minority introduction to engineering [MITE], but I actually was a counselor for the minority introduction to engineering as a sophomore and then moving into--the other years I interned with General Electric Aerospace the summer of junior year as well as the--well summer of my sophomore to junior year as well as my junior to senior year.
Speaker 2: Okay, now you graduated in '94' (1994)?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you graduated as a member of the ANAK Society [honor society and secret society]?
Speaker 1: ANAK Society.  Right.
Speaker 2: ANAK Society.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a cool honor.  So ANAK is a secret society.  Many universities have these.  Like the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] has Iron Arrow Society.  It's really a combination of scholastic accomplishments as well as leadership.  And they only have a certain number.  So Georgia Tech had the ANAK Society which only tapped twelve students per graduating year.  So they might graduate maybe a couple of thousand students each year, but of the students that started in 1989, there's only twelve that were chosen to be in that society.  So, yeah, it's a really good society.  You can't tell people you're in it while you're there, but you can tell people you're in it once you graduated.  And they are the society that started the year book, they were active in the integration of Georgia Tech both for bringing the females as well as bringing in African Americans.  It's just like one of those societies well integrated that pretty much does things behind the scenes.  And you don't take credit for any of the things they do until later.  So effectively those are the--it's just, you know, student leaders on campus, faculty on campus that interact, the administrators (unclear) they kind of come together to address some of the problems that are challenges in the school.  So that was it.  That was a very neat.  They call it the highest honor that you can have, and it's very selective.  So you have to generally be in good standing with the school and also be well known across many different departments of different student organizations to be someone whose been actively trying to make the environment better at Georgia Tech.
Speaker 2: So they recruit from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you don't even see it coming.  You can't apply for it.  One day you'll get--the way they do it is funny, I got a letter saying that I was nominated for an award and that I needed to come in and go through a top ten humorous list of things that are good about Georgia Tech.  So you go there and you think it's--you're like, you can't understand it, because it's not serious, they want you to make up jokes, basically.  So you get there and it's you and another five or six people doing this kind of like a joking thing and in the end they tell you that you've been tapped for ANAK Society.  At the time I wasn't sure what it was, and then, "oh, wow."  And you don't see it coming, it's like a group of people talking about who would be the next best person in ANAK.  And then I became the vice president of the organization, handling membership, while I was in it.  So, yes, it was one of those--Georgia Tech goes deep to my heart, I really got ingrained in that community.  Even today I still stay active in their sort of alumni development board.
Story_ID: 26623
Speaker 1: All right.  Upon graduation were you going right into grad [graduate] school?
Speaker 2: Now, this is a sort of interesting story. I interned with GE [General Electric] Aerospace two summers, summer between my junior and senior and the summer between my sophomore and junior year.  So then my second summer I got offered a job to start in their engineering, Edison Engineering Program, which is the rotational program--two-year rotational program where you actually--you go through six months rotations, you take six hours of credited courses in the plant and then you go a third year where you finish you master's at the university, on site, at the university.  So between the time I accepted an offer to go to General Electrical Aerospace in October, before I graduated, and the time I actually went there, the summer of next year, they got bought twice.  So GE Aerospace got bought by Martin Marietta and then Martin Marietta got bought by Lockheed, so it was Lockheed Martin.  So Lockheed Martin didn't exist when I accepted my offer for General Electric Aerospace, and they changed the program.  So I actually was a member of both the Edison program, as well as the Lockheed Martin Engineering Leadership Development Program, which they developed so that they can keep all the people who were already currently in the system for Edison Engineering and the other related programs.  So that program, by nature, had us go into the plants and also--you pretty much worked--it was rotational, so it really fit into my nature.  I had a desire to learn a lot of different things, so each six months, I could learn something a little bit different.  I did that program--and also come graduation, I was a GEM [National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering and Science] Fellow, so I got--I received a scholarship to do GEM, which would have sent me to grad school directly and this had summer internships, but Lockheed gave me the opportunity to decide whether I wanted to be a GEM Fellow or if I wanted to be an Edison engineer.  I thought the Edison program would be more effective, because I felt, you know, I did five years, almost five years as an undergrad, so I felt like I'd be more effective if I had a little bit of a break, although that's a tough program.  I can't tell you how many nights we were in the plant, like midnight, so, but it was a clear extension of undergrad, so there were about ten students from different schools, people from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Lehigh [University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania], also from Georgia Tech, the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  So there were like ten of us, and we all went through these rotations in different areas, and we all did the courses in the plant, and we all had to work on different projects each week.  So we really felt like being--it's almost like another year in college, but you're working on site, getting paid for it, so it was a really good experience.  I finished the first year there.  And then that's when I got the opportunity to go to Dallas, Texas, or Fort Worth, Texas, to work as a consulting engineer, so I went temporary duty there.  That's the first time I actually had the opportunity to work in another location and learn how to consult where you actually are brought into the subject around an expert working in a group where you didn't get trained.  You would come and you work on a specific thing.  So, I did that, and it was actually back in programming at that point and I finished the Edison Engineering Program, but it gave me about a six-month break from school.
Story_ID: 26624
Speaker 1: So then I realized I wanted to finish my master's [degree].  I moved back to Orlando [Florida] and then immediately moved to Atlanta [Georgia].  And then I had to decide whether I wanted to go back to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta] or if I could--because the courses were during the day, or if I wanted to go to Mercer [University, Macon, Georgia].  So I ended up going to Mercer because they had night classes.  But I finished--
Speaker 2: This was in 1977 by now, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so 19--I moved back to [Washington], D.C. [District of Columbia].  So, '94' (1994) to '95' (1995), I did the first year, the Edison Engineering Program, Engineering Leadership Development Program, and then the summer of '94' (1994), I moved--the summer of '95' (1995), I moved to Fort Worth, Texas, and stayed there for six months, and then I moved back to Atlanta in January of '96' (1996), just before the Olympics.  And I was working with Lockheed.  I got the opportunity--this was a really neat opportunity, and this was very foundational for my career.  I interviewed--at that point, I'd become really, really--I felt very--I had a strong foundation in software engineering so I got the opportunity to interview for this 50 or 60 person software integration engineering consulting division within Lockheed, and it was like one of the red teams.  It was 50 really, really strong software engineers, and one guy who was a technical consultant that reported to the vice president, and it went from project to project, fixing things.  So if things weren't--if you saw our team coming or some parts of our team, your project was pretty much hosed.  So we were the red team--if you saw us coming then you knew it was something--people knew when our group came that that was--you were on a tough project.  So I tell you that's--this brought together a lot of different things, like being responsible.  I went on projects where I was alone, going into a place where things were really just in bad shape and behind schedule, and I had to put together teams of the clients' software engineers and try to fix the problem.  In some cases we went out in two, we went to some projects with 10, but it was very much, very senior specialized people that went into these tough situations.  I loved it, I just absolutely loved it.  I moved to Atlanta for this position.  To get it you had to do--I mean, it had like a programming test, a presentation, very rigorous interview process to get in, and once you got in, not only did we go from project to project doing these things, but we also--you could also part time it to a teaching, so they actually had a training center, where you could actually train in software engineering.  So I actually was a teacher, trainee in that division as well.  I mean, I was going across the country.  I left Dallas on sort of a temporary assignment, which got me sort of initially immersed in it then moved back and did my master's degree at the same time I was doing this consulting.  So I was flying--I couldn't have done it at Georgia Tech, I was flying across, I went to Jackson, Mississippi, for nine months, and during that time I spent a month, a couple of days a week in Charlotte [North Carolina], spent some time in Montclair, New Jersey, area.  I actually did a trainership up in Canada somewhere, where I had to fly in and ride on this dirt road way back to this place where the hotel, so I did a lot, just some training.  We were working on these projects, like we were working on Bell South service activation project where they were trying to automate the issue of telephone numbers.  So at that point--as a client, you had to call in to Bell South, and you talked to the operator, and the operator would call ten other people to set up you line and give you a proposal.  If you didn't like it they'd put you on hold and they'd call ten other people, you know, so we actually worked to make software to make all that work together where the person could take your information, plug it into a computer and all these things, it just happened naturally.  And that was a very--that project was way behind.  So that's one of the first ones I went to where I realized how tough it was going into environments.  Same thing was at the project I did in Jackson, Mississippi, which was the two-way pagers at the time, and then we did some work for Bank of America, we did some work for MCI, for Delta Transquest, so many different projects.  In a two-year period I just went to different projects.  I was actually doing final exams for Mercer University by fax.  So I pretty much maintained my--I worked with every professor so that I could come, maybe once every two weeks to the courses, and then do a lot of my testing sometimes proxy remotely at libraries and such.  I kind of worked--to get through the master's degree, it took some creativity.  Really it was that position, I can't tell you how many times I went to places and I was like you were taught that you were the expert, no matter how difficult it looks when you get there, everyone expects you to be the expert.  So you can't go in and say I don't understand or--you got to come in with sort of a swagger that says, "I'm the expert" and if it takes me to kind of assess the situation and reach back to people who might know more about this than I do, I have to do it, I have to figure out what the problem is and figure out what's the best way for us to address the problem.  So I learned a lot from that, and this bridges back to my dad's notion of this sort of stick-with-it-ness, not give up.  So the combination of, you know, having that in my childhood and then having that in this working experience is just a great compliment, you know, I thrived in that environment, I enjoyed it.  I loved it so much that I wanted to be the person, his name was Blake Edwards.  He was the person who was in charge of this division, and I said I really want to be that person, and that's what sent me back to get a Ph.D., because I felt like there were people who I felt who were better at the position than I was, but they were much older, and he was one of them that was much older.  I'm like, if I'm ever going to be able to do this then I need to get--I need to be more credentialed, because I'm not going to get the experience like overnight.  So that's why I went to get my Ph.D. so I could come back and do this type of position.
Story_ID: 26625
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this.  Did you get any sort of certificate or something from GE [General Electric Company]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the General--I got both the Edison Engineering certificate as well as the Engineering Leadership Development Certificate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then various, you know, I got a certificate in optical and design and some other things.  Yeah, so I got a number of certificates from Lockheed [Martin Corporation], you know, various awards and you know.  When I finished with Mercer, I actually had a master's in electrical engineering and they had issued a minor in software engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Mercer [University, Macon, Georgia] starting in '96 (1996)?
Speaker 2: Yep, from '96' (1996), and I finished late '97' (1997).   Because, like I said, a lot of that was done remotely.  I did a lot--that was the nice thing about being in that environment is that Mercer--both schools I did my master's and Ph.D. in a sense catered toward industry oriented students, those who were working, so they made it possible because they had later night courses and the faculty were flexible to allow me to kind of take the courses while I was working, you know, for Lockheed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are there any special people that you came in contact with at Mercer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, Mercer not so--I take that back.  Professor Paul McNeal, he actually was--he taught software engineering.  I took three courses with him while at Mercer.  And he taught it in a very applied way.  He taught at the Atlanta campus of Mercer, and I got to know him.  He actually helped me bridge the idea of theoretical software design with the applications I was doing at Lockheed.  So I actually really began to understand that the theoretical piece, it wasn't theoretical, it was actually--the modeling pieces are so important to being able to effectively do more programming, more software engineering piece.  Interesting story is that I've kept in touch with him over the years.  He's written me a number of recommendations.  One recommendation actually hinged on my promise to some point come back and teach at Mercer.  I haven't made good on that promise yet.  And then he also recently invited me to come back to Mercer about a year and a half, two years ago to give a talk to engineering.  And through that talk, I regained that interaction with him and got a chance to give a later talk at Owen Roberts Air Force Base right there in middle Georgia.  So, yes, he has been sort of a lifelong mentor, in a sense.
Story_ID: 26626
Speaker 1: Okay, and back to Blake Edwards [Blake's role model at Lockheed Martin Corporation]?
Speaker 2: I haven't talked to him since I left that position, but he was very much in charge of that division of Lockheed that did the consulting.  So I didn't have direct interaction with him, but I did appreciate the fact that he was managing a group of really hotshot software engineers.  So when I left there to get my Ph.D., my idea was to get a Ph.D. and then actually start my own--and this is where entrepreneurship came in, I really had planned to get the Ph.D. so I'd be credentialed and then get a group of seven or ten hotshot programmers and not just do this red team for one company, but do it for multiple companies.  So that was my idea in going into the Ph.D.  That was when I'd be this company of really high, you know, accomplished software engineers.
Speaker 1: Now you know, when I read about it, I thought about a high-end version of the geek squad?
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, right, right.  But through my Ph.D., I had so many other experiences.  So, by the time I got through, I kind of evolved into becoming a professor.  So, for example, I stayed at Lockheed, but I was commuting a long way when I--I started my Ph.D. at George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia], and I stayed at Lockheed but it was a long commute.  So I couldn't make that work and I left and I went to this company that later became General Dynamics but they did network penetrations, meaning they tried to break into systems.  And I got on a team of another set of hotshots that were actually going from company to company.  They would pay us to break into their system.  So that was just a phenomenal two years, I mean, we did internet service providers, we did banks, we did insurance companies and we just kind of went from company to company breaking in.
Speaker 1: So that was fun (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was fun.  I had a great time doing that.  And it was--I was kind of more of the academic type, so I did break into the systems, but it was a couple other younger guys who were like their pure hackers.  I was the kind of a person that hacked sometime, but also I developed a firewall policies, you know, I developed the architecture to defend against what we found.  But it was such a lucrative business as far as, you know, most of the job was scanning systems.  So before we even got the contract, we'd start scanning.  So it's basically, that was the interaction.  That was a really good experience.  I did that at the same time as doing my Ph.D.  Then I moved to another research oriented company called the Mitre Corporation, and they actually allowed me to do some of my Ph.D. work during the work day, which was good.  And there I actually worked with the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA] on their integrating their databases across different air traffic controller units.  So by the time--I still was keen on being this owner of a business that, you know, so like you said, like a high-end geek squad.
Story_ID: 26627
Speaker 1: But what happened was my last year [as a Ph.D. student at George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia], someone said, you know, you are getting a Ph.D., it is a teaching degree.  You should at least consider being a professor.  So, I remember this distinctively, it was in nineteen ninety--, I think it was middle of '98' (1998), late '98' (1998).  Yeah, it was late '98' (1998).  I sent an email out after someone told me this, to Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia], Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], John Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and American University [Washington, D.C.], saying that I wanted to teach.  I sent it to the chair's department.  I said I wouldn't mind teaching a software engineering class, I have a little--saying I taught software engineering for Lockheed Martin--
Speaker 2: This was after you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 1: I was still working on it.
Speaker 2: You were still working on it?
Speaker 1: So I said, yeah, yeah.  And sent that out and I said, well, I'd be interested in teaching a software engineering course, these are some of the areas I've got expertise in, this is my background.  And literally, I sent that at 5:00 p.m. one day, the next day, by noon, I've gotten answers from all of them.  Two said, I think American University said to apply by their system, but they were interested, John Hopkins said the same thing, apply through their automated system.  Howard said we want to get you in to give a talk, and Georgetown said we're going to get you in to give a talk soon.  So I got in to give a talk at Howard--I got into Georgetown first.  I went and gave a talk to a group of students and to faculty, literally within a month.  And then I gave a talk, similarly, to a group at Howard.  Georgetown pretty much put me on schedule and said after that talk, they said, yeah, you do well.  We're going to put you on for next fall.  So fall, '99' (1999), they gave me the opportunity to teach as an adjunct, but I was still doing my Ph.D., and that group of students--I actually have a--I'm close to a number of those students even to today, probably at least six or seven because they way I taught the course--there's some conditions--if you think about it, there's some condition around the environment, for example, I think I was only like 25 or 26.  Most of the students were 21, 22, so I was pretty close in age to the students.  And then I just did everything.  We did field trips to companies, we went to different seminars.  The problems that I gave were so fresh because they came directly from industry.  I connected them with different industry leaders in different areas.  It was just a very interactive class, and I think the students appreciated it.  I appreciated it, because what I realized is that "wow" I want to build a company of young hotshots, and then here Georgetown in the computer science course--I got a--I have a group of young hotshots.  And that's when I began to consider being a professor, because I figured, "wow" in my research group, I can do all the things that I wanted to do as an owner of a business, but I could also teach because I enjoyed it and then I can continue to consult, and that's kind of how my position evolved.  Once I finished my Ph.D., I interviewed with a number of companies.  I interviewed with Silicon Graphics, Compact Computer, Goldman Sachs, Arthur Anderson, I was already with Miter and then I interviewed with Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and Georgetown, and I got offers everywhere.  But what I found out was that the job that I really wanted--I always said once I finish my Ph.D., the first thing I need to do was get established, was to get into one of the well-established consulting firms and continue doing what I was doing before and build up a rolodex and then over time, I'll move into a consulting firm of these hotshot programmers and then do the same.  I said I needed to start back because I'd been away for three years.  And it turned out that I got the offer with Arthur Anderson, I mean, it was working completely as my plan had laid out.  But then I got an offer from Georgetown that--Georgetown kept encouraging me to apply because I must have gotten--I think I got like a 4.8 out of 5 on my evaluation, a really good teaching experience.  They came back and they said, look, we'll allow you to teach part time--we'll allow you to teach as a tenure track faculty and part time you can continue to do some of the consulting, as long as you continue to make bounds on your research.  And I just found out, it was a numbers thing.  I already had a salary at Miter, and Miter allowed me to work part time, and then I was getting sort of a lateral salary at Georgetown, so I was kind of getting all the things I wanted. I was getting a group of students that were really hotshots, so I had immediately built a group of undergraduate students, and I was also getting the ability to continue interacting with industry through Mitre, so it was just a good combination that kept going for seven years.
Story_ID: 26628
Speaker 1: Now, I got to go back to your dissertation, what your dissertation is about.  It is entitled 'Agent Based Workflow Modeling For Distributive Component Configuration and Coordination'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So really, you know, that's a long title as most dissertation titles are, but the idea was making interesting processes of systems.  So workflow is just a sequence of how you run different applications.  So my work was saying, okay, if you're going to run--how do you automate the interaction of applications that were never meant to be integrated, and then put them into a higher level process where they're all connected together and they work intelligently.  So an intelligent agent is like a softer robot, and that's why I have a couple peers in robotics that we interact well because a lot of the control systems are the same.  So the idea is if you have like a softer robot, could that robot do interesting things by integrating applications that were already there.  So imagine the really--probably the most used example is working with travel agencies.  So imagine if you're going to fly or make a trip from one place to the other, you got to get a rent-a-car, a hotel, air line ticket, you might have to do registration, all these things are different software application that may reside on the internet.  So our approaches were can an intelligent agent serve as a proxy for a person to integrate these applications together?  So it requires first a knowledge of what the higher level process is, how do you integrate the messaging between the two applications, how do you resolve differences, how do you make it fast, how do you manage risk.  So my work was basically the combination, how do you do this but for what was called the time distributive components which were like a clean web application that had predictable descriptions, if you will.  So the work and the dissertation was very much workflow integration, it really was a process, sort of an on demand process integration piece.  My work is actually related to all types of different things, like I've actually applied it to the process for air traffic control, I've applied it to the process of collecting and curating data, I've applied it to the process of interacting robots or interacting UAVs, so it's always about how workflows come together and then how you integrate so the system interaction from that perspective as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the status of, I guess, the study of workflow?
Speaker 2: It had become--it's funny, it was a little bit, it was right at the top, around the early mid-90s [1990s], there was this huge government push, what did they call it, they say governments were not working as efficiently as they could, and they went into this big thing, it's called business process reengineering.  So that became a really hot field where all the--it was very significant for like government agencies, where they said, look, we need to document our processes and we need to hire people, consultants, to reengineer them so we're doing things most effectively.  So that was system related.
Speaker 1: I remember the government passed a paper reduction act--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --So it eliminated paper files.
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed.  So one of my mentors, in fact, you may have interviewed him, Skip Ellis.  I don't know if you caught him.  Skip Ellis is the first, largely known as the first black computer science Ph.D.  And, you know, it's an interesting story I have with him.  So I was trying to figure out--he was actually a workflow guy.  He was actually called group ware.  He actually worked on software to office automation, very similar to what you just mentioned.  How do you reduce paper, what's your paper reduction, how do you manage the flow of documents through different processes within an organization.  He kind of worked in that area and he knows a little bit more--he did the--he did a lot of process algebras and process, formal process models, if you will, but very similar work he's done in that area, workflow change, workflow reactiveness, he's done a lot of--so he had one paper that was on workflow change.  And I remember sending him, leaving him a voice mail or sending him an email.  At that time he wasn't very big on the email piece and I think I left a voicemail saying that I really need this paper, because it was very well sited but difficult to find.  And he said, oh, I'll just send it to you.  So, literally, a week later, I get in the mail, through regular mail, I get the paper and a little note.  I kept in touch with him since that time.  That paper was the paper I still cite still today.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Here he is, he's one of the pioneers of workflow, and he sends it through the mail.
Speaker 2: He sent it through the mail, yeah.  He did, indeed.  So really good guy.  And what you'll find about computer scientists that were of perhaps of his era it wasn't a particular friendly environment for black computer scientists at the time.  So they learned--a lot of them had nontraditional paths toward tenure promotion and how they interacted.  But, yeah, he's been, and it turned out that interaction might have been part of the reason why I actually stayed in the workflow domain, because I had that person that looked like a (unclear), that worked in the area and had been very impactful.  I was less about the process, although process is central, more about the integration of processing systems, if you will, so definitely, that was a meaningful interaction I had coming through.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26629
Speaker 1: What was the reception of your dissertation?
Speaker 2: Went really well.  Actually the university--so George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia] at the time, that's where I did my Ph.D., was very much a school that was industry--they really catered to industry.  In fact, I just recently joined their engineering advisory board.  But the dissertation itself, I'll give you a couple of different measurables where I thought it went very well was that one, was that I was able to extend the dissertation to develop this workflow of data management system that went to Miter and since that time, they set up--I actually worked with Mitre as consultant and a professor to translate my workflow work into the set of components called MRALD, Midol Resource for Accessing Loaded Data, and have used it in three or four different platforms like they use it to capture their aviation data, multiple terrabytes, they use it in their brain, neuro informatics (sp) server, and they've had over three million downloads in the last six years and they used it in some homeland security places.  So that was one of the very huge applications of the work that came out of my dissertation.  The other one was I gave a talk of using agents, intelligent agents to manage workflow at the Intelligent Agents conference in Barcelona [Spain], which by coincidence is where I'm going today.  And that was the first time I have a technical talk, 200 people, and that talk--from that talk I got an offer from Carnegie Mellon to come as a research professor.
Story_ID: 26630
Speaker 1: Tell us about WARP [Workflow Automation through Agent-based Reflective Processes], I think we mentioned it in general, but not specifically?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, WARP was this notion of--I think the acronym stands for Workflow Oriented Agent Base Reflective Processes is what it stood for, but the idea was--it was actually intelligent software using agents that could--reflective being that it could look--it could introspect on software that already exist and try to connect it into workflow automatically.  So it was a--it really was sort of an expert system, if you will, that could actually assess already written code and develop workflows from that code.  It was about I think it was like 15 or 20,000 lines of code I wrote during my dissertation, and it was really foundational to my early work.  One of the interesting things about being a software engineer and being sort of self-proclaiming expert at programming was that when you do your dissertation you have all this theoretical stuff, you could actually--I could write my own software to kind of do a proof of concept and WARP was that proof of concept.  And as I said later it extended to any number of projects that we had.  We had a project with the Federal Aviation Administration where it actually served air traffic control data, had a project that served date through neuro informatics(sp) through the National Institute of Mental Health.  We had another project where I used it for image guided surgery so the theory behind actually integrating the workflow and some of the modules we developed later, you know, based on that initial module were using any number of applications.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26631
Speaker 1: Tell us about Hassan Gomaa, he was your advisor, right?
Speaker 2: Hassan Gomaa, he actually is a traditional software engineering.  So he does software modeling, which is what I--that's pretty much the class that I teach, but Dr. Gomaa, he was the chair at George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia] for many years after I graduated, probably for a decade.  He just recently stepped down, but just a really good mentor, very hands-off, very inspiring, very strong academic background, very empathetic, a very good advisor.  He was a core advisor in a sense.  My initial advisor was Prasanta Bose but he was relatively junior, and he didn't stay at the institute for the completion of my degree.  So Dr. Gomaa took over and he's been my mentor.  We've published a couple of times since I graduated and he's been a mentor throughout the years.  Whenever I have a major decision, I usually get an opportunity to speak to him about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26632
Speaker 1: Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] in 2000, right?
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're an assistant professor?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And tell us about Georgetown?
Speaker 2: So Georgetown, I was sort of a nontraditional professor because I was working a day and a half, two days a week with MITRE, consulting for various federal government agencies, and I taught three courses a year, I taught--typically, I taught Introduction to Programming II, Software Engineering and Electronics and E-Commerce.  So, those were definitely--that was kind of central to what I was doing at the time.  We actually had any number of--I worked on any number of projects through MITRE and then I worked on other projects that were based right in Georgetown.  So I did that for seven years and just kind of matriculated through.  I was fortunate enough to get tenured after five years and then I was up for full professor in my ninth year.  So typically it's six years and then another six years, but I was fortunate to go to full professor after my ninth year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like teaching?
Speaker 2: I did.  I still do.  I actually teach all the way to--I had taught software engineering, same course, I taught software engineering last semester.  Software engineering is the central course, it's essential to what I have done as an industry person, it's essential to what I've learned in my Ph.D., it's essential to what my research is, and I've enjoyed teaching it with students that have been very entrepreneurial.  One thing that I do in my course is a little bit different than most is that before every semester, I solicit real problems from companies outside of the university.  And I have those companies come in and with four slides, they pitch their problem.  And students get to form in a group and decide which one they want to address.  So it's an open problem.  I don't know the solution, the companies don't know the solutions, the students don't know the solution.  So they pick it and they run it through the full soft engine like cycle.  They develop problems, they develop design, they develop a solution, and then they pretty much pitch it right back to the company at the end of the semester.  So my job is actually to train them the time-line for software engineering and they do it at the same time as they are addressing the problem, and I have to scope the problem so that they can finish it in a semester.  So, I've really enjoyed it.  It builds on my background of being a software engineer to kind of have a course with that sort of aspect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26633
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that you served as an expert witness for Ken Lazarus and Associates [law firm]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got the opportunity to serve as an expert witness a number of times.  So with Ken Lazarus, they actually--they had--there was this telecommunication software that a big company was using that was--some part of it was built by a smaller consulting company.  So that consulting company didn't particularly get permission for the bigger company continuing using that software.  So the case was to try to determine how much of the workhorse of the software was either derived from, or actually verbatim, the software that was developed by the smaller company.  So it was all in, what was called Divo, which is a variant of COBALT, mainframe software language.  So I came as consultant to kind of take a look at the raw software and come up with ways to quantify how critical the smaller part of the software was to the larger part.  So that was the first time I did expert witness.  I did another case with Perkins Coie [law firm], and it was actually with--they were using software estimation tools.  My job was to come in and say, were software estimation tools around? I think it was like a six billion dollar Air Force award.  Were they used appropriately, or was there some bias in those.  So my advisor's advisor was Barry Boehm, who's actually, he's like the father of software engineering, and he pretty much developed--his cost estimation models are probably one of three that are most used in government.  COCOMO [The Constructive Cost Model] was the name.  In that case they used COCOMO and some other ones, but was a good--obviously being in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], I was probably, I would say, a good person to use, based on lineage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you meet Barry Boehm?
Speaker 2: I have.  I met him a couple of times.  He actually was the advisor of the professor [Prasanta Bose] that didn't stay throughout the time [at George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia].  I largely considered both of them because Prasanta Bose was my advisor for two years and Hassan Gomaa was my advisor for the final year.  So most of my research was based on my interactions with Prasanta Bose, who had later went to Lockheed [Martin Corporation], which is a small world, when he left George Mason.  He just recently retired.  I don't have a close relationship with him, I've met him a couple of times at the conferences and then we're associated together in the genealogy tree that they keep up for the software engineering community.
Story_ID: 26634
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you still worked for MITRE during this time.
Speaker 2: I did.  I worked for MITRE for seven years.  I started with them in '99' (1999), just before I went to Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  I left that network penetration job.  Those probably started to dry up a little bit and I was like, well, it's not as exciting being here without those sort of projects, so I left and went to MITRE where I actually got the opportunity to work with the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA].  But I stayed with MITRE.  They were just with--a variant of my dissertation became a patent for the workflow data interaction piece.  And they asked--when I told them I was considering going to Georgetown, they said, well would you stay and steward in this patent and I had one other one coming up.  So I stayed with them.  And it just became a very good interaction.  You know, I was able to continue doing project work at a part time status, I continued to make impact there and the data I received from MITRE and FAA were related to the work I was doing in Georgetown, so it was a very good interaction of industry and academic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us, there's a project here that you worked on where you developed a simulation on the Brussels Airport?
Speaker 2: That was it.  So much related to my dissertation work, but we received four hours of air traffic control data from Brussels Airport.  So that area, that region of Belgium and Euro control was very flooded.  It was only a couple of different tracks ways for airplanes to land into the airport.  So they were trying to figure out ways to make it more efficient.  So they sent us this data.  It was all raw data files. So we actually had to parse the data and clean it and then we had to make these specific objects to keep the specific information that we wanted.  So based on that we developed a simulation that allowed you to rewind and fast-forward and change the perimeters so that you can just determine that there was ways to change the air space around the airport such that you can make it more efficient.  So that was a pretty cool project.  I had the opportunity to fly over and see the--I've been in a couple of centers, that's one, I've also been in Atlanta Center and Dallas Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Another significant activity is the CAASD Repository System [CRS]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The CAASD Repository System.
Speaker 1: CAASD.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's hard to say how they pronounce it, but CAASD was the division of MITRE that worked with the Federal Aviation Administration.  So CRS, the CAASD Repository System, it actually would make--automatically make these data query forms out of a workflow of components.  So that was the system that derived from my patent work with MITRE and based on my dissertation.  So that system you could, I mean within a day, 24 hours, you could set up a new data set and the queries would be generated automatically based on the software.  And that was the core of the software.  The software had this central module that would connect the system table from the relational database to the internet interactions, and you could make real queries in real time.  Again, that was the patent, CAASD Repository System was one embodiment of that work and there was one that the MITRE Corporation used for the FAA and various air traffic control data; I think it's probably three or four, when I left there were still three or four terabytes of data.  A lot more data these days, but this was in the early, it would have been mid to early 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26635
Speaker 1: Now you were involved--you've been involved in some mentoring programs, too, formally and informally?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we have.  As a mentor, I've been--as a mentor or as a mentee?
Speaker 1: As a mentor at this point?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I know quite a few of your students go on to MITRE?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so as mentor, the formal programs, I mean throughout, you know--my dad has always given me the--even when he was working in his service station, I was always amazed about how he always gave back to the community.  And also, one of the other things that struck me as a kid was that, there's a number of kids in my first neighborhood I mentioned that was on the west side of Savannah, I had a lot of friends in first grade, kindergarten.  And not a lot of friends are either living or locked up at this point.  So sometimes I look back at it, I'm like, well, what about what I did?  What about my matriculation has kept me from being either dead or in jail, you know.  And I can only say that I had access to certain things and fortunate for what my dad was able to do.  And when I think about those things, I think well, you know, I feel like there's an onus for me to give back because someone gave me access, so I need to be able to give other people access because it's a difference maker, so that's one of the big things throughout--I mean I was a big brother big sister program at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], I later got a philanthropy award for some of the programs I was doing in the neighborhoods around the university, either by a fraternity or by some independent projects.  I worked on a number of fundraisers.  Later as a member of Lockheed Martin [Corporation], I did some programs with the community as well.  When I got to--Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] I was actually director of their minority mentoring program, which actually attempted to get more African Americans at the college or to grad [graduate] school.  Dr. Wayne Gilbert and I actually, even today, we actually have a program where we try to mentor all of the black Ph.D.s around the country.  Because when I was going through, Skip Ellis, Valerie Taylor [also a HistoryMaker], Bryant York, these were like the first generation in computer scientists.  And they would answer our call, whatever it was, it could be Friday at midnight and they would answer our call.  So, Dr. Gilbert and I, we now have a group of Ph.D.s that we mentored over the time.  He founded it, and I've been pretty much involved in it.  So we have a very tight connection with the group of black Ph.D.s that come out.  So it's not very many that we don't meet each year.  So that's part of being one of the stronger pieces.  And then as an academic, Georgetown didn't have very many black computer science undergrads, so I joined the admissions committee so that I could actually look at some of the files and see if there was--and try to pretty much identify the benefits of some of the applications.  So, from the time I started it, it was probably one or two black computer science undergrads.  By the time I was there and became chair at Georgetown, we had probably ten or a dozen or so.  Each one had worked in my lab at some point.  So I got the opportunity to mentor all those students, as well as all types of students.  And since I have been working at MITRE, I actually set up a pipeline for these students to go and become summer interns and sometimes work with me over the summer.  So I have really good interaction between academia and industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26636
Speaker 1: Now, you were the lead process consultant for ISES [Imaging Science and Information Systems Research Center].  So you were basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so ISES was a center at Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] off the Department of Radiology, and they developed telemedicine applications.  I worked with a group that was trying to figure out ways to connect different systems within the operating room.  So if you were in your operating room or in your actual patient's room, they're like four or five machines around you at all times.  None of them can talk to each other.  They're all built by different people, they have different data types and this, you know, and around that time they were trying to come up with a standard data type.  But the work I did was trying to make it so that you could develop components from a lot of these systems and develop a new--every time you develop a new surgery around image-guided capabilities; you have to pretty much develop new components.  So we tried to develop standard components that allows you to have workflow of these machines.  So it's very similar to my dissertation work.  We actually went on as a consultant to ISES to kind of develop workflow processes across these various devices in the operating room and also in the patient's room.  And then later we developed this tool kit, it's called image guided surgery tool kit, IG Stick, and wrote the book, and then over the years we've had tons of downloads.  People are using it to develop new medical interventions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Story_ID: 26637
Speaker 1: Now, you received lots of awards over the years, we won't go through all those but at a certain point, you sort of shifted more to administration?
Speaker 2: I did.  So, another one of those things, I would have told you I was never going to be in administration, but I got the opportunity to--my seventh year as a professor [at Georgetown University, Washington, District of Columbia], I got the opportunity to be department chair.  It just turned out that the department had--there were a number of cohorts that were not friendly with each other and I've always been--this is where I return to my mom, she's always had a sense of empathy, where she can relate, and I think what happened was, I was able to be diplomatic and make decisions in multiple cohorts.  Whereas people really appreciated the fact that I was thoughtful and that I was actually making decisions that wasn't in the best interest for any cohort and seemingly was in the best interest of the department.  So I got nominated to be department chair around the time and I almost decided not to, in fact, I was pretty much not going to do it.  But then mentors told me that this would be an opportunity that if I pass up now, I may not get the opportunity in the future and it was a good time in my research where I could presumably, not easily, but I could maintain both things, at least for a short period of time.  So I did it, and I just fell in love with the idea of being able to make organizational impact, set up programs that could do mentoring, and set up a number of programs to try to attract more African Americans and more underserved populations into Georgetown, and then I could also continue doing my research and I could make administrative certificate advances so I could develop specializations within the department to kind of build up capabilities in a particular area.  So, it was just a good mix.  If you could find the right administrative appointment, you could continue doing research at a very high level, maybe not at the same quantity, at the same point, you could also use the organization to make both a societal differences, as well as making a larger impact on the scientific field and just, I mean, you got just such a comprehensive interaction day-to-day, so that's the reason why--I think the department chair really brought out the ability to kind of do multiple things.  And I kind of--since that time, I've been mixing it.  I've became associate dean at the same time I became a professor and now as dean of the graduate school and vice-provost, I still maintain a research group.
Speaker 1: So you became a department chair at Georgetown in 2007, right?
Speaker 2: 2007, right.
Speaker 1: At thirty-five years old, young man, department chair.
Story_ID: 26638
Speaker 1: I think I skipped over some of this.  You know, I was mentioning awards, but there's a paper you wrote, I guess, in 2004, it was cited as one of the top five most viewed articles in the 'Annals of Software Engineering' [journal].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was based on the patented work that I did with MITRE, so the WARP [Workflow Automation through Agent-based Reflective Processes] work that translated into their CAASD Respository System [CRS], that embodiment of WARP was written in that paper, and it just was--it just was well, I don't know if it's been well cited, but it was well downloaded at the time.  It's very applied research.  Later the patent application itself has become well cited.  So I think we have over a hundred citations to the patent application because of the nature of what the work is, so.  I think the combination of the patent application on that paper is what drove the number of references up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you also worked on some software for the [U.S.] Department of Justice, right?  I think it's significant, because I know this is the time, 2001, well all the government agencies have been trying to communicate with each other.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, the Department of Justice actually worked on their--they actually worked on trying to develop a software engineering life cycle that spanned all of, like the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and all of the different justice agencies.  So I actually worked in the Department of Justice on their--they had a specific life cycle.  I developed a training software to train the individual units how to get through the process so that they could acquire funds for developing new software.  So it's kind of more--that one's more process-oriented, but it was a great interaction.  I got a chance--the opportunity to work in that--I've been in [U.S.] DOD [Department of Defense], I've been in FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], I've been in various agencies related to armed forces, but that was the first time I've been more justice, which is, it's not quite the DOD, it's more federal enforcement.  So, it's a little different flavor, but it definitely was a meaningful experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26639
Speaker 1: So you're department chair, Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] 2007 and during this period of time, too, we haven't discussed IEEE [the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers] at all?
Speaker 2: So IEEE is the Institute of Electronics and Electrical Engineers, I think.  Electrical and electronic engineers.  It's actually the standard for engineering in electrical engineering.  And they also have a computer society for computer science.  So, IEEE is the organization that manages most of the papers so a lot of conferences are sponsored by IEEE.  They actually have a distinguished lecture series where I was actually a distinguished visitor for a couple of years, and I've been involved, I mean, I must have been involved with fifty various actual pre-conferences, either as a program chair, general chair, program committee member, workshop chair, workshop committee member, so I've been involved with any number of--fifty is probably too small a number, but just a lot of conferences over the years.
Speaker 1: You kept a high profile with IEEE?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I mean IEEE is a vehicle by which you connect to the computer science community.  I think I'm fairly well known in the area of internet computing.  But you know the one person that doesn't know what your reputation is, is the person, that actual person.  So it's hard to say.  I think over the years, I've actually put out some strong contributions in those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26640
Speaker 1: Now in terms of administration [at Georgetown University, Washington, District of Columbia], once again, was associate dean, Beverly Magda [Associate Dean of the Master of Professional Studies in Technology Management at Georgetown University's School of Continuing Studies] sort of a model for you?
Speaker 2: You know, actually, well, not so much.  She was actually--I actually interviewed her, so.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: She became associate dean for technology management at Georgetown, and I actually was--I had worked with--when I was department chair at Georgetown, I worked with the dean to write that program.  So I was the first associate dean, temporarily, fellow department chair, but I actually wrote the curriculum for the program.  And then later we hired.  So I worked with them to interview various people to hire into that associate dean role, which really just took over for the time I was temporary, you know, so, technology management was kind of in between the business school and the computer science.  It was a niche area that worked really well for continuous studies at Georgetown.  So, Beverly, we worked together for about a month before I left to go to [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], I guess a month or two months.  But she's really have taken the program.  I couldn't have asked for a better hire.  It's been, gosh, six years, and that program is still going, the dean's left and it's still--still strong students, strong faculty, they've done really well for that program.
Speaker 1: So you were the dean and hired her as associate dean?
Speaker 2: I was associate, I was just temporary associate dean.  So the dean actually set up any number of these programs, not all technology, but he worked with me to kind of say, I want to set up the technology management program, he had had a draft, I took that draft, and I wrote and what I thought was going to be an attractive program for technologists in the D.C. area.  And then he needed someone to kind of advertise it, so we went through information sessions, so I was pretty much temporary associate dean until he hired someone and then he hired Beverly, and she came in and just hit the ground running and has done a fabulous job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26641
Speaker 1: In 2009, you go to [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana].  Now, I guess, I suppose you would be seen, is this correct, you would be seen as a young man.  You're at the cutting edge of computer science in terms of developing curriculum and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I had worked--what benefited my interaction at Notre Dame to a certain extent was that I'd been chair already for three years, and then I was the inaugural chair at the time we had our new graduate program in Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  So I actually was involved with the development of the proposal for that and then I was really pretty much led the implementation of the proposal for the first three years from zero students all the way up to twenty-two students.  So that experience kind of setting up a market for the program and actually working with new students, figuring out what our best niche was, it was a very significant experience to have going into any--even now, my current position is significant getting into a position.  I recruited to Notre Dame for different reasons.  They recruited me strictly on being a research professor as faculty.  They had--interestingly enough--Now this is an interesting story.  My very first technical talk was at Notre Dame.  When I was doing my Ph.D., I got a call from--they had a division there, it was a minority engineering program.  They had a, I think it was an invitational lecture series, and invited minorities from across the country to come and give a talk on dissertation.  I think it was a great program, because I think what it did it gave--it was a way for them to bring in Ph.D.s who were doing really well to come and give a talk and maybe they could attract them into coming to Notre Dame, because they were challenging Notre Dame with unrepresented minorities and their faculty.  So I went.  I'd never been to Notre Dame before, but as you remember, I went to Catholic Military school, which Notre Dame was, it was very well known, so I knew of Notre Dame through that, but I never considered Notre Dame because, frankly, the people who were just obsessive with Notre Dame and the things I had heard about Notre Dame at the time, led me to suspect that Notre Dame wasn't particularly a place for me.  So, when they invited me to come and give a talk, well, maybe I was wrong about that, and I went and I gave that talk in '99' (1999), and I wasn't quite graduation yet, but I think they would have been interested in me applying for the position, and I just--I didn't really apply, so I stayed--so I had that interaction with Notre Dame.  And then when I got tenured, the year I got tenured at Georgetown, Notre Dame called me again, totally different circumstance.  It wasn't the same group or anything. I got a call and they said would you give a talk.  And in my head, I'm like wow, I was at Notre Dame when I was a Ph.D. student, I'd be happy to give a talk, and when I went there, this was right before I became department chair, they just asked, they said, well, how happy are you where you are?  You might find this institution interesting, and I thought about it, there was some things, like Notre Dame had a very strong engineering program and Georgetown didn't, Notre Dame was somewhat more highly ranked, I'm a football fan, so, you know, Georgetown basketball is phenomenal, but, you know, Notre Dame Football is legend.  So I said, wow, that might be interesting, but I had already promised to be department chair then.  So I didn't consider it.  My last year as being department chair, I saw the department chair at Notre Dame, he says you're still not interested, and I thought about it, I said I'll come back and give a talk and I gave a talk, and from there I met the dean and then we got into a more serious conversation and that's what led me to go to Notre Dame.  But they wanted me to be faculty.
Story_ID: 26642
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what were your responsibilities at [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: At Notre Dame, I started off working mostly with graduate studies and with corporate interactions and looking at, sort of enriching the graduate population, so I get the opportunity to look at diversity issues in the Ph.D. population.  And then within a couple of months of being there, the associate--that was associate dean of strategic initiatives.  Within a month or two the associate dean for research stepped down, and that the was the position I kind of wanted.  I got the opportunity then to be in charge of research for the college of engineering as well as doing graduate studies and looking at some of the diversity issues within the Ph.D. student body.  So, as associate dean for research, generally I was the interface between the research happening in departments on the university level research.  A lot of times we get their proposal where you can only submit one per university.  So I was the person that actually handled limited submissions proposals.  I actually helped some of the teams that were developing big proposals to run those through the system.  I worked cost sharing when the university gave money to individual PIs [principal investigators] when they were submitting a proposal.  I looked at the trends of our proposals and made strategic suggestions where we should invest; I worked with policies around research and graduate students.  I was really, you know, I really liked it at Notre Dame, so it was very--I liked the environment, it was very family-oriented, very nice place to work.  One of the things that I was passionate about was trying to make sure that the climate for the black Ph.D. students was amenable, so I actually set up this group and called it BLEND.  It was a group of all the black and Latino Ph.D. students, and I would take them to dinner once a month.  When I first started, they were like, why are you doing this, I'm like, well, you know, I wanted to make sure this community, you know, this community has a voice.  So at first they were a little bit skeptical, but then we would--there were not very many great restaurants in South Bend, but we were going to every restaurant once a month, so we got to know each other really, really well, and then over time, they begin to give me insight into what the real challenges were in the community.  And as associate dean for research, I also was involved in tenure promotion, I was involved with the provost office, so I was tied in really well, and could effect change on some of the things that they were experiencing as students.  So I felt that was just such a wonderful interaction I had at Notre Dame with the students.  Later, I actually became the founding chapter advisor for their first black graduate student association chapter.  So, I just had a really good interaction there from the mentoring standpoint in addition to all the things.  I think you got to do both.  In order to be an effective mentor and promoter of sort of diversification of either student body or faculty, then you also have to be strong with a strong foundation technically, as well as working in a position that gives you the ability to be in one of the mainline things of the institution, either research, teaching, that's while we're here.  So I think you got to be involved in those areas in order to have credibility in the other areas.
Speaker 1: And BLEND would stand for Black and Latino Engineers at Notre Dame?
Speaker 2: Now, this is the funny thing.  I never, ever printed a name on it.  But every time I would meet someone, they'd say that's what it was.  And when the people asked me, I'd say, well, you know, it has a B in it, it has a L in it, it has an E in it, it has an ND in it, but I never did, because the nature of the word, you think about it, BLEND is less about, it's less about the emphasis on the underrepresented minorities, it's more--the BLEND word, itself, is more about how you take those groups and make them fit within an environment that's wider than those things.  So I kind of did the play on words, because I knew people would get it, but I never wrote anywhere what it was, because I wanted to kind of play on, you know, it's kind of interesting.  I remember coming up with the name, and my wife was kind of--she was okay with it, but I remember coming up with the name when we were taking our kids down to the children's museum in Indianapolis [Indiana].  It's about a three-hour drive from South Bend, and I remember saying, well, what do you think about it?  She didn't quite--it's okay, at the end, I said it's great, it does these two things, it kind of plays, you know, it's kind of a pond as well as it kind of looks at this sort of more community integration, if you will.  So it worked, I mean, even to this date, I've been back to Notre Dame twice and I took, both times, I took the group to dinner again, even though I'm no longer there.  I had a good interaction there.  I know I was only at Notre Dame for three years, but it's a place where I see a lot of providence there.
Speaker 1: Has your social IQ ever been measured?
Speaker 2: Oh.  (laughing)
Speaker 1: I like that.
Story_ID: 26643
Speaker 1: Anyway you were at [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana] for three years and then, I guess, a chance came to come here [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Same thing, I was there and I'm going to go backwards again.  So as a young administrator, as a department chair, I got my first opportunity to interview as a dean after being a department chair for two years.  I got called by a head hunter firm and I got the opportunity to interview for a position as dean, I think it's open, so I can say, interview as a dean of arts and science at Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And I made it all the way through the end.  And it was about the same time I had the opportunity to consider Notre Dame. So I made to the campus interview, and then I pulled out near the end, because I wanted to take the Notre Dame position.  So around that time I realized it was--I thought I did really good in the process, but I realized so much about what it would take to be dean that I realized that there were many things I did not know.  So one thing that I decided to do, was I said, you know, I do a lot of travelling, and there are so many experienced deans around the country.  What I'm going to do is every time I take a trip, and I can't tell you how many times I've gone on a trip, went to a meeting, did my thing, and then went to the hotel restaurant, bought dinner, went back up to the room.  You know, I do that, I was doing that too often.  And I thought about it, I said, you know what, I'm on these trips, I'm in these new cities, there are deans and provosts and presidents in these cities. How about instead of going up and eating dinner in the hotel restaurant, why don't I just call ahead and see if a dean or provost would meet with me for dinner or lunch?  So I started doing that and, you know, two years later I met with the president of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], the dean of physical sciences at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], the provost at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], the dean of engineering at John Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], so I kept--whenever you ask, I say, look this is not for a job, I just want to hear your story and kind of hear what challenges you're facing in your position, because in the future, I might want to be a dean or provost or president, so this is a good thing.  So, I also met with the chair at [University of] Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], because it was one of those places where, you know, I said I love football, so when I think about football, I think about being from Georgia.  Some people like Georgia, I've never been a huge Georgia fan.  I've learned to love Georgia Tech because that's my alma mater.  But I was always this huge [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], Miami and Roll Tide (sp).  Those are the three teams I would follow as, you know, coming through high school.  So I just want to go--I wanted to see Miami so I came out and met with the department chair here and, you know, it really wasn't about a job, I came, we were here for a conference, my wife and I came.  The chair at the time gave me a tour of the campus and everything, it was really nice, we talked about being department chair so that was it.  So we stayed in touch; I sent him a gift to say thanks for meeting with me and everything.  So, later, as a part of how we help our students that we mentor in a Ph.D. program, so we would call departments that have positions and mention is there any specific thing you want and can we send a group of our black Ph.D.s to apply?  So I called him about a position they were listing in engineering to see if I can get some insight.  And then he asked me, I don't know if he thought I was considering it for me or not, but he asked me, he said, well would you consider coming.  He said he had just talked to his dean and dean had saw an article I wrote at Chronicle.  So I wrote an article in Chronicle of [Higher] Education with Juan Gilbert that said black computer scientists, endangered species and kind of talked about what it's going to take for us to have more black computer scientists.  And I guess the dean had read it and said, wow, you think this guy's movable and then when we had the conversation here, he mentioned to me, he said, maybe you want to give a talk and literally I got a call maybe a month later about coming and giving a talk.  And in that same visit, I met both President [Donna] Shalala and Provost Tom LeBlanc and then they just, even today, they're just phenomenal supervisors; they just promote, promote, promote, promote.  They sponsor you, they mentor you, you know, so it's really nice to have someone who's kind of a supervisor there looking after you.  So I was just intrigued.  The position they have given me is very broad, so I get the opportunity to kind of, do most of the provostial type of things in addition to being able to continue my research, at least at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26644
Speaker 1: Well, what does being a provost [at the University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida] entail?
Speaker 2: So a provost is actually the academic leader of the institution.  So the president, typically, has two vice presidents, the vice president of academic affairs and the vice president--executive vice president, typically, is for facilities and operations, a CEO versus a chief academic officer, if you will.  So the provost, a lot of times, is that person that oversees all the faculty, all the students, all the curriculum, you know, everything academic falls under the provost.  So as dean I report directly to the provost, but as a vice-provost then I actually also work within the provost office.  My vice provost role is looking at various strategies and policies around research and around faculty enhancement, and then my deanship is really all the graduate programs across the campus.  So with this school being 15,000 students, the combination, the interactions I have with faculty enhancement research and graduate studies is almost like a provost at smaller schools.  So it's a good interaction, great supervisory interactions with my leaders.  It's been a great move, I love it here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you find yourself concentrating more on a STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] related courses than on the other side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've only taught in computer science.  Actually, I take that back.  I've taught e-commerce course in the business school.
Speaker 1: But I mean as a dean of the undergrad school?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I have to be sort of a journeyman now.  Yeah, as dean of the graduate school, that's everything, that's all twelve of our schools. That's music, that includes education, engineering, arts and science, architecture, medicine, what am I missing, the law, I mean, all the schools now have graduate programs I oversee.  So whereas when I was associate dean for research engineering, it's all engineering, so I could just consider engineering.  In that sense, it was very much more comfortable there because I understand, and electrical and computer science are my areas anyway.  Mechanical is somewhat related, it's more general, civil is again, there's a relationship in the core courses so it's easier.  But now it's like one day I'll be evaluating architecture and the next day I'll be evaluating vocal performance.  So it's a little bit different.  And neither one is kind of in my general area, so.  I think those are the pieces that you need to be able to have some leadership over sort of a comprehensive institution, because you really need to be able to understand all the fields.  The graduate program is a phenomenal place to get that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you still are able to do some teaching?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as administrator, I've maintained teaching one course a year.  So I've been administrator, when I look at it, if you consider being department chair, associate dean, now dean, I've been a dean for a year, associate dean for three and chair for three.  So seven years administration, I've at least taught one a year.  But early in my chair ship, I taught two a year.  So I've probably averaged about more than one course a year.  I just taught here as a dean.  So I am actually able to keep teaching.  Research, I used to have multiple, and you would have seen this in my early CV, I had multiple threads of research that were somewhat related but not totally related.  Now, I've got to get--I have multiple threads of research, but they're related to a similar area.  So I kind of have to focus a little bit more and probably, so far the outputs been about the same, but is definitely more focused than I--I can't do all the different areas I'm interested in now, I've got to focus, okay, what am I most interested in now, and how can I look for different threads underneath that primary interest?
Story_ID: 26645
Speaker 1: I have a reference here for service-oriented computing and cloud computing, a paper that you wrote, are you focusing in on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the current--so service orient computing was the new term that came up with--was the basis of my work in my dissertation.  How do you integrate systems, basically, that's the new term.  So if software is used as a service for people, how do you integrate multiple software as a service system is basically service orient computing.  Now cloud computing is when you start putting these services on other people's machines.  So it's kind of different--the paradigms are integrated and they're reciprocal, but they're not, they're not quite the same.  So a lot of the work I do now is like I'm looking at how do you span the workflows across various machines on a cloud environment, and how do you reduce energy footprint, and how do you increase performance, how do you differentiate between the various services that go on different machines so you could optimize the ones that need the heaviest load on the machines that have the highest capacity.  So we do a lot.  So that paper that you talked about, what the major issues are between those two paradigms and both paradigms are very close to my background.  So, it's been good.  And a lot of the work that I'm doing now is just that.  We actually have one project where I had a student that actually worked on spanning workflows across clouds.  I have another student that worked on spanning workflow across clouds and managing energy so that the clouds could be in different geographical areas. Then I have another student that's looking at how do you manage big data analytics across cloud machines. So a couple of really cool projects now, but they're all kind of underneath that theme.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26646
Speaker 1: So what would you consider to be the, I guess, a cutting edge in computer science now if a young person getting involved in computer science, what do you think they should be focusing on as a future hot topic in computer science?
Speaker 2: I really think now is a good confluence between systems and data; more so than before, particularly, when you think about big data.  So I think currently, and this is not the only topic, but I've moved into this, so I'm somewhat biased, but I think students that have a really strong system background, and the ability to integrate those systems background with sort of the assessment of data, would do really well, because I think many of the data has become so plentiful so that there's just, I mean, with social networking and with the sensor data, the collection of data is really generated in inexpensive nature of how you can store it has actually made it available.  So how you use it to make decisions is not clear.  And you can't quickly use it unless you have a keen sense of how to process across multiple machines.  So students that are looking at sort of this distributed computing and how it overlaps with ability to deal with large, you know, excess-scale data, I believe, the confluence of those two is the new thing right now.  So, you'll see it happen, I mean, you'll see even those who do robotics or agents, looking into this area of how you develop stand-alone software that can actually do data analysis tasks.  So, yeah, that will be my best assessment right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26647
Speaker 1: I think before we started interviewing, we were talking about your friendship with Ayanna Howard [also a HistoryMaker] and Dr. [Andrew] Williams [also a HistoryMaker].  What aspects--I know you mentioned ontology as one aspect of your work that coincides--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --with what they're doing with robotics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so when you're interacting, when you're trying to--systems are, well you know, software systems and robotics are inherently dumb. So they only know--they typically only know what you establish for them as a framework.  So in order for them to understand meanings of words and meanings of messages, you have to establish an ontology, which is almost like a dictionary.  It's actually more like a thesaurus of terms, it shows what terms are related to other terms, and then they can associate those terms to various meanings they may have within their workflow processes.  However, not all organizations use the same dictionary or the same ontology.  So the work that I've done with Dr. Andrew Williams is, if different organizations or robots or groups are using different ontologies, it is inherently going to be some interaction.  So we worked on processes to actually, we call that local consensus ontology.  How do you develop a consensus of the aspects of the ontology from two different organizations that could be used for new organizations trying to get into that game, or use for subsets of the same.  So a lot of my work, like I said, is integrating systems.  Many times systems aren't built with knowledge of other systems a priori so this allows varying systems to kind of integrate their messaging automatically as opposed to kind of going in, actually rewriting what they have so they use the same ontology or try to adopt an ontology that their systems are not capable to use.  So, that's the general, and it works across.  With Dr. Andrew Williams, we actually looked at it for just that sense.  With Ayanna Howard, we looked at it as a way for robots to use things like Google search.  So how do you take what a robot understands and associate it with what can be understood from the returns from some web search, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26648
Speaker 1: So, I would guess at this stage, you probably see yourself as a university president at some point?
Speaker 2: I could imagine that.  You know, my current role is so broad and so fulfilling that it currently gives me everything, it gives me that feeling.   I'm in a location that I really like and everyone's really settled so I could imagine being a president at some point.  The president's job is a lot different.  So right now I get a chance, I can actually touch and feel things, like I can interact with the faculty, I can interact with the departments, I can have a direct impact on the curriculum, I can set up new structures.  The president and provost roles, to a certain extent, are very much strategic and sort of in a different hemisphere.  So once you make that leap, I think, to provost or president, you become less involved in what you can touch and feel and more involved in setting, sort of directions and milestones and such, in my opinion, and you spend a lot more time interacting with stake holders and constituents.  And it becomes very difficult to even have a skeleton of a research programs at those two positions, because you're the central person for everyone.  So, either you're a central program for all academics or you're a central program for everything.  So I think while, you know, I've been blessed with the ability to get to this role as dean and vice provost relatively early in my career which is going to give me the opportunity to really enjoy this longer and still have the ability to, in the future, look and see if I could be a president and still be within the standard timeframe for those options.  Yeah, I could imagine, I thought about it, but it's going to take some time to really not enjoy the sort of things I'm doing now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say not enjoy, but look to enjoy the presidency or provost better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26649
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, I guess, in computer science, what would you consider to be your proudest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: I guess as a computer scientist, there are a couple of things that I really have appreciated looking back.  So number one, if I look at it from a technical standpoint, I really appreciated sort of the central workflow techniques we developed, which kind of is a modeling approach.  So the way that's been expanded to areas in medicine in logistics like aviation, and internet ecommerce or internet process communication, that's been really fulfilling and being able to kind of look at lower levels and kind of continue sort of having an impactful research that actually decomposes that problem, by far, I think that's been the strongest contribution.  Even things I do today are subsets of what that general idea was, you know, from actually interweaving workflow processes for the systems of systems that have workflow processes, but I think, technically, I think that's probably the biggest contribution.  When I look back at, and this is interesting, I look back at a career, I think about the time that I devoted to mentoring, I think that's probably my strongest--I have the strongest passion for is that when I look at the students that, like I've had, probably mentored thirty, there's been thirty or thirty-two undergraduates, and undergrad research really has been a strong part of my research, but the undergraduates that have been in my lab have been thirty, thirty-two, of that group, I probably had forty research papers that I co-authored with undergraduates.  And of that group, I've had six or seven who continue to get their Ph.D.  And currently, two have gone in to become professors and others have went to industry, and I got two others that are still in the system.  So, many have gone to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the University of Maryland, so kind of like that interaction and the ability to kind of continue to bring on students that went into industry and have them work with me over the years has been so fulfilling.  I've interacted with enough students that there's no week that goes by that I don't get an email from some student I've interacted in the past and kind of seen their careers progress.  That impact, I mean, it's hard to beat that sort of impact, you know, you look at--and I've had PhD students too.  So you look at--I've looked at the core of summer students that have actually, where I've been the primary advisor, that number has got to be somewhere around 60 or 70, and you know, it kind of feels like a, at this point, it feels like a town, you know, of all the people they've advised and all the different organizations they're in.  I actually had a colleague that worked with me at Lockheed who remembered how I use to articulate object oriented design.  I used to say that when you have--the reason I use object oriented design is because you don't want to--you want to allow things to be encapsulated, meaning that it can do a particular thing without being tied to a particular thing.  So, for example, if you have pair of pliers in your toolbox, I should be able to use your pair of pliers, it shouldn't be specific to your hands.
Speaker 1: I can get my hands to use (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So I always use that example, I'd say, look, when you encapsulate a functionality, and you make it scalable and reusable, it needs to be able to do the thing it does and it needs to be open to different other types of systems, so it can't be just specialized.  So I had a student that graduated from my class and then went to go work at, I think he went somewhere in Charlotte [North Carolina], ended up working for somebody that I worked with on a consulting project back in Dallas [Texas].  And that person remembered me teaching the course in object oriented design, and when she made that parallel, he immediately associated with me and it just turned out they made that connection.  And it just triggered to me at that point just how, you know, what the impact you can make.  So this was the impact I made in the classroom, not just an impact I would have had with students that were in my lab.  So if I count, you know, I've taught, gosh maybe thirty different courses at this point, and if you just give it a conservative estimate of 15 students per class then, you know, that's 500 there, 450, 500 there, yeah, another 70, 67 students that were directly under our mentorship, I think that's the huge impact.  I think if you can somehow expand out your reach from that perspective, I think you can really make a significant sort of impact to society.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  You approached, I guess, computer problem is evolutionary, it seems as though your mentorship is the same?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  I mean here I have worked closely, well, one of the first things I decided to do coming to Miami was to have lunch with each of the presidents of the organizations that pretty much assimulate underrepresented minorities on campus.  At the same time, I've engaged with graduate students, the Black Graduate Student Association, so I think its--and then I've just built a research lab that's very diverse, you know, we're from all countries, all backgrounds, so it's been nice.  So I think for those who are in the field of computer science, if you can find a way to make a comprehensive--you don't really have to be an administrator to do this, you can kind of do this within your lab but I think you should really look to make sure that your engagement is as rich as possible. I think it has to have--it can't be just a technical working on a computer in the lab somewhere, where you don't talk to people.  It's got to be a sense where maybe you take your lab work to industry, you work with government, you have the ability to use your--to work with your students, to use those techniques to extend out beyond the institution.  I think it's just making that comprehensive engagement is just, that's the impact, I think that's when you really begin to make a difference.  I think the end of life is when you look back at that and say that's what you're going to be most proud of, it's not going to be the one or two papers that got cited in this journal and that magazine.
Story_ID: 26650
Speaker 1: Now, once again, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think there would be big things I would do differently.  And you know, this is one of those debates where you talk to people, and they say, you should never think you should do things differently because you obviously have done things well.  Small things I would probably do a little bit differently.  And I think about this each day.  So, to make this more generic, I think I would keep closer connection to people who are a decade ahead of me.  So, if you could pace with somebody who's ten years ahead of you, as far as--if I understood better the issues that I have today ten years ago, I'd have been better ten years ago, I think.  So, like for example, I'll give you a concrete example.  As a person that oversees tenure promotion, we look really heavily at some of these metrics around how many times your paper was cited, not only how much money you've received from sponsored research, but where did it come from, what was your, kind of how did you make impact so you want to know what specific area where the person called you an expert in, and these things have to be really clean.  And when you start your career, you tend to be more broad and less specialized.  And you don't do the tactical things that lead to the outcomes that people ask for at this point.  So I think the one thing I would do differently is I would probably--I've start doing this a little better now, was that--with the things I've done with administration with connecting with deans, I've found ways to kind of out, can you look--try to look into the future and find those who are highly connected to what you want to be and then really understanding what their daily challenge is, because that will give you a sense of, you know, how you can prepare for that.  So, that's the one thing I'd do a little bit differently.  I think early in my career, probably I'd say late '90s' (1990s), I think I may have been a little bit, and hopefully I have gotten better, a little bit arrogant at those points.  I think you have to somehow temper that and accept what you can learn from those who are in roles, not just what they can tell you about today, and maybe they can't tell you exactly what's the best A or B decision is today, but I tell you, they can tell you what's the best alphabet over-arching alphabet decision you're going to make today that's going to impact, you know, the future, so that's the one thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26651
Speaker 1: I read too that one of your goals for University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] is to bring it up to as one of the top institutions (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.  That's one of our strategic plans, not just engineering, but we're lookin--so if you look at, I was professor at both Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], and if you consider US News and World Reports, they rank them 17, I think in 19 or 20th respectively.  So the University of Miami has been ranked 38, I think now 42 or 44.  So they've been kind of in that right around 40 range for the last three years or so.  However, if you look at the institution, you look how comprehensive it is, you look at the strength of the medical school, you look at a lot of things and the location, it's poised to be right there with them.  So, this is one thing I heard when interviewing is that Miami is a place on the move, and it really is.  I mean, the sort of things that can be done, it's a very young institution, not ninety years yet.  So, one of the things I'm hoping to do is to try to find ways to develop programs that are world class and innovative, contemporary, you know, things that other institutions wouldn't be brave enough to do.  I think this is the place and it kind of fits with my own background of being somewhat early to this position as far as my time in industry or a time in academia gives me a sense of being a little bit more, you know, I will take more risk.  So I think the idea is looking for these new models that haven't been addressed that kind of challenges traditional means of instruction.  So, that's what we're looking at, at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26652
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: You know for the African American community, I think we--my sense looking back is that we don't, as a community, and maybe this is because our community is somewhat splintered from origin, we don't always come together.  When I see some of the other populations like, and some of this is international students that come over, they really connect well, I mean, even to the point where they have networks of people of that same origin that help groups of students that are coming in, so they actually set up support groups.  I don't know if this is formally or informally, but it's a  natural--
Speaker 1: You're talking about, to be clear, you're talking about how other groups galvanize with each other?
Speaker 2: --Indeed, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not how they disperse out?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So even in--even how international students come in and they disperse to different parts of the United States, they seem to have major hubs of people that help other people.  Even when they get into this organization, they neatly connect and so I don't see that same cohesiveness in sort of the black African American community.
Speaker 1: Do you think the black community got a misunderstanding of what integration is in a sense that, you know, there's so much emphasis on the rugged individual going out--
Speaker 2: Exactly, right. I think we, and you see this sometimes, I think that those of us who have so-called succeeded, we don't always give back and we don't--we have a short memory, we lose sense of where we were which makes it either, we're unwilling to go and kind of connect back with our origins or maybe we don't feel qualified, maybe we're too busy, I don't know, but there's not the same sort of hub, so we--in the computer science area, a lot of us work together to try to develop that sort of communication structure, but you don't--you just don't, and again, that's not the answer because you see that those who are already in college are already in a different place, so I think there needs to be sort of the same sort of interaction at all reach of society.  I had a grant for the National Science Foundation [NSF] and the attempt was to try to popularize computing to the mainstream.  That wasn't just for those who are already in science and engineering, this was actually, can you do it at a basketball game, can you do at a shopping mall, can you do it at the local library, you know, can you find ways to engage those communities no matter where they may be and to attract students into these fields.  So I think we don't do that as well.  Like, for example, there's a smaller group of students who graduated from some of these long traditional institutions but then that smaller group feels, a lot of times feels so--have such hard feelings about how the environment was when they came through, they don't always give back to the current group or find ways to improve the situation.  So I think we, as a people, have to be more proactive.  It just, you know, and this is just one person's assessment.  My assessment is that of the ethnic backgrounds I've seen, I don't think, you know, that African American is probably least cohesive in that sense.  So, I think that's the big thing is to try to find ways to expand that communication and find ways to share data across different societal economic backgrounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26653
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your family.  We didn't cover the story, how you met your wife and your children?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, my wife, she also went to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  She's a mechanical engineer.  So we have any number of debates about the value of electrical engineering versus mechanical engineering.  So she went and got her MBA from John Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  But we knew each other as undergraduates, but we didn't, I guess we didn't, at that point, we weren't that serious.  So what happened was we reconnected maybe four years, in 1999, almost around the same time I was graduating.  And then we started dating and then we became more serious and got married in 2000.  So definitely, we--and it's kind of been escalating.  I knew her and we just--we're best friends as well as husband and wife and you know, from that point--one thing that she did that was kind of interesting is that when we first started dating, she was very open to my desire to finish my Ph.D. and then I have, again I tell you, I have this--my dad gives me this shutter vision, so when I'm working on something, I like to work really hard for a long period of time with no interruptions, and then I'll play really hard for a long time with no interruptions.  But when I was going through and people asked, well, how did you finish your Ph.D. in three years and you also worked full time?  That's because I had a very regiment day, you know, Monday night, six to nine, I think Wednesday night six to nine, I take class on Tuesday and Thursday, Friday I take off and then Saturday morning it was like a job, I'd wake up like a regular day and work eight hours.  And it was pretty much those two nights during the week and then Sunday after church, I would actually kind of get sorted out for the week.  It's not hard work I could do on Sunday, it's kind of get a sense of what next week is going to be about.  And I had to have those times to be successful in my sense.  So I didn't really want to touch my six to nine times on Monday or Wednesday, and I couldn't touch my class times on Tuesday and Thursday and then on Saturday it was important for me to have that, and I wouldn't work all day, but I do like a seven o'clock to three o'clock or something like that.  My wife, when we first started dating, she was so supportive of that, she'd come over and, you know, do her thing or study, because she was in the MB program and she just like, you know, I know how he is, he just needs that--needs to work uninterrupted for that period of time.  I get something to drink like water or something and maybe a bite to eat and I'll just work straight through.  So I think--I appreciated that about her, and I did like the fact that she's highly intelligent.  It's kind of, I went to Georgia Tech, I struggled a couple of years; my wife was phenomenal all the way through.  So kind of getting a sense, she's--and you kind of need that sort of partner in your life that can kind of, you know, she makes her own--she's successful with her own rights and then, you know, when I can support her, she can support me, so it's been a really, a really good marriage in that sense.  We have two young boys.  We have Brendon Blake is our--Brendon Malworsth Blake is our oldest; he's going to be nine [years old] this year.  He actually was born maybe two weeks after I put in my tenure application.  So it was almost like a schedule.  Nothing I could do about that application by the time he was born.  So, he came to us.  And then my second one was born in South Bend [Indiana].  So, we hadn't quite decided to have a second one, and then once we moved to Notre Dame, which is a really phenomenal community, we definitely are happy to be blessed with a second one.  He'll be two this year.  So we have a little bit of a gap, a seven year gap between the two, but they're both phenomenal.  My older son, he's doing really, really well.  He reminds me of me in elementary school.  And the younger one, definitely I always say he going to be--he's a little stockier, relatively thin frame.  You're going to be the strongest Blake of us all.  So definitely we have a good mix.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26654
Speaker 1: Now do you approve of the Miami football teams?
Speaker 2: I do, I do.  We got to put some Ws in there, but definitely, I've always been a fan.  I mean, who couldn't.  I mean I was in high school in the '80s' (1980s).  Who could not, the Kanes in the '80s' (1980s).  I mean it was a black person's team in a sense back then, I mean you couldn't of liked football and not been interacting with Miami.  I mean, you love 'em or hate 'em, you had to know about them back then. So I kind of grew up, you know, like most in my--that came through my era liking or at least knowing about Miami.  I got to know the [University of] Alabama, when they beat [University of] Miami in '92' (1992), you know, and I kind of tracked them for a little while as well.  And then [University of] Notre Dame, like I said, Notre Dame was legend, but I tracked them pretty close when I was in high school, because I went to a school that was kind of a feeder for Notre Dame in a sense.  So definitely, but I think Miami football, I think we've only seen the, you've only seen like a part of what is to come.  Last year they had a nice season and having had a recruiting season that they could really, you know, stake claim to for some time, so I think there's more to come here, so I'm looking forward to it.
Story_ID: 26655
Speaker 1: One thing that was, is another interesting story, is that I might have mentioned it when I was working at my dad's gas station.  I used to get tips because I was working when I was somewhere between seven and ten years old.  So I started a bank account in 1981 or '82' (1982), I was ten or eleven years old with forty dollars.  And so, it was like my first account.  My dad took me down there.  We started an account just based on tip money I had received.  So each year I would put a little bit of money in that account and then when I would work summers, I would put a little money in that account.  I think maybe I had close to a thousand when I went to college.  Then every summer I worked internship in college, I'd put away a thousand.  So somewhere around the time I graduated, I had about somewhere between five and ten thousand dollars in that account, the same account I started when I was eleven years old, or ten or eleven.  So I bought my first house the summer before I had started--the summer at my senior year, I bought a first house in Orlando [Florida] for job at Lockheed Martin from that money.  So that kind of had the down payment for the house I bought.  It was like a three bedroom, two baths.  So I always say to people, I'm like, I started an account when I was eleven that really allowed me to get a house right out of college and that house has been turned over, I sold that and I bought a house in Atlanta [Georgia] and then I kept the house in Atlanta, bought another house so it's kind of, I always say that's been one of the success stories because my dad was entrepreneur at the time and he showed me the value of saving your money and investing it later.  Again, I always tell that story to try to share the idea of why it's important to manage your money effectively.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Good story.
Story_ID: 26656
Speaker 1: Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know I really would hope that those who've met me would remember that I was the type person that would really try to give you the shirt off my back.  So, and that's not just to say, financially, because it's not that.  I like to be remembered as a person that cared enough about society, not just from the technical perspective, but cared enough about increasing the capabilities of, you know, African Americans in technology so much so that you can call me at any time, I was the type of person that went above and beyond the call of duty to try to, if it took one by one, to try to find ways to enhance and to bring more African Americans in science and engineering, if you will.  And I want to be the type of person that does that, not just by leveraging the abilities I may have in whatever role I'm serving, but I also want to be the person that continues to show by example.  So, not very many engineers, faculty or deans who are also black and also grew up in sort of early life being sort of in a depressed area.  So I really like to be of that kind of continuum of that track and serve both as a role model as well as a person that's kind of for one the foundationally have done it the way everyone, you know, all mainstream expects you should and additionally the type person that never lost touch and continue to be able to give back and to promote, you know, this ability for more African Americans to be in STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] fields.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
