Story_ID: 275151
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Rico [McFarland].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Well, my stage name is [HistoryMaker] Ronnie Baker Brooks, R-O-N-N-I-E, Ronnie; Baker, B-A-K-E-R; Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S.  My legal name is Rodney Dion Baker, which is R-O-D-N-E-Y; Dion is spelled D-I-O-N; and Baker, B-A-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your, is there a story behind why you have Brooks as a last name, as a stage name?
Speaker 2: Well, I picked that up from my dad, [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Brooks, he took on that name.  When he came to Chicago [Illinois], they had--originally his stage name was Guitar Junior.  And when we came to Chicago, there was already a Guitar Junior [Luther Johnson] playing with Muddy Waters, and a lot of people were getting them confused.  So, he took on the name Lonnie Brooks.  My interpretation of the story is when he was down in Louisiana, they spoke a lot of broken English.  And they used to call him Little Lee because his name is Lee Baker, Jr.  And somehow, it came out Lonnie.  From Little Lee to--
Speaker 1: From Little Lee to Lonnie?
Speaker 2: --to Lonnie.  And, and his best friend's family last name was Brooks, so he took on Lonnie Brooks.  And when I was born, the story I was told was that my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] named me Rodney and my dad nicknamed me Ronnie.  And so when I decided to take on music as a career, I just used my real last name which is Baker, and my dad's stage name, Brooks, so that they could see the affiliation, and that I could also have my own identity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean the blues world in terms of names is kind of complicated sometimes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because I know Piano Red had the same thing.  You know, there was somebody else [Willie Lee Perryman] named Piano Red.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, he's [HistoryMaker] Piano C. Red now--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because there's another Piano Red.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're Guitar Junior, and you find out there's another junior up here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And there's a lot of names like that.  Like Guitar Slim, you know, Detroit Junior, people like that.  You know, the way they remembered you was like if you played guitar or whatever you played, they took something from your name, like a junior or Chicago Slim; I'm just making up a name, you know.  He's a slim guy and he's from Chicago, so Chicago Slim, you know.  (Laughter) So, I'm assuming that's how it was done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 23, 1967, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right.  And well, this sounds crazy, but what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 17, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or is it--it's the 18th?
Speaker 1: It's the 18th, right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, 2005 August 18, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at [The] HistoryMakers in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 275152
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that I have to ask you.  And you know it because you were at your father's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] interview (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So, they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I like southern food.  I like greens, you know, beans, cornbread, chicken.  (Laughter) I like a lot of fruit as well.  So, but my favorite food would probably be southern food, soul food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a good one.  I like any time, you know, but probably I would say spring and fall.  I like summer, too.  And of course winter is kind of hard on us here in Chicago [Illinois].  But I would probably say right now--it changes in my lifetime.  When I was younger, it was summer.  And at one time it was winter, because I always liked to play in the snow.  But now it's fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, I take that back.  Australia, Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've been there before, and it's beautiful.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite?  (Laughter) No, not really.  Do I have one, Rico [McFarland], that I say all the time?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, you say quite a bit (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, man, what would be my favorite? Oh, I don't know, man.  I'm trying to think off the top of my head.  You got me.  Me and my auntie, we like to play cards.  So we say, "What time the plane leave?"  That means what time we gonna play some cards?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that would probably be one.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, that's interesting--
Story_ID: 275153
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jeannine Baker, J-E-A-N-N-I-N-E, B-A-K-E-R.  Her middle name is Marie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Broussard.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I want to say B-R-O-U-S-S-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born February 26, 1941, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  Where do they come from, and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I don't know too much about my mom's side of the family.  The only one I can remember is my grandmother Lorraine [Broussard Owens] and her sisters.  I was raised around them.  But as far back as that--my great-grandmother was passed.  She passed before I was born.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, well, do they tell any stories about where they come from or where they--you know, or different stories about what happened in the family way back when?
Speaker 2: I didn't hear too much.  Because, you know, when I was a kid they used to keep me away from them, as far as, you know, when they started talking.  When the adults got together, they'd make the kids go and play.  So I didn't hear too many stories about that side of the family.  I can just remember like my aunties--Vivian, my  Aunt Vivian [ph.], my Aunt Mary [ph.], my Aunt Agnes [ph.], who's still alive now, and my aunt--I'm missing somebody--oh, Uncle Martin [ph.], and Aunt Marlene [ph.].  And that's it that I can remember right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But with a name like Broussard, are they like from Louisiana, or--?
Speaker 2: No, but my understanding--I don't know--I didn't know my grandfather [Joseph Broussard] that well from my mama's side.  But he, my understanding is that he was from Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mom's father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, there's no family tradition of being from anywhere else other than Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes, basically yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what did they do for a living?   What did--
Speaker 2: Well, my mom worked for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] for twenty-five years.  She's retired now.  Most of my aunties that I remember were just home--housewives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My uncles was working and taking care of the families, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up in Chicago, I mean what neighborhood she grew up in, or what school she went to?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  She grew up--well, I remember them living--she was telling me they used to live on, I want to say 43rd [Street] and Drexel [Boulevard].  And the same, they all lived the same building at one time.  And my great-grandmother and grandfather--my grandfather was the manager of the building.  And I hear them talking a little bit about that.  And that's where she was I believe when she met my dad, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think Buddy Guy was living in that building as well when he first came to Chicago.  He lived in the same building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did she go to high school?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: That, I don't know, man.  I can't tell you that, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: 43rd and Drexel, you think maybe [Wendell] Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  In those days--
Speaker 2: Possibly.
Speaker 1: Or, well, no, she's not that old.  So, you know, it could be--
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I've never asked.
Speaker 1: --yeah, DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], maybe Phillips.  Let me think.  But, okay.
Story_ID: 275154
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Jeannine Broussard Baker and Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] meet?  Is there a story?
Speaker 2: The story I was told is they met--I heard two stories.  (Laughter) My dad--well, they agree on one story.  But he told me once that they met at this club called the Blue Flame [Lounge, Chicago, Illinois].  And then he also told me they met--my mom had heard about this guy named Guitar Junior.  My mom always liked music.  Her and her friends actually sang in a group at one time, but she didn't take it serious.  And she heard about this guy named Guitar Junior, and she wanted to check him out.  Went to the show and sat down.  And my dad walked up, and she didn't know that this was Guitar Junior.  And they got to talking, you know.  And the next thing you know, it was time for Dad to go up on stage.  And he goes up on stage, and she realized that that was Guitar Junior.  And she was like, "Whoa, I didn't know that," you know.  And it became, they started dating after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he met her--if I'm not mistaken, I remember him saying they met at a club called the Blue Flame on 39th [Street] and, I want to say 39th and Lake Park [Avenue].  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wasn't in Chicago [Illinois] in those days.  But it--yeah.  Yeah, that could be--
Speaker 2: It's over in that area, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember it being it being in that area.
Speaker 1: Over near the lake [Lake Michigan], basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now, what year did they meet?
Speaker 2: That I don't remember.  It had to be--my dad got to Chicago in 1959, so it had to be around there, 1959 somewhere.
Story_ID: 275155
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lee Baker, Jr., a.k.a. [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Brooks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-E, B-A-K-E-R, Jr.; Lonnie Brooks, L-O-N-N-I-E, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 18, 1933.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Dubuisson, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know how to spell it (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think it's D-U-B-U-I-S-S-O-N, I think.
Speaker 2: I think it's two Bs I think.
Speaker 1: Two Bs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But the nearest city I remember him saying was Bunkie [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Oh, Bunkie?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is named after a monkey.  Did you know that?
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Well, that's the story, that this rich guy bought his daughter a monkey.  And she couldn't pronounce monkey, so she called it a bunkie.
Speaker 2: Bunkie.
Speaker 1: So, the town, you know, somehow--
Speaker 2: Became Bunkie.
Speaker 1: Since the guy was so rich he called it Bunkie, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what I heard (laughter).
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: We heard, we interviewed a man [HistoryMaker Isiah M. Warner] who's a chemist at Louisiana State University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], who's like--what is his name, Dr.--?  Well, at any rate he was born [sic.] in Bunkie.
Speaker 2: Bunkie.
Speaker 1: And he's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He told the story of how it was named.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: All right.  So it's a strange--.  But it's near Bunkie.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that one.
Speaker 1: So, your father, now he's--what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember my grandmother, I remember meeting her.  Her name was Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E, Baker.  And my grandfather, of course, his name was Lee, he was Lee Baker, Sr.  And I didn't get a chance to meet them until I was twenty years old, like nineteen or twenty, down in Louisiana.  Because they didn't, they didn't fly, they didn't like to get on planes.  So, I didn't get to meet them until I was much older, when I started traveling with my dad.  So, I was about eighteen or nineteen years old.  I remember my dad talking about his grandfather, and I believe his name, I believe it's Joseph.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he, your great-grandfather--now, I know your father talked about him at length.  And he played the banjo?
Speaker 2: He's the one that taught him about--well, introduced him to music.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he was also a strong man too, or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about him?
Speaker 2: I remember Dad saying he used to crack peanuts, pecans with his hand.  He'd just open it and crack it.  He had very big, strong hands.  And one story I remember Dad telling me was about him playing the banjo at these little house parties down in Louisiana.  And he wouldn't get paid, so they would give him alcohol.  And Dad would be responsible for him getting back home.  (Laughter) And I remember Dad telling me that several times when he wasn't there, my grandfather trained the horse to take him home.  He'd get on the back of the carriage or whatever, and the horse would go straight home (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think he said he'd go to sleep--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd fall asleep--
Speaker 1: --and the horse would take him home.
Speaker 2: And the horse would go right there, yeah.  I remember--you know, I've got a lot more stories on my father's side.  Because I spent more time on the road with Dad, you know, riding down the highway, and he'd tell me stuff like that.  And, yeah, I remember that.  I remember him saying that he, his grandfather didn't want him to play.  Well, actually, he tried to teach him to play banjo, but he didn't want to play the banjo, he wanted to play the guitar.  Because the banjo was staccato, like (musical sounds), you know, whereas the guitar rings (musical sound).  So, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever meet your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Never met him.
Story_ID: 275156
Speaker 1: Did your father [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard stories about him growing up in Louisiana, in the South.  And I actually--when I first went down there the first time, I actually went to the house that he was raised in.  And he showed me where he wrote his first song.  He showed me where the boss house was.  (Laughter) And I believe the house is still there.
Speaker 1: Well, describe the house to us.  What was the house like?  And what was the boss house like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a big, big house.  I remember it being a big white house, if I'm not mistaken.  And Dad's house was a one-room shack.  It had one room in it.  It had a kitchen and a living room with a fireplace.  And I remember going in there.  And it was sitting on top of, I believe it was sitting on top of some kind of stones.  And he said he used to crawl under there to stay cool, because it was so hot.  And he showed me a tree that he used to lay up under, where he wrote his first song 'Family Rules.'  And I went inside the house, and I'm looking around.  They didn't have insulation back then, so they would take paper and insulate the house to keep you warm in the winter.  And I found a calendar on the wall from December, 1951.  And he said that was around the time he left.
Speaker 1: And I think he was saying that the paper--you could actually read the paper as it was stuck on the wall.  You could actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could still read it.
Speaker 1: You still could--
Speaker 2: You could still read it, you know.  But it was a calendar, and it was the last page on the calendar of December of '51 [1951].  And he said that was around the time he left home and he moved to Texas.  He begged his dad [Lee Baker, Sr.] to let him move, because it was tough down there.  And he said, "Well, if I move, I'll send you half my money, you know, that I make from working."  And that was the only way that his father would let him leave, because they had to work; the whole family had to work.
Speaker 1: Now, your father was able to--you know, he got discovered by Clifton Chenier, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, what's--can you tell us that story?  Do you remember that story?  Or, what were the significant things, I guess, that your father told you about how he made it in the music business?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the initial thing that Dad would say to me--his initial introduction--it was just the passion of the music.  He just wanted to play guitar.  He just, it wasn't about making a bunch of money.  It wasn't about--the initial part of it wasn't about being a star or nothing like that; he just liked playing.  And he would tell me he would practice for like eight hours a day or more, you know.  And one night, one particular day he was practicing on the porch, and Clifton Chenier pulls up in his car and he heard this guitar.  And he walked up to him and said, "Do you play?"  And he said, "Yeah."  And he said, "Let me play with you."  And they jammed a little bit.  And he said, "Well, you're good enough to play with me.  Come on, I've got a gig tonight," or something like that, or the next day or whatever.  And he began playing with Clifton that way.  And he never thought it would become what it is today; he just did it because he liked it.  And then once he got into playing with Clifton, he realized that this was an opportunity to do something other than working at the steel mill or whatever, you know, and he started to take it as a career.  But he didn't know the business side of it as well, you know, and so he got used up a lot, you know, taken advantage of.
Story_ID: 275157
Speaker 1: Did he [Brooks' father, Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] try to like pass on to you all how to avoid that kind of--
Speaker 2: A lot of it, yeah.  You know, I mean just telling those kinds of stories, you know, and allowing me to see certain things that a normal side musician wouldn't see--you know, like the business part, taking care of the inside stuff, you know, like running a business, you know.  And you have to be on top of everything, you know.  He always told me, you know, and I remember today, that you've got to have a vehicle to get to your gig.  This is when you're starting a band off, you know, you've got to have a vehicle.  It's like, that's like your instrument as well.  Take care of it, change the oil, fix the tires, you know, where a lot of people don't even think about that.  They just jump in the car and go, "We got a gig" or whatever, you know, and the car breaks down.  That's going to happen anyway.  But if you try to do preventive maintenance on it, you can alleviate a lot of that, you know.  Stuff like that.  Or, taking care of the business.  You know, sometimes you got to go out there and work just to keep the machine going.  You know, you might not make no money, you know.  So, you know, and I didn't really understand that until I got on my own.  Because see, I look--even today, man, I look at my dad like some people look at Elvis Presley.  I never thought that I could play music, because I looked at Dad like, "That's--I can't do that.  That's untouchable.  You know, that's--."  And he instilled confidence in me and my brother, "Yes, you can do it.  And this is how you're going to do it.  If you want to do it, though.  You've got to want to do it."  And I remember times when we would be playing around the house, me, him, and [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Baker Brooks].  And Wayne would be playing on some boxes, and I would be playing bass.  You know, we'd tune the guitar down where I'd play the bass parts, and Dad would play the guitar, and we'd be having fun with it.  But then it got to when I started taking it seriously, I couldn't play in front of my dad.  I couldn't sing, I couldn't do none of that, because I was intimidated by him, you know.  And it freaked me out when--I think it all started when I went to see Dad play at the ChicagoFest here in Chicago [Illinois].  And I saw the people going (noise).  And I was like "Ohhh--."
Speaker 1: Was that the first time you saw him perform?
Speaker 2: The first time.  Well, I take that back.  I went in the club with him before.  I was nine years old, but I was young.  I wasn't thinking like that, like I was when I was about--I'd say when I was about twelve or fourteen.  It was a little different mentality.  When I was nine, it was like a thing to do because Daddy was doing it.  You know, when I got a little older and taking music a little serious, I was like, okay, I can't do that.  You know, I can't do what Dad is doing like that, and especially when I saw them people going crazy over Dad like that.  It was like unbelievable.  But it kind of intimidated me, you know.  I was like "I can't even play in front of him."  I used to have to hide.  He'd say, "[HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks], if you can't play in front of me, and I'm your dad, you won't be able to play in front of the people.  I'm going to tell you if it's right or wrong, you know."  You know, and he built that trust in me, where I could let it out.  Now, I run to him when I've got a new song or something I wrote, "Check this out, Dad."  (Laughter) So it kind of, that was the first time it hit me, when I was twelve at the Chicago Fest.
Story_ID: 275158
Speaker 1: Do I have a--An earliest, a first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] used to tell me, and my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker], too, that I was always interested in music.  My sister Denise [Baker] used to, they took her to piano school.  She went to learn piano, and she picked up the guitar.  So, there was always music around the house.  You know, like I said, my mom used to sing.  And my dad would of course, you know, do what he does.  And it was always--my auntie would play.  I remember when she lived with us, my Auntie Geraldine [ph.], she would play gospel during the day.  And then in the evening, she'd turn on the blues.  (Laughter) It was always all kinds of elements of music.  You know, my dad listened to a lot of country and, you know, rock and roll, and of course, blues.  And it was all kind of music going on in the house, and my mom said I was always interested in it.  And my dad said when he was--he would play at nights, and mom worked during the day.  He would lay a pallet out on the floor and he'd be playing his guitar.  And me and the kids, my little brother [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] and sister, would be on the floor.  We were little, and so we wouldn't fall out of the bed, we'd be on the floor with him.  And he would fall asleep sometimes with his guitar, and lay his guitar down.  And he said he woke up one day and caught me picking it, and letting it ring, you know, (musical sound).  Whereas my other brother and sister was like, (noise) you know, pulling on it and, you know, just beating on it, where I would just (musical sound) let it ring, you know.  And he said he knew something was there.  And I had to be like two or three years old then.  And he started teaching me when I was six, six years old.  He bought me my own guitar, and my first time on stage I was nine years old.
Story_ID: 275159
Speaker 1: So, you wanted to play when you were young?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You wanted to play?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to play.  You know, like, you know, me and Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] and my sister [Denise Brooks], we all would imitate Dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] around the house, you know.  And at that time I didn't know that my dad was--you know, I thought it was just something we did around the house.  I didn't know that this was Lonnie Brooks, you know.  I didn't know that he was like he was, you know, at that time.  I just knew this is Dad, you know.  And we'd get a broom, and we'd imitate Dad.  I'd see Dad do this, you know, and it was, it turned into a real serious thing once I got a little older.  Then I realized that this is not every day.  This is not what everybody goes through, you know, having a father like this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, your brother Wayne was saying that he really didn't get a guitar until he was about eighteen or nineteen.
Speaker 2: Eighteen, yeah.  Wayne used to play drums.
Speaker 1: He really didn't think about playing one until then?
Speaker 2: Wayne used to play drums, man.  And my dad's dream was for me to play bass, Wayne to play drums, and we'd have our own band.  But then we ended up all playing guitar.  (Laughter) So, you know--.  But Wayne started off on drums.  Wayne would be the, be the timekeeper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe your neighborhood for us?  Where did you live in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I remember growing up on 50th, it was 50th Place.  But the nearest street was Forrestville [Avenue], right across the street from Provident Hospital [John Sengstacke Health Center], over by Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  We lived there, I think we moved there when I was, I was a little baby.  And we stayed there for like thirteen years.  I was thirteen years old when we moved away from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, most of my early childhood memories was there.
Story_ID: 275160
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds, it was real busy.  Like I said, I stayed by a hospital, Provident Hospital [John Sengstake Health Center, Chicago, Illinois].  There were a lot of big families back then, well, big considered by today's standards, you know.  There were a lot of things moving, a lot of things happening.  You know, you had crime, but it wasn't that bad.  But the older I got, it started getting bad.  You had people trying to make a better life for themselves.  You had--I'd hear, you know, ambulances and police sirens because, like I said, we lived by police, I mean by the hospital.  Then you had the park, Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  You had bands over there, you know, like the marching bands or whatever going on.  Just, I remember it being very vibrant, very, you know exciting, you know.  But now when I go back through there, when I go back through there it's smaller than I remember.  Everything is real--
Speaker 1: It's funny how that works.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, when you go back to the place of your youth, it seems a lot smaller.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot smaller, man.  Because I remember walking to the store was like a journey.   And I go there now and it's like, man, it was just right around the corner, you know.  (Laughter) Some of the sights was the park, you know.  I always had a place to play in the place, you know, like two blocks down the street, a block and a half.  We'd be playing softball and football in the park, and swimming at Dyett, Walter [H.] Dyett [High] School [Walter H. Dyett High School for the Arts, Chicago, Illinois].  We used to go in there and swim.  And you know, I remember the Bud Billiken Parade all the time.  You could hear it from my house.  You could hear them on [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive, you know.  That's when we knew it was time to go and check out the parade, because you could hear them getting ready, you know.
Speaker 1: And that's a, you know, that's an annual parade in Chicago [Illinois].  It's the largest parade in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was like--
Speaker 1: And you know, I think people were surprised to find that out.  Because it actually has more floats and more participation than any parade in the United States.
Speaker 2: Man, I remember as a kid seeing Prince there.  And I'm not sure--I'm pretty sure it was Prince, man, back in 1976.  And I remember seeing this cat.  He was young, man, playing the guitar.  And he had this pedal board back then.  You know, he had this pedal board.  And I remember he had some kind of button he'd push and fireworks would shoot out.  I was like, ooh, this guy is good.  And I remember saying this guy from Minneapolis [Minnesota], man, he's going to be the next big thing, you know.  And he was playing on the ground, man.  It wasn't no stage or nothing.  And he got in this big limousine.  I remember this big, I want to say Lincoln Continental, the big ones, you know.  And you know, you got to see that kind of stuff around there, you know, because of the parade.  And we always had--I remember--when you say sights and sounds--I remember I was just talking to my guys about this.  We had--we were having dinner somewhere, and we ate some watermelon.  And I remember when they used to travel around in the trucks selling watermelons off the back of the truck.  And they had this guy with a headband on, and he's singing, (singing) "Watermelon, get yourself a watermelon."  And you could hear him, man, from blocks away, you know.  And they'd go real slow.  And he'd just, I remember seeing him singing, man, and his veins popping out his neck, you know, (singing) "Red as a berry, sweet as a cherry, wa, wa, wa, wa, watermelon."  Boy, you hear that, "Daddy, can we get a watermelon?"  (Laughter) You know, it was always a lot of kids, man, playing.
Story_ID: 275161
Speaker 1: And then you know, as I got older, it got a little rough, you know.  I think that's when the drugs really came in and kind of broke the neighborhood up, you know.
Speaker 2: So, I guess the late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s], it got a little rough or whatever?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, it was during the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], yeah.  I remember one incident before that, though, when I was a little kid.  My dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] was somewhere on the road working, and this kid was walking his dog right next to our house.  We had an apartment complex here, and there was another building on the corner.
Speaker 2: How big a building did you all live in?
Speaker 1: It was a big court way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It had to be probably about twenty-four apartments or more.  You know, because it was three in our--six in our building, it was one big court way.  There were six in our building and it was another building connected to that, and it was six there, six there, and six there.  It was like a big U, and we used to ride our bikes around the sidewalk of the court-way.  And I remember one incident where this kid was walking his dog, he was around my age.  And these guys were racing in these cars coming off of 51st [Street], and they turned down 50th [Place, Chicago, Illinois] and they lost control.  And they killed the dude, smashed him into the building.  And my mama [Jeannine Broussard Baker] thought it was me.  I was out playing somewhere, and I can remember hearing my mama screaming, you know.  And I was like, "What's wrong with my mama?"  And she found me, and she just grabbed me.  She thought it was me.  And the car hit the dog into the basement, it was like a window.  It hit the boy and killed him, and hit the dog and knocked him in the basement.  And we kept that dog.  And--
Speaker 2: It knocked him all the way into the basement?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Through the basement window?
Speaker 1: Yes, and he lived, the dog lived.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we kept him.  And the dog's name was Rex, I remember Rex, man.  And my dad--my mom was so nervous, she called my dad on the road.  He was like, "Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], don't leave the house.  Don't go nowhere."  I remember hearing it in his voice.  He was real--like, "Don't you go nowhere.  Stay in that house until I get home."  And it kind of scared me to hear my dad talk like that, you know.  And then seeing that, you know.  It was really--the whole neighborhood was like just--and everybody was crying.  And it was sad, it was a sad moment, you know.  The family was just distraught.  And that kind of woke me up to being aware of what I'm doing, and watching myself.  Because I was--you know, back then you'd just play; you'd just go out and play.  You weren't thinking about your surroundings.  You know, I felt safe, you know.  But then it started changing a little bit after that.
Story_ID: 275162
Speaker 1: Now, were you all worried about the gang issues in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I had to go through that a little bit.  But what saved me is I had one thing--I had a period where I had quit--and I quit, but I didn't focus on music as much.  I started playing basketball.  Because when I was playing music at that age, man, everybody was older than me.  I mean like my dad's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] friends would come by, and I was trying to learn something from them.  And then it was my sister [Denise Baker] had some friends that played, they had a band.  They were much older than me.  They were, you know, polished musicians.  I was a kid, and I didn't feel like I fit in, you know.  All my friends were playing sports and something else.  And so I kind of got into that, you know, into playing basketball.  And I loved, I always did love sports, and basketball.  And I started taking that seriously.  And I told my dad, you know, when I was in school that I wanted to play basketball.  He was like, "What?"  I said, "Yeah, I want to try that."  He said, "Well, you know, Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], if you want to do this, you ain't going to be able to play music.  You ain't going to be able to do them both like that.  You got to take one or the other.  You got to be serious, you know."  I said, "I can do it.  I can--."  He said, "No."  I said, "I can do it," you know.  And eventually I just put the guitar down, you know, because I got so caught up in the basketball.
Speaker 1: Were you playing over at [Walter H.] Dyett [High School; Walter H. Dyett High School for the Arts, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I would go play over there.  And we would play, I'd play for my grammar school, Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois] on 48th [sic. 49th Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive.  I went to Corpus Christi, and I played for them from sixth grade to eighth.  And then I played at Hales Franciscan [High School, Chicago, Illinois] for four years, all four years of high school.  I was pretty, I thought I was pretty good.  I didn't--if I would have focused on basketball, and I could do my music, I could have gone much, much further.  But I was, it was more of a way to get girls, you know, the hip jock; I wasn't serious.  But I loved the sport, you know.  Because we'd go play up at Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]; we'd go play everywhere.  You know, me and my boys would go play everywhere.  But I didn't take it seriously like some of my friends, you know.  And I played against a couple of guys that's in the NBA [National Basketball Association] now, well, was, like Tim Hardaway.  I played against Ben Wilson before he got killed.  He was the number one ranked--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, yeah, the number one ranked player in the country.
Speaker 2: In the country, from Chicago.
Speaker 1: He was a high school player and was gunned down by some guys in the neighborhood over on--
Speaker 2: By Simeon [Neal F. Simeon Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Simeon School, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: On West 81st Street.
Speaker 2: I remember that day, man.  We were in practice, and the coach told us what happened.  And we cancelled practice, you know.  We had just played against Ben and Simeon in the summer--spring league up at Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], up near Evanston [Illinois], Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And I mean all the big-timers were up there.  I mean, just big headway schools like King [Martin Luther King, Jr. High School; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Simeon back then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They had some great players, you know.  And we were hanging with them, you know, at one time, you know.  Because my school, Hales, they wasn't known for basketball, you know.  And then we kind of put them--at one time they were, back in the '60s [1960s].  But then they had fell off, and we kind of put them back on the map as a school for ball playing.  And now, they're just killing them now.  (Laughter) They just won state twice, so they're doing pretty good.
Story_ID: 275163
Speaker 1: I hurt my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], man, when I decided to do that.  Didn't know it, didn't know it.  And my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] was like, "Hey, let him do what he wants to do."  My dad was like, "Well, if this is what you want to do, do it."  And my dad would work at night.  He'd get off like four in the morning--get home about four in the morning.  Three, four in the morning--and he'd be at my game at nine o'clock in the morning the next day, sitting in the crowd watching me play.  I didn't know what that meant until now, you know, until I got older, you know, that he would support me in whatever I wanted to do, you know.  He would take me to the pizza place after the game or to McDonald's, you know, and sit there with me and talk to me, "You having fun?" you know, whatever, supporting me.  And I didn't realize that I hurt Dad until I got back into playing.  I met my buddy, Bernard Allison, Luther Allison's son.  I saw them playing at ChicagoFest--at Blues Fest [sic. ChicagoFest] at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois].  I believe it was back in 1983, Luther's last show before he moved to Paris [France].  And I had seen him and Bernard up there, his son, Luther's son, Bernard.  And I was like, "Whoa."  And my dad came over to me and said, "Yeah, see, you can be doing that, man."  See, I never had nobody to relate to until Bernard, you know.  Me and Bernard kind of hit it off.  And Bernard told me--I'll never forget it.  He said, "Yeah, Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], we got enough Michael Jordans, we need some more [HistoryMaker] B.B. Kings."  (Laughter) So, that kind of inspired me to pick up my guitar again.  And me and Bernard became real good friends, and still good friends today.
Speaker 2: Now it's probably, you know, rough on somebody that wants to play blues.  And you're around blues in the black community today.  And even then in the '70s [1970s]--because you know, although there's a strong blues community in Chicago [Illinois] on some level in the black community, the blues are not as popular as it used to be.
Speaker 1: Man--
Speaker 2: And people--only amongst the older people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I used to get teased a lot when I was younger, for listening to blues.  "What are you listening to, man?  You don't need to be listening to that."  The older people were like, "You don't know nothing about that, boy.  You don't know nothing about this."  You know, they would tease me, you know.  But I always loved it, man.  It's just something about that music that just draws me.  I mean it--just the truth of it, the truthfulness.  And I remember hearing Lightnin' Hopkins. Dad would play Lightnin' Hopkins around the house, man, and I'd get chill bumps as a kid.  "Ooh, I like that."  Or Muddy Waters or John Lee Hooker, you know.  I remember hearing John Lee Hooker slapping his foot, and it just did something to me, you know.  I do that in my show today, you know.  And I used to get teased, man.  You know, it kind of discouraged me a little bit.  You know, but once I decided to take it on and be serious about it, you know, I laugh at them now.  Because a lot of them want to get backstage now, a lot of my friends that used to tease me (laughter).
Speaker 2: But it's funny, the stigma attached to being country.  You know, when you come to a city like Chicago, or even a smaller city--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --like Cincinnati [Ohio], they tease people about being country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think the blues has something to do with it on some level.  I mean it's used as a way to countrify people, and therefore, drop them--
Speaker 1: Drop them down, yeah.  Yeah, I hear you, yeah.  Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: And it's funny, because in a town like Chicago, you know, you got like, at least 70 percent of the people are from Mississippi anyway.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know why that's even a factor.
Speaker 1: Well, because you know, they get to Chicago and get citified, man.  They don't want to remember that--where they come from, you know.  And I got a little taste of that.  Not as much as probably like my dad and his generation.  But I got a taste of it a little bit.  I always felt like that, man, you know, even growing up, you know, near Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  You know, it was known for having bi-racial couples.  You know, and my mom and dad was a bi-racial couple, and I used to get teased, you know, for being white.  Then I'd get teased for being black.  And I never really fit in nowhere, you know.  And it took, it took a lot to stay strong behind that, you know, because it was tough growing up on the South Side of Chicago.  But then after a while, it was like, "Well, and? You know, you're no different than I am."  So--
Story_ID: 275164
Speaker 1: Now, I was asking you earlier about the gang thing.  I forgot to ask your brother [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] about this yesterday, but I know in the '70s [1970s] the gang thing in Chicago [Illinois] was really--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --jumping off.  I mean it wasn't--if you were an athlete or a musician, you might be able to escape that kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of got away from that.  When you said that--what saved me was basketball.  You know, they say, "Oh, he's a ballplayer, man, he's pretty good, leave him alone.  You know, let him do his thing."  I remember getting on the bus coming home from school [Hales Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois] or whatever, man, late at night after practice.  And these guys would get on the bus, man, just thugs, straight-up thugs, man--hats cocked all the way--.  And you're either going to be Folks [Folk Nation], or you're going to be Vice Lords, or El Rukns, one or the other, man.
Speaker 1: Explain, if you can explain that--because I don't anybody--very few people--when you try to explain this in these interviews--.  But what is that?  What is the gang thing in Chicago--the Folks and the People [Nation], and all that, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, the Folks was the Disciples [Black Gangster Disciple Nation].  And the Disciples had different branches, like the Black Disciples, the Black Gangster Disciples, and then they had the Gangster Disciples.  It was all kind of different segments of it, under one nation as they would call it.  You know, I had to know something about it, because I grew up right in that area.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  All youth who grew up in Chicago in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] know this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's a complicated kind of thing.  That's why I wanted you to explain it.  So that's--
Speaker 2: And then they had the Black Stones [Black P. Stone Nation].  I remember the Black Stones, and then the Vice Lords.  And then--
Speaker 1: Now, they were part of the People's or the--
Speaker 2: I believe so.  The Vice Lords and the Stones were kind of intertwined a little bit.  And I remember the El Rukns were like a branch of the Black Stones, if I'm not mistaken--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right, that's true.
Speaker 2: You know, and I remember growing up, and Jeff Fort had the thing down there on 39th [Street] and Pershing [Road].
Speaker 1: The Oakland, the--
Speaker 2: The Fort.
Speaker 1: --the Oakland [Square] Theater [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: They turned it into the Fort, and they had a little thing there.  They broke that up.  I remember that when that was strong, real strong.  And I remember a lot of those guys used to come up to our schools to recruit, you know.  And you had to be one or the other, man.  And one of my schoolmates was, he lived where the Disciples was strong at, and he went to school where the El Rukns was strong at.  And they came on the school property after him, man, during school hours.  We had to walk from one building to another, and they jumped on the gate and said, "Hey, we got you.  What you going to do?"  And he had, at that time we didn't have scanners for guns.  He had a gun with him, and he pulled out his gun and said, "Hey, y'all not going to get me."  And he shot, and they ran, you know.  But he got kicked out of school for that.  I remember that.  And he ended up being my neighbor.  (Laughter) Small world, but he survived, you know.  And you had to, you know, deal with that.  And I was just lucky, first of all, to have a strong family.  Like my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] and dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] kept us focused on getting an education or doing something constructive.  And like, it was times when dad and mom would be in the house and keep us in the house with them, playing cards, Monopoly, or something, you know, some activity at home, you know.  And I thank them for that today, because I could have easily went that way, man, because it was there hard and strong.  And what really saved me is that in my neighborhood people knew my dad from being a musician, and seeing that I was a musician, you know.  And once I started playing basketball around my school, I was known as an athlete.  So, they kind of let me ride with that.
Speaker 1: And that was the word on the street, "If he's a ballplayer, leave him alone."
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 275165
Speaker 1: But when Benjamin Wilson was shot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That kind of made people think, well, maybe that might not be enough now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, that was hard, man.  It was hard, because he had so much potential.  And he was representing Chicago [Illinois], and he could have broke it open wider and gave more recognition on the national scale to Chicago for athletes.  You know, we always did have that.  But we had lost it at one time, and he was bringing it back.  Man, you know, he was getting--like USA Today was talking about him, and stuff like that.  And he was really, he was like the next Magic Johnson, you know, a lot of hype.  And he could back it up, he could play, man.  I mean the dude had some long arms, man.  And he was like 6'6", 6'7", something like that with some long arms, man, and could handle the ball like a guard, you know.  And he had all the phases for a high-schooler down, man.  And he got shot.  I remember that, man.
Speaker 1: And I think the circumstances--if I'm--correct me if I'm wrong.  I think he was walking down the street in front of the school.  He was coming from--
Speaker 2: He was coming from the store, I heard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I heard all kinds of different stories about it.  And I heard it was somebody connected to Willie Dixon's family that did it.
Speaker 1: Right, I think it was the nephew [sic. grandson, Omar Dixon] of Willie Dixon, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know how true that was.
Speaker 1: And they had a blues connection.  It was--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: That is strange, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we were talking about it, because it was a nephew of Willie Dixon who shot him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a grandson or something like that. It was kind of way he was connected to the Dixon family.  I'm not sure about that.  But I remember when it happened, man.  And our coach told us, and he cancelled practice, man.  And we played them the first game.  Because right after he got killed, the Chicago schools went on strike.  But we were still in school, because I went to a private school [Hales Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And their first game back was against us at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And it was like, it was deep, you know, seeing the people coming to the games from Simeon [Neal F. Simeon Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], who were still in shock, you know.  And they had Nick Anderson playing for them, and he ended up playing for the Magic, the Orlando Magic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a pretty good pro.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nick Anderson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played against him.
Speaker 1: He was the second banana on the team, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was under Ben.  And he ended up going pro, and being pretty good, you know.  I played against them guys, man, and they were good, man.  And I think all of that prepared me, you know, for what I'm doing today.  Because I remember very well my coach telling us in practice, "What you learning here today from basketball, you can apply it to life, in any facet."
Story_ID: 275166
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back.  I want to go back to grade school, and bring up--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --and talk about some specific stuff.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: You went to Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Corpus Christi.
Speaker 1: --Catholic grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean it's, there's a long history in the black community of Corpus Christi.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers there, and what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject I would say was math.  Mr. Allen [ph.] was my math teacher.  I remember Sister Ann [ph.], I believe she was my first grade teacher.  Miss Rehr [ph.] was my third grade teacher.  Mr. Audrey [ph.] was my seventh grade teacher, and Mr. Allen was the eighth grade teacher.  My auntie, my Aunt Agnes [ph.], she worked at the school.  She was like an assistant to the principal at that time.  I can't remember--Miss Kelly [ph.], Miss Kelly was my fourth grade teacher, she was real cool.  I remember her saying in class one day--I had done a TV commercial with my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] back then for Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV].  And I don't know if you remember it, but it was, (singing) "The best place to look at Chicago is right here," and they would show different parts of Chicago [Illinois].  And this one part of Chicago they showed me and my dad, and Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] was playing drums, and I was playing guitar.  Me and Dad was playing guitar, and this other man was playing chess with his son, you know, in the park.  And they played that during the day all the time, especially on Saturday when 'Kids are People Too,' I remember that.  'Kids Are People Too' would come on, and they would show that commercial.  And I came to school and my teacher said, Miss Kelly said, "We have a celebrity in our school.  He's in this commercial.  Did you y'all see that?"  And it made me feel like I was a star, you know.  (Laughter) And that was right around the time when I left music to play basketball.  Because I had--man, I was a star.  I'm on TV, I played with my dad down at Pepper's Hideout [Chicago, Illinois], and they were throwing me money on stage.  You know, I'd made it, you know.  My mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] and dad were trying to get me into movies.  You know, I was auditioning for movies and stuff.  That's when Rodney Allen Rippy was hot, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now was he from Chicago?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Right, well, no, he was a spokesman for Jack in the Box, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  I remember that, Rodney Allen Rippy.  And you know, I remember all of that, you know.  I was like, I'm going to be a star, you know, a kid star, you know.  I had that--you know, but it didn't--I--
Speaker 1: So, you actually played guitar on stage when you were--
Speaker 2: Nine years old.
Speaker 1: Nine years old, okay.
Speaker 2: My ninth birthday.  Dad had went to Europe for the first time.  And I think he was going there for the first time, and it was like '75, 1975 [sic. 1974], somewhere around there.  And he was gone for like six weeks.  It seemed like three months, but it was like six weeks or so.  And he would call home and check on us.  And I begged my mama, "Let me talk to Dad."  "I'm not through yet."  "Let me talk to Dad."  And he'd finally get on the phone, and he'd say, "What you doing, son?  How's school?  You doing good?"  And I said, "Daddy, I want to go with you.  Take me with you."  He said, "Well, son, if you learn to play two songs by the time I get back, I'll let you play with me."  So, I went home; I came on home and played, practiced 'Messin' with the Kid' by Junior Wells, and Lowell Fulson's song, 'Reconsider Baby.'  Those were my first two songs that I learned fully, you know, from beginning to end.  And he got home, and I played them.  I couldn't wait.  When my dad got out the cab, man, I had my guitar.  "I got it, Dad, I got it."  He was like, "Awww," he was tired, you know.  "Come on, show me."  And I played, and he was like, "Whoa, you do have it, you know.  And they had a welcome home party for Dad at Pepper's.  And he said, "You did it, so you can come on down."  And I went there, and man, I was nervous, man.  I was, I had a mood ring on back then, you know, them mood rings?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And it was turning all kinds of colors, man.  And my mom was sitting there with me, "Son, it's going to be all right."  They ordered me some orange juice.  And she said, "Son, just do like you do at home, you know."  And that's when it hit me, like, "Yeah, I'm going to play like when I'm at home."  Once I got up on the stage, that's how I felt.  But before that, I was like shaking, man.  Mom was consoling me, "It's going to be alright, just play like you--," you know.  And man, I got up there, and I just, I was in a zone.  I didn't--I just blocked everything out, and I was playing with my dad and his band.  And they just started throwing money up there at me.  And once I got that money, boy, I thought I was a star then.  (Laughter) My dad always said I made more money than he did that night (laughter).
Story_ID: 275167
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is before I got on stage.  You know, like I was saying earlier, my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] had bought me a cheap version guitar that I would practice on.  And I always was able to, I had access to his guitars, you know.  But then when he saw that I was serious, he ended up buying me a guitar, a Gibson SG [Standard] 1967, which I still own today, I've still got it.  But before that, I was practicing on his guitar.  And this one particular day I was practicing on his guitar.  I believe it was a Gibson, I want to say, a 345 [ES-345].  I remember it being a Gibson Hollow Body.  And I'm practicing on the porch, and I laid the guitar down.  And my balcony was on the second floor, and the railings went around the balcony.  And it had a little gap in it, you know.  And I laid the guitar down on the porch, and my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] called me for something.  I went in the house and I hear my dog barking, Rex, because he sees another dog outside.  He's going crazy.  And they ended up walking by, and my dog just went nuts, you know, and kicked the guitar down under the railing.  And as I was coming to the door, you know, I could see the guitar.  I'm sliding, I'm trying to get it.   And he just kicked it.  And I tried to reach and get it, and everything was just slow motion, man.  I could see that guitar just going real slow.  I'm like, "Oh, no!"  And it fell and broke.  And I believe my dad heard it.
Speaker 2: Did it hit the sidewalk?
Speaker 1: It hit the sidewalk and broke into pieces, man.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what it sounded like when it hit?
Speaker 1: Just a crash.  Like, you know, you hear the guitar ringing, and it's (crashing sound) you know, and I was like, "Oh, no."  My heart just like stopped, man.  I was like, "Oh, no, my dad is going to kill me."  Because it wasn't no cheap guitar, you know.  I remember it being a nice expensive guitar.  And I went and told Dad, and he said "Where?  Where?"  He went and looked at it, and he ran downstairs and we started picking up the pieces.  And he said, "Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], you do not leave that guitar laying on the floor like that.  You always put it in its case, you put it up.  Don't do that."  He was real hurt, but he didn't, he didn't show it, you know, as far as like being mad at me or anything.  But it was a like lesson, "Do not do that.  You can't do that, man.  When you get through with it, put it in this case, I don't care if it's for two minutes.  You put it up, you know, because this is not cheap.  This is not, you know, this is an expensive guitar."  And he was picking it up, and I remember he kept the pickups, but everything else was destroyed.  Man, I was just--man, I felt so bad, man, like somebody just hit me or something, you know.  I was just like--I felt that guitar's pain, man.  It was like (noise) and I couldn't believe it.  I was like, "Oh, no."  Even my dog was looking like, "What just happened?"  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, the dog, this is Rex?
Speaker 1: This is Rex, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is the same dog that was knocked through the basement window?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That you all saved when his master was killed by that car?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 275168
Speaker 1: And you said there's another story about him?  What's the other story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rex had a problem using the bathroom, man (laughter).  And Rex used the bathroom on my dad's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] alligator shoes one time.  You don't piss on no blues man's alligator shoes (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's like don't mess with my blue suede shoes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you definitely don't--
Speaker 2: And Dad was highly upset about that.  So, he took Rex for a ride.  Rex was gone for about a week.  I'm outside playing, and I see this dog running down the street.  I said, "That's Rex."  And he came right to me, man, when he saw me.  Man, the dog got so happy he started peeing everywhere.  And I came in the house, and I said "Mama [Jeannine Broussard Baker], I found Rex, I found Rex."  My dad said, "How did you find him?"  I said, "He came running to me."  He said, "No."  My dad said he took the dog--I don't know if I should be telling this story, man, because the humane society is going to kill us if they ever hear this.  But he said he took the dog out near [Chicago] O'Hare [International] Airport [Chicago, Illinois] and let him go.  This was back in the '70s [1970s], you know.  And that dog came back home, man, came back home.  And my dad could not believe that.  So he said, "Well, if that dog did that, he needs to be here."  And he stayed there for a while, and then Rex did the same thing again, man.  (Laughter) He did the same thing, you know.  And Dad was like, you know, well, I can't take this.  You know, back then we weren't--they didn't have the shelters available as well they are today, you know, where you could take the dogs to the shelter or whatever.  So Dad said he took him to Chinatown [Chicago, Illinois], and we ain't seen the dog since.
Speaker 1: That stopped--we can all speculate--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I ain't saying nothing, but I'm just saying what he said (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a story.
Speaker 2: So, but that Rex was a good house dog.  You know, he just didn't know how to use the bathroom in the proper places.  But he protected us, man.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  Now what kind of dog was Rex?
Speaker 2: What kind?  I think he was almost--he reminded me of Lassie a little bit, man.  I can't remember. He was a mutt, man.  He was gold colored, gold.  And I can't remember what kind of dog he was.  But I remember him looking like Lassie a little bit, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he--
Speaker 2: Whatever Lassie was.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: I think he was mixed--
Speaker 1: Well, Lassie was a collie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think he was mixed.
Speaker 1: But maybe he was mixed with some kind of shepherd or--
Speaker 2: Shepherd and collie, yeah, I want to say that.  But he was a good house dog, I mean watchdog.  You know, he protected our house, man.  He just had a problem using the bathroom.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story, that he could make it all the way from O'Hare in all the traffic.  I think, I mean, for those who are not from Chicago [Illinois], when they hear this--to get from O'Hare Airport back to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], to drive it is about an hour drive, you know.
Speaker 2: At least, yeah.
Speaker 1: At least.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that dog made it back home, man.  And I always--and people say yeah, dogs have a great sense of smell or whatever.  They said that dog could smell his way back home, now.  I don't know, man, that's a long way.  Because, you know, we lived on 50th [Place] and Forrestville [Avenue], and O'Hare is past the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], you know, west up there, and it's a long way.  And that dog came back within a week and a half.
Speaker 1: That's a long hike.  And just to think that he didn't get hit by a car.
Speaker 2: Nothing.  He survived that long, you know.  It was a good dog.  I missed that dog, man.  I cried when he didn't come back.
Story_ID: 275169
Speaker 1: Now, but you got a new guitar.  And you were telling us about the kind of--what kind of guitar did you have?  You got a new Gibson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Once my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] saw that I was really serious, he bought me an SG, a Gibson SG [Standard] 1967.  It's like a maroon color, and I still have it today.  And as a matter of fact, my dad used it on his first Alligator [Records, Chicago, Illinois] record that he recorded, because that was around the time I had quit, playing basketball.  He said, "Well, you're not using it, so I'm going to use it."  And he ended up cutting the whole record, 'Bayou Lightning' with it.  And he's on the cover with it, with the lightening shooting out of it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: That's, that's my guitar.
Speaker 1: On the cover.  That's--yeah, so that's your guitar?
Speaker 2: That's my guitar.  And he took it back from me when I, when he saw I wasn't playing.  I was playing basketball at that time, so--
Speaker 1: So the stakes were pretty high in some way. Because he had invested money--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You know, and you had already been on stage.
Speaker 2: --and time.
Speaker 1: And he thought that you--now what did, what, so you said it was like peer pressure in some ways--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --influencing you to be more of a basketball player?
Speaker 2: Sort of.  You know, I always loved sports, you know.  But I just never felt I like I fitted in, because a lot of the guys that I was playing with was much older than me.  And the older blues guys--you know, I remember Hubert Sumlin coming by the house.  I remember Jody Williams coming by the house, vaguely.  This guy, Wayne Bennett that played with Bobby Bland, he would come by the house and jam with Dad.  This guy, they used to call him the Tail Dragger [James Yancey Jones], he was kind of, reminded you of Howlin' Wolf a little bit.  He would come by and hang out with Dad.
Speaker 1: The Tail Dragger?
Speaker 2: The Tail Dragger, yeah.  I remember Koko Taylor, Sonny Seals [Steele "Sonny" Seals].  I played with Buddy Guy's kids, because Buddy's first wife [Joan Guy] and my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] was best friends.  I didn't know Buddy Guy was Buddy Guy.  He was just a guy who played guitar, like my dad.  I didn't know until I got much older.  I remember seeing Junior Wells.  So, you know, it got serious at one time, when he realized that I was serious about playing.  So, he went and bought me an amp, and then the Gibson SG.  And once I stopped playing--you know, he did put a lot of time into it.  I mean, a lot of the songs on his first Alligator record, 'Bayou Lightning,' came about from us jamming at the house; the ideas of these songs came from us jamming.  I remember very much coming close to the riff on 'Voodoo Daddy,' on that record.  I was just playing around the house with him, like okay, I like that.  And he took the essence of it and made it what it is today.  But the beginnings of it came from me just (musical sounds).  And he was like, "Whoa, we got something here."  And you know, he put his touch on it and put it together.  I remember coming up with a lot of bass lines in the song, you know, just playing bass to what Dad was playing.  And he wasn't thinking about recording then, but my Dad was always writing, even back before he had a contract.  He was writing songs and we would, he had a reel-to-reel that he would tape us on.  And we still got some of that stuff at home where he would have Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] playing drums, I'm playing guitar, my mom might play some piano, and her my sisters would be singing in the background.  He had them all on the other side of the room singing background, and we all playing the music.  And it reminded me of The Jackson 5 a little bit, you know (laughter).  Because that was Dad's vision, you know, to have us all as one band, you know.  And I remember that.  And so, he had a lot of time invested into what we were doing.  Because like I was saying earlier, at that time blues--my dad had moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And he was a rock and roller, known as a rock and roller, or whatever.  He could play anything, but he was known as a rock and roller from the hits, 'The Crawl,' 'Family Rules,' 'Roll, Roll, Roll' and stuff like that down in the South.  When he came to Chicago, it was just blues, man.  You know, you had everybody playing blues, you know.  If you wanted to make a living, that's what you had to play.  There wasn't no rock and roll joints around here like that for him.  So he changed over to the blues, and right around that time, disco came in.  You know, disco got hot, and it knocked a lot of musicians out of work.
Story_ID: 275170
Speaker 1: So he [Brooks' father, Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] spent more time at home, because he wasn't working at the club anymore.  And it got so bad that he had to get a job at the steel mill, at the die casting plant.  And so he had more time at home with us, you know.  And around that time we were getting a little older.  You know, and once he got a job at the die casting plant, that's when I started getting into basketball.  And then Wayne [Brooks' brother, HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] eventually got into basketball as well.  And when he got more popular playing blues, he was gone a lot.  And by that time we were teenagers, you know.  So, I was into sports heavy by then.
Speaker 2: So, who was your gym teacher at Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: I remember Brother John was our basketball coach.  And then he eventually left Corpus Christi and came to Hales [Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois], and was the assistant coach there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he was the one that kind of like, "Y'all need to check out these guys, they want to come to your school," and he sent us to Hales, and I liked it.
Speaker 2: You were pretty good there--
Speaker 1: I was--
Speaker 2: --starting on the team?
Speaker 1: I was decent, you know.  I could have been better, like I said, if I focused.  But it was more of a thing to fit in, you know, with my peers and chase girls (laughter).  You know, the girls liked the jocks.  And you know, Hales was an all-boys school.  And man, we would have just as many girls waiting outside for us than the boys in the school, you know.  So it kind of--I didn't take it serious.  You know, I did it because I liked it.  But I didn't take it--I never thought of it as a career.
Speaker 2: Playing ball?
Speaker 1: Yeah, playing basketball, yeah.  But it did teach me the concept of playing as a teammate, as a team.  And I apply that to my band today.
Speaker 2: Were you a guard?
Speaker 1: I was a guard/forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were about, you're about six--
Speaker 1: I'm about 6'2" now.
Speaker 2: Six two [6'2"].
Speaker 1: When I was, when I first got to Hales, I had to be about 5'8", I want to say.  No, about 5'4" or 5'6", somewhere around in there.  My sophomore year, I shot up to my size I am now.  And my coach couldn't believe it.  He was like, "Whoa, we're moving you to forward."  You know, so I would play a little forward and guard.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now when you were at Hales, did you have any other interests at Hales?  Did you--you were--you were involved in music classes at Hales?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm, I took it on.  I took up, it was mandatory.  You had to take a music class, so I--they didn't, they wouldn't--we didn't have like a jazz band.  We did have a jazz band, but they didn't allow you to--they just had bass guitars; they didn't have bass and drums.  They didn't allow you to play keys.  So, it was bass drums and maybe some saxes, saxophones, and stuff like that.  But then we had a concert band, where we had the whole orchestra, you know.  And--
Speaker 2: Did you play any concert--
Speaker 1: I played flute, because it had the same treble clef as a guitar.
Speaker 2: Now, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's good.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I kind of picked that up.  And I got second chair for the flute.  You know, I didn't take that serious either, because I had to do it.  My dad was mad.  He said, "Why did you pick up flute?  Why didn't you just play a sax?  You could play the sax, and you could be a solo artist with the sax, you know."  The flute was easy for me to carry home (laughter) because I was living in the ghetto, and you didn't want to be carrying this big old instrument home, you know, in the ghetto, man, because they'd take it from you.  So, I could easily put my flute in my bag and carry it with me.  And you know, I liked the sound.  I liked the sound, you know.  And I was pretty decent, you know.  I didn't practice that much after school, but--
Speaker 2: Now, did you know Herbie Mann in those days?
Speaker 1: Herbie Mann?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the flute player.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: M-A-N-N.
Speaker 1: Uh-uh, no.
Speaker 2: He's a big-time jazz flute player.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Herbie Mann, he's a white guy, bald headed.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He played the flute.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then later Bobbi Humphrey, I guess in the late '70s [1970s], she became real popular as a flute player, you know.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know none of those guys.  I was just--
Speaker 2: Hubert Laws, I think played the flute.
Speaker 1: I heard of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard of Hubert Laws, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I just wondered if you--
Speaker 1: No, I wouldn't--man, my thing was basketball at that time, you know.  But I played it.
Story_ID: 275171
Speaker 1: --Did you have any other favorite subjects, I mean in school?
Speaker 2: In high school [Hales Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois], or any school?
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: In high school, I always liked history and science.  I was into math, you know, I always liked numbers.  But I liked it, you know, my high school was my growing up period, man.  I made it, but I didn't, I wasn't focused, you know.  As I look back now, you know, I did enough just to get by.
Speaker 1: Did you really like the popular music that was out then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was like funk was the--
Speaker 2: Funk--
Speaker 1: And disco, I guess.
Speaker 2: And right around that time when hip-hop just eased in there--I remember hip-hop easing in there.  And I remember hearing the underground stuff, when it wasn't on the radio.  "Who is this?  Yeah, this is tight."  I remember hearing that stuff, and--
Speaker 1: What's the first hip-hop you heard?
Speaker 2: I remember hearing, I want to say, Grandmaster Flash.  I remember hearing Afrika Bambaataa back then, and then the Sugarhill Gang came in.  And it was funny, man.  Afrika Bambaataa ended up coming to one of my shows in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I didn't tell him that, you know, that I'd been listening to him for years, you know.  And he was like, "Man, you tight, man.  You tight man, we need to take some of these tracks, man, and do something with it."  I was like, "Man, yeah."  I gave him my CDs and--. "Whatever you need to do, you know."  But he fell in love with this song ['She's a] Golddigger' that I wrote.  It's got a funk groove to it, you know, with the blues element.  And I remember those guys.  And then Run-DMC came in and just took it off the charts, you know.  And I got a chance to meet them right before Jam Master Jay passed.  Like two weeks before he passed, I played with Aerosmith.  They invited me and my dad on stage with them.  They were on tour at Alpine Valley [Music Theatre, East Troy, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Now, this is recently, right?
Speaker 2: This had to be about three or four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were on tour.  Run-DMC was on tour with Kid Rock and Aerosmith.  And they all came out for 'Walk This Way' at the end, right before we played with--we played with Aerosmith, and then they did the finale with Run-DMC.  And I remember meeting them guys, like, "Man, y'all just don't know, man.  I grew up listening to y'all, man."  And I remember buying that Run-DMC album, and seeing them walk around in their Adidas and leather suits and big gold chains, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, your brother [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] told a story yesterday about that event.  And he said he was kind of surprised in a sense, because Aerosmith knew who your father [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who you all were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But Run-DMC didn't.
Speaker 2: Didn't know.
Speaker 1: Which kind of speaks to this gap between, in the community, between blues and how our music is going, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because my philosophy behind that, Larry [Crowe], is you know, the black community--the blues kinda reminds them of the bad times.  So they kinda want to forget about that.  They remember it, but they don't want to be, you know, fed that.  Whereas the hip-hop, the kids was looking at--on the videos they see the money, they see the bling bling, the cars, "That's what I want.  I live in the ghetto, and I don't see that around here.  But that's what I want."  So it kind of chases them over there, you know, that's what they see, and that's what they want.  They want to get away from that environment, and this is the environment they want to be in, you know.  And I think if the blues was exposed like hip-hop and they could relate to someone young, like themselves, then you'd have more coming over there, you know.  I mean you got a few, but it's slimming down, man.  It's slimming down, because it's a hip-hop world now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought, I mean some of us have thought that maybe--I mean it's been going on since 1980 or so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that by now there'd be another phase of something else.
Speaker 2: I was just talking about that, man.  Because I remember people saying, "This is going to be gone, this is just a phase."  But man, it's strong, man.  It is real strong.  I mean with [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons, and now you got, what's my man's name?  Puff Daddy, Sean Puffy Combs [Sean Combs], and the dude from the Rock, what's his name?  I'm drawing a blank right now.  He goes with Beyonce.  Jay Z.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, and Jay Z and them bringing up cats with them, you know, like my man Kanye West from here, Kanye West from Chicago [Illinois].  And it's strong, man, and it's not going away.  I don't see it going away.  You know, I can't see it going away.  And you know, it's kind of cool, because it's definitely the blues.  It's just got a different beat to it, a different presentation.  Because these guys are speaking about what they were growing up in.  Some of them are speaking about where they come from, and the elements of their environment, you know.  Then you got some of it like, with all music, some of it's just, you know, blatantly, you know, there's no room for imagination, if you know what I mean.  And you know, its room for all of that.  That's what allows room for me.
Story_ID: 275172
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Hales Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois] you played ball four years.  What did you, what were your prospects?  Did you think you were going to go on to college and play ball, or what did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I got to like the end of my junior year and my senior year, I said I need to start thinking about college.  And my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] would say, "Well, if you want to go to college, I'll find a way for you to go."  Because at that time when I graduated--well, close to my graduation, I had a few offers to go to school, to like junior colleges--well, not junior college--a school out in Minnesota, St. Mary's [University of Minnesota, Winona, Minnesota].  They wanted me to come there and play ball.  And my dad gave me the option.  He said, "If you want to go, I'll find the money to get you to go.  But you've got to really think about what you want to do, because I don't want to waste this money.  We were too--we didn't have enough money to send me to college, but we were making too much to get a grant.  So, it was like right in the middle there, man.  And so, but my dad said "Hey, I sent you to private school all your life, and I'll find a way to do this if you want to do it.  But you got to really think about what you're doing."  So, at that time I didn't go to the school for basketball.  That summer after I graduated, I got a job working at AM International [Inc.], which is an office material company.  At the time they were selling office material like furniture and stuff like that.  And I was working as a clerk in the mailroom.  I said, "This ain't what I want to do, man.  You know, I don't see myself going nowhere, you know."  And my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] was like, "Well, you ain't staying here.  If I get up and go to work, everybody got to get up and go somewhere"  (laughter).  So, I ended up going on the road with my dad.  She kind of forced me to go out there, you know, and check it out.  And for two reasons: because she knew I loved music, and then I could watch Dad (laughter).  So I'd go on the road, and me and my dad--and he said, "Well, if this is what you want to do, you're going to work.  Because I'm not bringing no dead weight."  I would move his equipment, I would tune his guitars, I would carry his luggage, I would sometimes drive, I would set up the hotels; I would do everything.  I was selling records back then--albums, everything man.  And he started showing me the business side of it.  "This is what you got to do.  This is what you don't do.  Stay away from the drugs, you know.  Don't get unfocused, because it's a lot of things out here, and distractions that could cause you to be, you know, unfocused."
Speaker 1: They're in the songs that people write.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They write about them in the songs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All the things that, all the pitfalls.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he showed me.  I mean, I could see it physically.  I was there, man, and we got an opportunity to play in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  At the time it was called the GIT, the Guitar Institute of Technology.  But now it's just music-MIT [Musicians Institute (MI), Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Is this in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, this is in L.A.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles, yeah.
Speaker 1: That L.A. (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that L.A. (laughter), the city L.A.  But now it's the Music--it's the Musicians Institute of Technology [sic.] I believe, Music or Musician, it's in L.A.  And we had an opportunity to play there, because they were having bands come there.  And I remember talking to my dad.  I said, "Dad, I would love--," because I got two brothers that live out in L.A., and I was thinking I could stay with them and go to school, to GIT.  And I had one of the professors take me around and show me the school.  Man, and I was fascinated.  And he said, "Well, let me introduce you to some of the students."  And man, I talked to some of the students, and they were like, "Your dad is Lonnie Brooks?"  I said, "Yeah."  "And you're talking about coming here?"  I said, "Yeah."  They said "Man, you're in the best school you could ever be in, on the road with your dad.  I would trade that with a heartbeat."  And that's when it hit me.  I was like, well, okay.  And I started not just focusing on the business side of it, but the musical side of it.  And then that's when I started getting heavily into like Albert Collins and, you know, people like that, and [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King]. That's when I heard B.B. as a guitar player and not just as a blues musician, you know, like 'The Thrill is Gone.'  You know, you like the song, but you never listen to the guitar.  That's when I started listening to the guitar.  And people like [Jimi] Hendrix, and Santana, Buddy Guy, and Albert King, Freddie King.  I started doing my homework on all the Chicago [Illinois] guys, you know.  And I started focusing.  And one night Dad played here in Chicago at the Kingston Mines [Chicago, Illinois].  And Albert Collins came in, and Albert was hot.  He had a TV commercial, and he was in that movie 'Adventures in Babysitting,' where the part came in, "Nobody leaves here without playing the blues or singing the blues," and a young lady sings the blues.  And Albert was, he had a Seagram's Gin commercial.  He was hot.  He was out there with Bruce Willis.  And he come sat in with my dad, man.  And I remember seeing him do a guitar battle, and I got the chill bumps.  I was like, "Wow, that's what I want to do.  That's what I'm going to do for the rest of my life."  That's when it hit me.
Story_ID: 275173
Speaker 1: About what year was it that you really got serious about playing?
Speaker 2: I want to say '86 [1986], '87 [1987], like a year after I graduated out of [Hales Franciscan] High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I graduated in 1985 and spent that summer working, and then I decided that ain't what I wanted to do.  And I went on the road with Dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] helping him out.  And then about a year after that, I got serious into playing.
Speaker 1: Before I get into the playing, I want to ask you--now, you were in high school during the [Mayor] Harold Washington years, I guess?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It just dawned on me that you were there during the Harold Washington days.  How did that whole--I mean there was a movement, you know, the whole movement around Harold Washington and him being the mayor and all.  How did that affect you and your high school?
Speaker 2: It was definitely a vibrant spirit going around in the black community, you know, like we finally got a voice, or you know, we could finally make some changes, you know.  I remember people getting excited about going to vote, and getting Harold in there.  You know, Harold had that presence like a preacher almost, to get people excited, you know, by saying the right things.  And he was doing it, he was doing it.  And people could see the results from his, you know, when he was in there.  So it was like definitely a vibrant vibe around the black community when he was in office--for politics, you know, almost like--I don't know because I wasn't around, but the thing I could probably relate it to was like when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was around.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, when Harold Washington died, do you remember how you felt?
Speaker 2: I felt sad.  I remember I was on the road with Dad.  We were in Louisville, Kentucky playing with [HistoryMaker] B.B. King.  And I remember getting the news, I think it was around Thanksgiving.  We had a gig with B.B., and we got the news.  And even B.B. was like, "Oh, that's a big loss."  And getting home, they had the funeral procession, and it went right down the street from where I lived, on 107th [Street] and Vincennes [Avenue].  And I remember watching the funeral go by.  And I remember being in the house watching the news when it first started, and timing it so I could be out there when they came by my house.  And it was a big, sad--a big loss and a sad day in our community, you know, everybody was hurt.
Speaker 1: Now, did you all discuss politics much at home or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not much, a little bit.  Not much, but a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to touch on that, because that was such a big part of anybody in Chicago [Illinois] in those days.
Story_ID: 275174
Speaker 1: You were mentioning some of the musicians whose style you started--paid particular attention to, you know, when you got serious about playing again.  And from what we've, I've discovered in the last, you know, the last couple of months, is that it's more complicated than people think, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In terms of--talk about some of the--
Speaker 2: The styles?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the styles that people play in.  And I think one of the keys--you said that a lot of people are self-taught, or learned in a small place--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where they learned a particular way of tuning their guitar and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and trying to duplicate those sounds they heard growing up, you know.  Like my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] would play the train sound.  He would play the high sound on a train, you know, his interpretation of the train on a guitar.  Or you could hear Albert Collins making the guitar talk, "Shut up, you know."  (Laughter) Or you know, Gatemouth, Gatemouth had a way he would play, like a lot of nursery rhymes, you know, melodies.
Speaker 1: Gatemouth Brown [Clarence "Gatemouth" Brown]?
Speaker 2: Gatemouth Brown, Clarence Gatemouth Brown, one of my dad's influences.  And if you listen to Gatemouth, you can hear T-Bone Walker and his influence on Gate.  And Gate tuned different; he used a capo.  So he had his own little--he took--this is my explanation of it.  But he took, I think he took elements of T-Bone's big band thing and applied it to what he was doing using the capo, and came up with his own sound, you know.  And I--
Speaker 1: Now, what's a capo?  You know, somebody's not going to know.
Speaker 2: A capo is a, it's like a thing that you lock around the neck of the guitar in certain positions.  Like, if you want to be in the key of A, you set it on the fret and lock it on that key, where you can have an open, you can have--depending on how you tune it, you can have an open tuning of that key, you know.  Or you can play in that position as if you're playing E natural.  You know, you can do that in A natural, you know.  So, you get different sounds; you get different positionings, you know.   Then you have people like Albert King that tune totally different, you know, he had a different tuning.  I don't remember exactly how he tuned it.  Albert Collins used to tune his to a D-minor with the capo, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: So, that really gave him--
Speaker 2: That gave him his own thing.  And see, Gate kind of took that from T-Bone, and Albert kind of got a little bit of T-Bone.  And Gate had his plan and came up with his own thing, you know.  All those things I try to study to incorporate it into my thing, you know. Freddie King. [HistoryMaker] B.B. King, from my understanding was one of the first to really squeeze and bend the strings in the blues, one of the--I don't know if he was the first, but he was one of the--if I'm not mistaken, one of the first people to--he was trying to emulate--from my understanding--don't quote me, I mean don't write this in stone, but from my understanding--
Speaker 1: But all this is your understanding.
Speaker 2: Right, well--
Speaker 1: So, just go on and just go with it.
Speaker 2: He was one of the first--he tried to--this is what my dad told me and I heard from people like Buddy too, Buddy Guy--that he would try to emulate the slide.  And he would, you know, slide the strings down, and he ended up bending them.  And that's what, how the bends come in.  Now he's got his own little vibrato, and he created a whole new style of playing the guitar.  And people like him--and then you have the branches from that, you know.  And I try to incorporate all of that into what I do today.
Story_ID: 275175
Speaker 1: Yeah, off-camera we were talking about some of your favorite guitar players.  You mentioned George Benson and--
Speaker 2: George Benson, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Jimi Hendrix, people just unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Hendrix gave me a whole new outlook.  When I would listen--when I grew up I would listen to most--I remember hearing Hendrix and stuff, but I didn't absorb it.  I remember absorbing the country style, the Delta style, like Lightnin' [Hopkins], and Muddy [Waters], and John Lee Hooker, and people like that.  And it was a period where I got into [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King], Albert [King], and Freddie, Freddie King.  And when I got into Freddie, it kind of took me over to the rock stuff.  When I started listening to Hendrix--
Speaker 1: Now, Hendrix had blues roots.
Speaker 2: He had blues roots, but you know, it wasn't, it wasn't sold that way.  It was rock, you know.  It was sold as rock, you know, but it was blues elements all in it if you listen to it.  But that got me into Santana, you know, and people like that, and [Eric] Clapton.  But I remember hearing Hendrix, man, and it was like the first time I couldn't understand it.  I was like, what is this?  And then I heard 'Machine Gun,' and it was like "Whoa."  That first note in that solo of 'Machine Gun,' the live version, oh, my God.  Man, it's like I felt it, man, like somebody just shot it through my veins, man.  And I got deep into Hendrix then, you know, listening to where he came from, and it was the blues.  You know, he just colored it different.  It was the blues, man, you know, and from interviews that I heard and saw, he considered himself a blues man, you know.  But that's the way it was sold, you know, as a rock guitarist.  But I got into them guys, man, and Santana, I love the way he plays, man.  It's like he's speaking through his guitar.  You know, I could feel it.  One of my favorite songs he did with John Lee Hooker, 'The Healer,' it had elements of "it's me, man."  It had elements of what I grew up on, the Delta blues, and it had the electric with Santana.  And it was like, "Whoa," all of it came together on that song, man, for me.  I was like, whoa, 'The Healer.'  And you'd hear John Lee's voice just, you know, hitting you through your body, and then Santana comes around with that guitar, and it's like "Oh, man."  You know, that's one of my favorite songs.  And that opened up my eyes to a lot of people.  And then once that happened, I got into George Benson.  And I would hear George Benson, but I didn't hear him, if you understand what I'm saying.  But I got into George Benson and people like Eric Johnson, you know, a lot of the rock cats, you know.  And jazz, I got a little more into Wes Montgomery and people like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever go back to--now you used the electric guitar.  Did you ever go back and--there were some, I know there were some musicians in Chicago [Illinois] that used to play like country blues acoustic.  And I know we had a chance to interview [HistoryMaker] Howard Armstrong, you know, a couple of years ago in Boston [Massachusetts].  He played at things with Yank Rachell--
Speaker 2: I remember him.
Speaker 1: --and you know, the other people around Chicago that are still playing like the country blues with the string, you know, just a unique style.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you listen to much acoustic music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, early on.  Early on I heard a lot of Delta solo, with just the guitar and vocal.  I started hearing Son House, and people like that.
Speaker 1: Robert Johnson.
Speaker 2: Johnny Shines, Robert Johnson, I got into them, you know.  It was like an extension of what I was listening to.  But I always heard Muddy, and [Howlin'] Wolf, and John Lee Hooker around the house.  And my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] was real good friends with Earl Hooker.  I remember hearing some of Earl Hooker, you know, sliding around, you know.  But see, you know, at the time I didn't understand what I was hearing, you know.  I can vaguely remember hearing Hendrix and when he died.  But it didn't, you know, I couldn't relate to it at the time.  I was young, like three years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about three, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I can remember hearing him, I remember when they said Jimi Hendrix died, I remember that.  But it didn't hit me like it would now.  You know, like I said earlier about playing at Buddy's [Buddy Guy] house with his kids--that's this man that played the guitar like my dad.  It didn't hit me like it hit me now.  So, all those elements was around my house then.  And it's in me, because I heard it, and I felt it--
Story_ID: 275176
Speaker 1: Now, do you tune your guitar in a certain way?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or do you--
Speaker 2: I've done it to play slide.  I cut one song like that, 'Bald-Headed Woman' off the 'Golddigger' CD.  I played slide in open E tuning.  And if I play slide, I'll play it like that, with open E.  But I never did any tuning.  I am doing like, I do E-flat tuning for certain songs.  Some of my rock songs with rock elements in it, I do an E-flat tuning, you know.  And I'm dropping one down, a couple of songs down to D, you know, to give you that spooky sound (laughter).  But no, I'm not doing any tuning like some of the older guys have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What characterizes your guitar playing?  You had a reputation for, you know, being a good guitar player.  So--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, oh, man, I'll leave that for the people to judge.  The best thing I've learned from being out here with my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] in my early days, was I got to be around the greatest in the world.  And I just pray and hope that some of that, what I've learned, has rubbed off on me.  I got to rub shoulders with the greatest in the world, and talked to 'em.  And one night I remember talking to Junior Wells.  He said, "Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], if you can't feel it, you can't make the people feel it.  When you get up there, you got to play what you feel in order for the people to feel it, if you want to touch them.  Now, you can go up there and be a gimmick, Lonnie Brooks' son, but you got to play what you feel in your heart, and not what somebody is telling you you should feel."  And I think that was one of the best pieces of advice one could have given me outside of my dad, you know.  Because it's so true.  You've got to feel what you play, man, in order for people to feel it.
Speaker 1: What are the themes that you write about when you write songs?
Speaker 2: Oh, some of the things that I can relate to.  Most of it is what I've been through, or someone I'm close to have been through that I can relate to, you know.  I've written songs about people that touched me and changed me a little bit.  I wrote a song for Walter Payton, you know, because I remember growing up at one time in Chicago [Illinois] when we didn't have no championship teams. (Laughter) And Walter Payton was the only highlight we had, you know, before Michael Jordan came.  And if the [Chicago] Bears lose and Walter Payton got a hundred yards, we were happy (laughter).  Because he was like our hero, and like, I guess like what Muhammad Ali was to my father's generation, you know, that generation.  But I write songs for people like Walter Payton.  I wrote songs about members of my family, myself, friends.  I love writing just as much as live, playing live, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite song that you've written?
Speaker 2: All of them have an extension to my heart, you know, even some of the fun songs, you know, like 'Bald-Headed Woman.'  I wrote that song in my sister's [Denise Baker] beauty shop.  And I--
Speaker 1: It wasn't really about a disaster or anything?
Speaker 2: No, it was just fun.  Because what it was, man, a lot of these women were coming in there getting their hair done and getting these extensions in their hair.  And they were beautiful women, they didn't need it, you know.  But they were doing it to keep with up the Joneses, I guess.  And I was saying to my sister, "Why are they doing that?  She looks fine without that."  She was like, "Shhh, I'm making money here, I'm making money here," (laughter) but I was like, you know, man, you know, I'm going to write a song about it.  So I wrote a song, "I got a bald-headed woman, she keeps me worried all the time.  Her hair so short, you can hear what's on her mind."  (Laughter) But what I was saying to her is like, "Baby, I love you the way you are, but it's costing me to keep you looking like you want to look.  You look fine, you know."  So, but I made it fun, you know.
Story_ID: 275177
Speaker 1: And you know, I got one song that I wrote called, 'I'll See You Again,' that came to me.  It was written--it initially came to me after Albert Collins passed away.  When he died, me and my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] flew out to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] to the funeral.  And it didn't hit me--because Albert was one of--like I said earlier, one of the first guys that made me say, "This is what I want to do, this is serious."  Because see, my dad put it--his standards were so high to me that I couldn't do it; I didn't believe I could do it.  But all the time he was nourishing me, "Yes, you can; yes, you can; yes, you can."  And then when I saw Albert Collins, and he said the same thing to confirm what my dad was saying, and I saw it, it was like "Okay, this is what I want to do."  So he was one of the first blues guys outside of my dad that embraced me, you know, being that they both were on the same label here in Chicago [Illinois], Alligator [Records].  And you know, they would tour together a lot, and you know, I got to rub shoulders with them.  And I got to meet Junior Wells, and Buddy [Guy], and Koko Taylor and all of these people.  And they would say, "Well, son, it's going to be up to you to keep this going.  You know, learn all you can, you know."  And [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King] and Hooker, John Lee Hooker--so, Albert was one of the first ones to embrace me.  And when he passed man, it crushed me.  And I remember going to the funeral and they were putting the body down in the grave.  And his manager came up to me and said, "Ronnie [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], you know, Albert would talk about you a lot, you know."  And I was like, "Whoa," because I never heard nobody say that to me.  I always thought Albert was just being nice, you know, "All right, son, you're going to do it.  You got to keep these blues alive."  And then to hear it from someone else to say that, I was like "Whoa," and it touched me.  But I couldn't cry, I couldn't--I just felt sad.  I got home and I'm playing in my room about three or four months later.  I'm in the room and I just had the lights out, playing, man.  And this song came to me, 'I'll See You Again.'  And I mean the changes, the words were just flowing, like it wasn't me.  And I just, I always kept a tape recorder on the side of my bed.  I just pushed record and I recorded that song on the tape, and it was inspired from Albert.  And then around that time after Albert died, Stevie Ray Vaughan died.  I mean we had a lot of, a lot of heroes were just dying, you know, Fenton Robinson, Johnny Copeland, and what's his name?  I can't think of it right now, I'm drawing a blank.  But all of them was at one time passing away, and I just dedicated that song to all of them.  And I didn't write it, man.  I mean I wrote it, but it didn't--it was a higher being, it came from a higher being--
Story_ID: 275178
Speaker 1: Well, it seems like, you know, when you look at--when I first came to Chicago [Illinois] in the late '70s [1970s], and you'd look through the [Chicago] Reader and you saw all the blues venues, you know, hardly any of them on the South Side, you know, they were all on the West Side.  And all the names of all the musicians--after a few years of looking at that, I started thinking, I said this is, Chicago's got a--we must going through some kind of golden age of the blues here in this city, I mean with all these musicians in this city.  They don't stay here all the time, but they--
Speaker 2: But they were here, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean did you ever feel like that when you were kind of coming up, that this is something that's never going to happen?
Speaker 2: I didn't know it until I got away from Chicago, when I started going on the road with Dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] and I'd see what was in other cities.  And I noticed that most of the guys on the road was coming from Chicago, you know.  I was like whoa, this is, Chicago is the capital, you know, we got some big names (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Luther Allison, Lefty Dizz, your father, all--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy Rogers was who I was trying to think of earlier.  Jimmy Rogers, you know, he touched me, too, man.  And he has a son, Jimmy D. Lane that plays today, you know, he's kind of in my generation as well.  But you had a lot of people from Chicago, man, you know, Jimmy Johnson, Syl Johnson, [HistoryMaker] Eddy Clearwater, Koko [Taylor], Sonny Seals [Steele "Sonny" Seals], Buddy Guy, Otis Rush, Junior Wells, like "Whoa," you know.  You had Sunnyland Slim from Chicago.  You had Pinetop [Perkins], you know.  It was like whoa, you know, all these--James Cotton, you know, Carey Bell.  I was like this is, this is something special here, you know.  And I got to hang out these guys, man, a lot of them.  And like I said, I picked their brains, man, when I got the opportunity, if they let me.  You know, some of them--, "Boy, you too young to know about this music, boy."  And then some of them were like, "Well, you're the future; you're the future, you've got to carry this on."  And when I started playing with Dad, man, they wasn't giving record contracts to kids, you know.  But once I got out of that generation and I got to be like twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, they started giving record contracts to kids, white kids, you know, sixteen and seventeen years old, man, major record deals, you know.  And I was like "Whoa," you know.  Now I see it's a change, you know.  It's directed to a different audience, you know, because Stevie Ray Vaughn and Robert Cray kind of revived it, you know, because it was down.  Like coming out of the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], it was disco.  And disco was kind of phasing out, and Stevie Ray Vaughn and Robert Cray snuck in there, and with the 'Blues Brothers' movie, kind of put it to another level, you know, and helped the blues, because it was lost for a minute, because a lot of them cats around me wasn't working man.  They were around the house, or they were working over in Europe, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, we've got like--it seems to me like maybe you've got at least two invisible entertainment worlds, in terms of the black community.  I mean, one is the blues world and the other one is the progressive jazz world.  And the musicians in the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians], like the Art Ensemble of Chicago or [HistoryMaker] Kahil El'Zabar, and a lot of those people, they do fine in Europe.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And someplace in the big cities, maybe San Francisco [California], Chicago [Illinois], and New York [New York], and then in Europe.  And I think it's the same way with the blues musicians.  A lot of them, young people--and I was talking to a young person on staff the other day who had never heard of hardly any of the blues musicians.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They say, "Well, where are they playing?"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I say, "Well, they make a lot of money in Europe and other cities."  But they, it's like an invisible world.  Do you ever feel like, I mean you come back home and no one knows who you are?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, man.  You know, you go--man, I've been fortunate enough to go over to Europe with my own outfit here.  And this one particular time in Holland [the Netherlands], I played a festival over there.  And I think this was like the first time I went over there on my own.  I'd been over there many times with my dad, but was the first time I went over there on my own.  And they had this kid standing in front of the hotel for two or three hours waiting for me to come out.  I didn't know it, you know.  I'm up in the room chilling and doing whatever.  And I come downstairs and get in the bus to go to the gig, and they say, "[HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks], this kid wants to have your autograph.  He's been waiting down here for two or three hours for you."  I couldn't believe that.  I was like, "What?  For me?" (Laughter) You know, but he knew everything about me.  He knew everything about my dad, about my whole family.  I was like, wow, that's deep, you know.  What they do over there, man, it's not an everyday thing for them.  You know, it's like a history that fascinates them, and they do the research on it. Whereas here, it's like "Ah, man, I can go see Lefty Dizz tomorrow, or I can go see Buddy Guy Tuesday.  I can go see Otis Rush maybe next Thursday."  It's accessible here, and it's like an everyday thing here, where over there it's an event.  You don't get that over there every day, you know.  It's kind of changed now, because you got bands that have been listening to these people like Buddy and them, and they're doing their thing over there now.  But when they get the chance to see Buddy and my dad, the real thing, or myself, it's like whoa, this is where we need to be; this is where we need to be at, and it's more appreciated.  So then that causes the promoter to pay you a little bit more, and intrigue you to come over there.  So, that's why you get a lot of people that know you over there and may not know you here.
Story_ID: 275179
Speaker 1: Now, what are your future plans and stuff?  Now, you're still a relatively young man.  You're, you know, a lot of your peers are into the hop-hip generation.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I mean, well, what are your musical plans in the future?
Speaker 2: I love this music, man.  And when I decided to go full-time solo, I made two goals: to take the blues to another level, and to take the family legacy to another level.  My dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] took it from my grandfather [Lee Baker, Sr.] playing the banjo for juke joints and house parties.  My dad took it from him to radio and television; my dad's been in movies.  And I just want to take it from there if I can, if the good Lord lets me.  And that's, that's the two main goals.  And I want the blues to be recognized like other genres of music, and not just recognized, but respected.  Because a lot of the music that is respected and has this high profile was taken from the blues, or have the elements of the blues.  And you know, I don't think that we get the true recognition that it deserves.  You know, at the Grammys [Grammy Awards] or whatever you might have a flash of who won the Grammy, or a picture they took from who won the Grammy, but not the actual presentation, you know.
Speaker 1: On stage, anyway, right.
Speaker 2: On stage, right, you don't see too much of that.  And I think that with the right opportunity, I can do that.
Story_ID: 275180
Speaker 1: We were talking about Chris Thomas King who was in the movie ['O Brother Where Art Thou?'], and the whole Robert Johnson tradition with crossroads, and selling your soul to play the blues better (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, two things out of that discussion just popped into my head.  The name King--
Speaker 2: King.
Speaker 1: It seems a lot of blues musicians have the name King.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is this, do you have any suspicions about whether there's a King lineage of--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --a genetic King lineage, or is it just a name?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the name King is powerful, you know, it's King, you know.  And then you know, [HistoryMaker] B.B. King broke the blues open for a lot of people.  You know, he was the--
Speaker 1: Ben E. King, B.B. King--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Albert King.
Speaker 2: Freddie King.
Speaker 1: Freddie King.
Speaker 2: I know a guy named Eddie King.  There's a lot of people out there named King.
Speaker 1: Chris Thomas King.
Speaker 2: Chris Thomas King.  There's some King brothers out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that play this--you know, some of it could be true and some of it could be added on, because it's  a recognizable name.  And it's like, you know, it's a positive, you know, strong name, King.  You know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Even James Brown performed on King Records.
Speaker 2: King Records, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I think Freddie King cut for, was it King Records?  Where were they, out of Ohio?
Speaker 1: King Records?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think King Records was out of--oh, I thought it was out of Atlanta [Georgia], I think, or--
Speaker 2: Atlanta?  Maybe I'm thinking about someone else out of Ohio--
Speaker 1: --or Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: --or out of Cincinnati [Ohio].  But anyway, I--
Speaker 1: Well, maybe it was, maybe it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know, man, it's just, you know, B.B. King--you know, Blues Boy King [Beale Street Blues Boy King], you know, and that was his real name.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't know.  And that's when I'll leave it alone (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the other thing that came out of that, that just popped in my mind about them, is the whole piece about the crossroads and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, does anybody--you know, we were talking about the movie 'Crossroads,' and Ry Cooder played some of the blues riffs in that.  Who, do any blues musicians take that seriously?  I mean is that a serious, is that a story that people take--you know, does anybody take that story seriously about going to the crossroads and meeting the devil, and all of that?
Speaker 2: I don't know anybody like that.  I think it was just a thing, a legend that grew, you know, from a story maybe, you know.  And I don't know anyone like that.  But what my interpretation of it can be, is once you accept a dollar for playing music, you've sold your soul.  I don't know, I don't look at it that way.  I look at it like it's a blessing to be able to play what you love and then make a living off of it.  I don't think it's selling my soul to the devil.  (Laughter) But you know, back then if you played the blues, you were serving the devil.  If you played gospel, you were serving God.  I think it's a blessing that God gave me this talent, and I try to use it in a positive way to touch people, you know.  That's the way I look at it.  And I think from that--if you play the blues you're serving the devil--came that story from Robert Johnson where he sold his soul to the devil because he wasn't playing church music, you know, he was playing the blues.  And he, you know, he was known for drinking and chasing women, and all the bad things at that time, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: There's that dichotomy between religion and, I mean, that Saturday night and Sunday morning kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's--
Speaker 1: You said your grandmother played gospel during the day and then blues at night?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my auntie [Aunt Geraldine (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Your auntie, okay.
Speaker 2: My auntie would play, she would play the blues at night, man.  And you know, sometimes during the day, you know.  Because we had WVON [Chicago, Illinois] back then, and they would play everything, you know.  I remember Perv Spann [HistoryMaker Pervis Spann] the Blues Man playing, and Butterball [Bill "Butterball" Crane], and E. Rodney Jones, you know, they would all have the blues playing.  And then they'd have their gospel on Sundays, you know, I remember that.  And so, yeah, it was always that, man.  But I think what's in your heart, you know.  If you have goodness in your heart, that's what's going to come out.  If you're going to have evil in your heart, that's what's going to come out.
Story_ID: 275181
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Jeannine Broussard Baker and Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] religious?  Did you go to, I know you went to Catholic school, but--
Speaker 2: I went to Catholic school, yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you all--
Speaker 2: We went to church.
Speaker 1: Was religion a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: We went to church.  It wasn't forced, like a lot of people that I grew up with, you know.  They were forced--you had to go to church all day, you know.  Because, you know, I went to a Catholic school, we went for forty-five minutes to an hour on Sundays, you know.  But it was never like being forced to go.  We went because we wanted to go.  So--
Speaker 1: The whole association of vice with music, you know, in the black community--I mean it could be with any community--with blues and jazz and the hip-hop community now.  Your family managed to, as far as I know, to avoid a lot of the bad pitfalls of the--you know, there's a typical story.  And [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor's Black Ensemble Company [Black Ensemble Theater, Chicago, Illinois] does like a lot of these bios of musicians, like Muddy Waters and others coming about as being a great talent.  And they find--they're recognized--they usually get exploited by a record company or a manager or something, and they get involved with drugs or something, and then they have a resurgence or a comeback later.
Speaker 2: A comeback, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the story, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you just fill in the name, and--
Speaker 2: Right, that's true.
Speaker 1: You know, it's the same story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: We kind of, we were kind of lucky from that.  Because my dad, like I said, before he played rock, he met up with Sam Cooke in Atlanta [Georgia].  And Sam Cooke brought Dad to Chicago [Illinois], because Dad was looking to do something else.  You know, his contract had ran out with the guy down there, and Sam Cooke brought him to Chicago and he got exposure to blues and other, like, studio work and stuff like that.  And it kind of--my dad had his pitfalls as well, you know, but he always was, like I said, he had a passion, and he still has a passion today.  He has a love for the music, and he took care of his family basically playing music.  He did what he had to do at certain times when it wasn't the music, wasn't able to provide.  And I respect him for that, you know, sticking by.  Because I know a lot of my friends' fathers and parents wasn't there.  So, you know, we were blessed to have him there, but it was times when we had five dollars in the house, (laughter) you know, amongst both parents.  But they made a way, you know, and that's what I'm very appreciative of.  Because now as an adult and being a parent myself, I understand the sacrifices they took, you know.  My dad was lucky enough to stay away from the drugs and some of the pitfalls.  He did get taken advantage of by record companies, you know.  And I just played a CD for him that my brother [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] got off the Internet that my father forgot all about, didn't know nothing about, "Where'd you get that from?"  You know, because a lot of that stuff, when he got ripped off, he just forgot about it and left it alone, you know.  So, he definitely had his bad breaks as well.  But he stayed focused on his family and his music.
Story_ID: 275182
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, the, first of all the crime, you know, and not being able to unify, you know.  We had a vibe of that when [Mayor] Harold Washington was here in Chicago [Illinois].  But I'm talking about as a whole community across the world and across the nation, there's no unification.  You know, it's about the dollars, you know.  Because when you never had nothing, and you get an opportunity to get something, you forget about, you know, bringing somebody with you.  It's changed a little bit, but it's still there, you know.  And if we unify and come together like a lot of other races, I think we'd be more, we'd progress more, you know, today; you know, it could make a difference today.  We're not--I mean, it's better, don't get me wrong.  Because you know, guys from the South came up and they worked in the steel mills, and they lived in these apartments.  Those generations from there now probably own homes now, and their kids are able to go to college, where they didn't have that opportunity.  But it's still a big gap, a big gap there that we need to fill.  That's one of the things.  And then the senseless crime that you hear about, you know, it bothers me, you know.  There's a lot of hate now, man, and that bothers me.  And like I said, looking behind me, I don't see too many African Americans playing blues, man.
Speaker 1: Now, when [HistoryMaker] B.B. King was here and performed with The HistoryMakers, the band, the guitar player that played his, you know, part, and the band that backed him up, was an Asian guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he could play.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My buddy, Billy Branch, man, he's got two Asian guys in his band, the keyboard player and the guitar player.  They can play it; they studied it, you know.  I just think that, like I said before, that it's not directed to them, because they're looking at hip-hop and they want to change now, instant gratification.  You know, they grow up in the projects, they grow up in the ghetto, and they want to get out now, and this is my way out.  Whereas with the blues it takes a little time, you know.  You got to work at it, you know.  But I think if it was exposed more, it could be looked at equally as rap and, you know, other genres of music.  Like country, country's a prime example.  They've got a huge support system.  They got their own cable channel, you know, they're loyal fans, man.  They buy every piece of merchandise you got (laughter).  You know, they come out with signs up, you know, "We love you," whoever.  And the blues have a little bit of that, but not that strong.  But that's what I'm here for, to help change that, man, and hopefully bring some more attention to that.
Story_ID: 275183
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Well, I probably should have kept my guitar in my hand during the basketball years.  But I don't think that I should have--that I would change that, because it taught me other parts of the business, running a business.  You know, it takes a team to get it done.  We all can't dunk at the same time, we all can't shoot at the same time.  Somebody got to rebound, and we all got to play defense, you know.  Somebody got to bring the ball up the court, you know, and run the plays.  And then when I pass it to you, you got to dunk it, you know.  And it's the same thing with running a band, you know.  So I learned that from playing basketball, but I probably would have been a little more advanced musically, because I was a kid, and I was absorbing everything like a sponge at that time, you know.  And then I had that period where I just put the guitar down, but it was time for me to learn something else.  So, I really don't look at anything that I regret.  Because I look at what I went through, and I go through things for a reason, and it helps me be what I am today.  You know, and the ultimate thing is, I was talking to Prince.  You know, my friend Jellybean Johnson took me down to Paisley [Park] in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and I had the opportunity to meet Prince and talk to him.  And you know, he's a Jehovah['s] Witness.  And he asked me, he said, "What's your ultimate goal in life?  Not just musically, but in life?"  And I told him, "To be the best person I can be," you know.  And he said, "That's deep.  That's because, that's what you push to be, a good person first."  You know, and I thank my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] and dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] for being there to nourish that, and to direct me, and to give me that sense of direction to be--to not live for the neighborhood.  Because the neighborhood I grew up in [in Chicago, Illinois] was, you know, gangbanging, and later on they got into drugs, you know, and a lot of crime.  And you have to live for the world, not just live for the neighborhood or the block, live for the world.  And my dad took me out of that element and let me see the world.  So, I really can't complain about what I would change or do different.  You know, everything happens for a reason, and I try to, like my song says, "Turn a bad into a positive."
Story_ID: 275184
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life at this, from this point--and you're still young.  When you look back on what you've done so far, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, the family tradition, keeping it going.  My dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] allowed me to learn what I'm doing today, and that opened up doors as far as running my own label, my own record company, Watchdog Records, and being able to learn how to make records, you know, not necessarily just the musical part, but behind the desk part, you know.  I'm not great at it, but I've learned how to--I've done three projects on my own with the help of my good friend Jellybean Johnson, and then my dad, of course.  But I've learned how to make records and market myself, you know.  And the best way to do that is off the stage (laughter).  So, I mean at the time when I did that, I didn't know I could do that.  And once I seen that there weren't too many people out here doing that back then, it's like wow.  Now I can look back and say wow, there weren't too many people doing that, taking that chance.  There was a few, but not many like it is now.  It's wide open now; everybody's making their own CD, you know, financing it themselves.  You know, they're taking whatever they make from the gig and saving it, and eventually, you know, doing a record.  Everybody's doing that now.  I was one of the first--I don't like to brag on that--I'm not the first, but I was one of the first in my generation to do that.  And I've created, you know, my own CDs and a DVD, a live DVD ['Ronnie Baker Brooks Live'].  So, I'm very proud of that, and I'm hoping to take it further and keep pushing, you know, and making it better for the people behind me.
Story_ID: 275185
Speaker 1: We haven't asked you about your family life.  Can you tell us about your own family?  You have children, right?
Speaker 2: I have one daughter, Noel Dion Williams.  Her mother, I'm not with her anymore, we kind of broke up.  But her mother's father is Jody Williams, the blues guitarist.  So, she's got blues music in her blood.  (Laughter) With me and my brother Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Baker Brooks] and my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], and then her side of the family, her mother's side of the family, Jody.  So, that's my pride and joy.  And that's it.  I'm not married.  I feel like I'm married to my guitar.  I always tell everybody, I am married to my guitar.
Speaker 1: Does your guitar have a name?
Speaker 2: The Baby, and I've got it wrote on there, too, The Baby.  She done saved, she done put me--pulled me out of the foxhole a lot of times; she went to war with me (laughter).  And I just love music, and that instrument is like a part of my body.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of guitar do you play?
Speaker 2: I've got a Stratton, a finished Stratton Plus.  It's the first guitar that I bought for myself, from working, you know.  But Dad bought me like two or three guitars, you know, and I used them when I first got with him.  But then when I got, you know, my own money, that's the first thing I bought, was my own guitar.  And now I have like twenty-five to thirty guitars, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: One phenomena I noticed when [HistoryMaker] B.B. King came to Chicago [Illinois] for The HistoryMakers interview was that people started showing up, young white kids usually, showed up with guitars for him to autograph.
Speaker 2: Autograph, yeah.
Speaker 1: Does that happen a lot with you?
Speaker 2: I get that a lot too, now.  Yeah, I get, a lot of people ask me to sign their guitars, you know.  I guess that happens because of eBay, man, you know.  (Laughter) Everybody can make a buck now, you know.  And I tell them, I say, "Hey if you can get an extra dollar for my name, take it.  You know, it's cool."  You know, but a lot of them are sincere, you know, you touch them.  And they feel, you know, like you--because I do the same.  I got a guitar that was signed by Otis Rush; I got Buddy [Guy] who signed some; Robert Junior Lockwood [HistoryMaker Robert Lockwood, Jr.] signed some; I got people to sign my guitars as well.  I got my dad to sign one for me.  He bought me one, and I had him sign it for me.  He even got--my dad, when he gave me my first dollar to help me do my record, he signed the dollar, "This is your first loan, son."  (Laughter) I keep it in my wallet today.  So, I'm into that too, but not to make a profit off of it.  It's just a symbolic thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that we should ask, that you want to talk about that we haven't mentioned?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything right now.  I'm honored to be a part of The HistoryMakers, you know, legacy.  I think it's a great concept, and I'm just hoping that whatever in the story someone can pick up from me can help them in their life, and help them in whatever they're trying to do that's positively, you know.  I'm just a branch off my dad's tree, and I'm trying to get on that train to keep that blues alive, man, that blues music alive, and be a link in the chain for the generation behind us, you know, someone to say, "Hey, I can do that, you know."  I'm honored to do what I love for a living, and to be able to touch people through the music.  Because when I see people happy, it makes me happy.
Story_ID: 275186
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I thought--I knew you were going to ask me that, Larry [Crowe] (laughter), and I thought about it today when I was in the shower.  I said, I know he's going to ask me that.  And I said I should tell him I want to be remembered for living so long.  (Laughter) I know we're all born to die, you know, but the thing, like I said earlier is probably being a good person and a pretty good musician, you know.
