Story_ID: 3302
Speaker 1: My name is Dawoud Bey.  That's D-A-W-O-U-D, Bey, B-E-Y, and I'm a photographer.  I've also been a professional musician.  I've also had a career as a writer. And I've also, since 1976, been a teacher, and I'm currently a professor of photography at Columbia College in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 3303
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your date of birth and also today's date and where we are.
Speaker 2: I was born in New York, Presbyterian Medical Center on November 25, 1953.  My mother is Mary Smickle.  My father is Kenneth Smickle, and when I was born, they actually gave me the name of David Edward Smickle.  In the mid '70s [1970s], like a lot of African Americans in this country, I re-identified myself.  I changed my name to Dawoud, which is actually Arabic for David,  the name is actually not that different.
Speaker 1: And Bey, what does Bey stand for?
Speaker 2: Bey came about as a result of my involvement with traditional African music.  I studied quite extensively in the early '70s [1970s]  with a man by the name of [Chief] James Hawthorne Bey, who also was a teacher of most of the traditional African dramas in America.  In recognition of the significant change, you know, that made for me, I took on that name.
Story_ID: 3304
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask five questions that have no relevance, except I've been doing it since these interviews.  I'd like to know what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: My favorite color--it changes.  It would probably either be purple or blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year--summer, without a doubt.
Speaker 1: It's been cold this summer, without a doubt! (laughter)Your favorite foods?
Speaker 2: Favorite foods.  That's a difficult one.  I'll have to think about that for a while.  It hadn't occurred to me, so I'm not quite sure how to answer that.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have any?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase of saying--How long do I have to think about this before I have to--
Speaker 1: I can come back to that--
Speaker 2: Come back to that.  Favorite phrase or saying.  It would probably be something to the effect that 'everything is possible', because I really think everything is possible.  Now, whether that's my favorite phrase or whether I use that exact phrase--I try to convey to most people that I come in contact with that in fact, everything is possible.
Speaker 1: It's true though. And favorite vacation destination, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation place?  The place that I generally enjoy being at is London [England].  That would probably be my answer for right now.  I have a very strong connection to the place, to the community of people that I'm very close to there.  When I'm there, I feel that it's a kind of second home to me.  I'd probably say London.
Speaker 1: I'll go back to food.  Do you have a favorite food you can think of now?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 3305
Speaker 1: You were born in Brooklyn [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Queens [New York].  I was born in Queens.
Speaker 1: Queens--okay.  Now, I'd like you to talk about--well, your mother--I'd like you first to talk about your mother and what you know about her and her growing up and her side of the family.  Her name was Mary, right?
Speaker 2: Mary Smickle.  My mother's side of the family is from West Point, Mississippi,  a very large family.  They moved out from Mississippi and ended up in all different parts of the country.  My mother, she went to school through the sixth grade, but I think what she was able to accomplish,both herself and through her family, was quite extraordinary. My mother lost both of her parents at a relatively early age and ended up in the care of an older sister, who then became a kind of surrogate mother to my mother.  She met my father when she came to New York to stay with my aunt, my Aunt Louise.  She got on the bus, came up to New York to stay with my aunt who had come here previously and met my father.  She met my father in church.  It's a very interesting story, because she met my father through his mother.  My grandmother on my father's side knew her and thought that perhaps it would be good for her to meet her son.  My mother was singing in the choir and my grandmother asked my father why don't you come and meet this very nice young lady, who is singing in the choir.  So my grandmother got the idea that my father should meet this very nice young woman who was singing in the church choir and that young woman was my mother.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up?  What age was she when she came to New York, took the bus to New York?  Do you know what age?
Speaker 2: I would say she was in her very early twenties when she came to New York, very early twenties.
Speaker 1: Did she--Do you know what age she was when her parents died, because you said they died early?
Speaker 2: I believe she was twelve when her mother passed away.  A little bit older when her father passed away.  From what I remember, the father alone was not able to take care of all the children.  It was a very large family, and that's when the older children started taking responsibility for the younger ones and that's my mother.  My mother's the baby in the family.
Speaker 1: Did she share anything about growing up, about her growing up or anything with you or anything that you are aware of?
Speaker 2: It was probably the kind of childhood that a lot of black people had growing up in the South in the early 1900s, 1920s, taking in clothes, washing clothes for white folks as a way of ekeing out a living.  It was difficult.  My mother did not have a very easy childhood, that much I do know.
Speaker 1: You had mentioned earlier that your mother was--you said an amazing person.  I was wondering what you mean by that.
Speaker 2: My mother was--
Speaker 1: You said, in many ways my mother was a very amazing person.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  my mother. We are who we are because of my mother and my father too, of course.  My mother role in our lives and our education was pretty significant.  She was one of those parents who was very involved in the schools that we went to.  She was one of those constant presences at the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting.  She was very intimately involved with several of our teachers.  My second grade teacher, Ms. [Hortense] Jones--my mother became very close to her.  She became like a family member in fact.  During the time that we were in school, there were things that would come up, being a black child going to a largely white public school, and I can only imagine what a difference my mother, being a very active presence in those schools, made in terms of how my brother and I were dealt with by those schools that we went to, because they knew if they didn't do their jobs, they would have to answer to Mary Smickle and that made the difference.
Story_ID: 3306
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  His name is [Kenneth] Ken Smickle.  What do you know about his family and his background?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Pennsylvania--Richboro, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Where in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Richboro, Pennsylvania.  He was raised by his mother, who was from Jamaica and a stepfather.  My father--his story is probably very interesting and inspiring story as well.  He was a person who, after his time in the military, came out, took a leave while he was there in the military to marry my mother in New Orleans [Louisiana.]  My mother went up to New Orleans.  My father took a leave and they were married in New Orleans, but, after my father got out, he became very much interested and involved in electronics.  From what my aunt had said, my father was always one of those kinds of people who wanted to know how things worked.  He was constantly taking things apart and trying to figure out how to put them back together.  Very intellectually engaged and curious.  I'm probably like my father in a lot of ways, because one of the things that I always remember about my father, he was constantly reading something, all the time.  He would read to us from the newspaper if there was an interesting story.  When I was very young, I discovered a whole room full of books in the attic, in what was my father's space.  He had constructed a space for himself in the attic where he had his library--his ham radio equipment.  He was a ham radio operator.  That was fascinating as a kid.  The idea of this man talking to people, literally all over the world, and having something to say to people whose experiences were probably quite different from our own.  That's something about my father that I remember.  He was an engineer, one of the first black people to rise to a significant level in the electronic engineering field, specifically microwave electronics.  In all the places that he worked, my father was management level, which gave me a definite sense of how one could conduct one's self in the world with a certain amount of authority, with a certain amount of dignity.  My father, in a lot of ways I think  as I get older, I realize how much I've been inspired by who my father was.  He was someone who, after rising to a certain level in any profession--he decided in his fifties, that he wanted to make a significant change and go back to school, which he did.  He had been in engineering for the larger part of his adult life and decided to a good deal, based on the impact of my second grade teacher, who we kept in touch with all those years.  He decided he wanted to go into the field of education and to see if he could make some kind of impact in that area.  So he left the field that he was in. He left that profession, went to the UMass-Amherst [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts] and got his master's degree in education and then stayed on, continued and got a doctorate in education from the UMass-Amherst.  He then became the acting assistant dean of the School of Engineering at the UMass-Amherst based on all of his experience in that field, coupled with his doctorate in education.  Then he set up several programs that he ran in Massachusetts for a number of years, which were basically about trying to empower young people by positioning them and training them to enter positions in high tech industries.  He was probably a little bit ahead of the curve in that sense.  He was a visionary.  He saw things and he realized that certain kids were not having access to this technology and he tried to identify them and attract them, you know, into that field.
Story_ID: 3307
Speaker 1: You described your father in the one article about his being very gregarious. And I found that sort of interesting, because I don't think of engineers as gregarious.  You described him as a person who was always very intrigued by other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father had the ability to engage, in what seemed to me, to be a very meaningful way with people across a very broad, economic and social range.  He had a real curiosity about people that allowed him, I think, to engage with them in a real and meaningful way.  It could be someone selling hot dogs on the corner, it could have been anyone--could have been anyone.  My father found a way to connect with that person, whoever he or she was, for that moment--have some kind of exchange with them. He was very open to the world in that way.
Story_ID: 3308
Speaker 1: Are there things that you could share with us that are stories about either your family or home life or anything that sort of--like two or three examples.
Speaker 2: A thing that I remember about growing up? There are a lot of things that I remember about growing up.  Probably the things that stayed with me the most are the things that I can most readily identify with the person that I think I've become.  We always, from the time I was a child, we were always traveling somewhere whether it was to a house upstate. My father bought a house upstate New York that we did go to during the summer.  That gave me a sense of having some other place in the world to go to that I think are very important.  Other childhood stories--you know, some of the things that I think about have to do with being like one of the first black families in certain neighborhoods that we would move to.  I didn't, at that point, know what white flight was, but I quickly found out.  When I was born, we lived on 115th Road and Sheffield Boulevard in Jamaica, Queens [New York] and I remember this being a wonderfully diverse community.  I still remember the German couple who ran the bakery around the corner.  It was a very rich range of people in the neighborhood and that changed.  I remember when that changed.  I also remember when we moved.  We moved from 115th Road to 119th Avenue, which had a similar kind of racial mix initially.  I remember the very nice family that lived next door to us, the Kenits (ph.), a white family.  It was a mix of black and white people on that block and over the course of a few years that changed.  Pretty much the same thing happened when we moved again.  We moved to Hollis, Queens [New York] to 208th Street and again it was a very mixed racially and economically--probably more racially actually and then within a few short years that changed and became primarily an African -American community.  In retrospect, it gives me this real sense of my mother and father trying to keep us situated in a certain kind of environment that, in spite of their best efforts, kept changing.  Then they would change and make another move.  It was tied to my father doing increasing well in the field that he was in, because we were moving to bigger and better houses, bigger and better neighborhoods, and yet the caliber of the neighborhoods seemed to change within a certain period of us getting there.  I now understand the implications of all of that.  It was somewhat puzzling to me as a kid and I didn't really understand quite what was going on.  Race wasn't talked about too much in my family and that's an interesting thing, because I was constantly finding myself in situations and with race clearly was a very meaningful factor, but it was never really talked about.  I find that interesting.  It created this tension between things appearing to be normal as defined in the home and yet there's this world out there in which things are not quite right, and I never--why I never asked those questions when I came home or why they were never really raised, is an interesting thing to think about, because it's very clear to me now what was going wrong.  I think my parents were sheltered in that regard.  I think they wanted to keep all of those negative forces as far away from us as they could and create a sense of normalcy, which I think they did a very good job of doing, except that I now know that there are all of these other things going on around us.
Speaker 1: How many times did you move?
Speaker 2: 115th Road, where I was born and then we moved to 119th Avenue, which was still in Jamaica [Queens, New York] and then we moved to Hollis [Queens, New York.]
Speaker 1: So three times--you would stay an average of what, maybe five years or so in each place?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Story_ID: 3309
Speaker 1: You have an older brother and how much older is he to you?
Speaker 2: My brother is almost two years older than I am.  His name is [Kenneth] Ken Smickle, named after my father, Ken Smickle, Jr.
Speaker 1: So as the youngest son, did you feel that you were definitely the youngest son and how do you and your brother differ?
Speaker 2: I think the youngest sibling always knows they're the younger sibling.  The older siblings make sure they know that.  There was definitely that sense.  My brother was the older brother, so I looked up to my older brother.  I was the younger brother and he made sure I knew he was in charge.  I mean that's what older siblings generally do.  We were close enough in age for us to have very close relationship, but also like most older and younger siblings, there comes a point where age matters more, then as you get older it matters less.
Story_ID: 3310
Speaker 1: So do you have any other--in school, where did you go?  Do you have any stories from school?  You had mentioned your second grade teacher.  You said she had an impact on you, but you also mentioned it relates to your father later.
Speaker 2: She became almost like family, an extension of my family, because my second grade teacher, her grandson--quite a number of years later, my mother took care of him for a while.  By that time, they had become almost like an extended family.  I think everybody probably has a favorite teacher story and Ms. Jones, Ms. Hortense Jones, she's my favorite teacher story, because more than any teacher that I had before or even since--the deep sense of investment that she had in every child in that room--you knew that you were receiving her full attention.  So that became to me, a moment that I always remember, especially in relation to things that came after, because Ms. Jones, for example, was not surprised to encounter a bright little black boy.  Probably significant that she was, as I think about it, the only black teacher that I ever had.  Now that I think about it--until I got to college at least, Ms. Jones was the only black teacher that I ever had.  After that, my brother and I were bused.  The busing--the great American busing experiment started, and we were bused out of our neighborhood.  Ms. Jones had a role in that too, because at that time it wasn't mandatory busing.  It was at the initial stage in which certain kids were identified who would be bussed out of their community to another neighborhood, where presumably they would be met by more opportunity.  I always like to say once I left Ms. Jones's classroom, things were very different.  My sense of the relationship to the teacher was clearly not the personal one that it had been when I was in Ms. Jones's class.  The relationship between the teacher and my family was never what it had been at that point. That was a very unique moment I had and a wonderful experience when I had an exhibition at the Queens Museum [of Art] in [Flushing Meadows Corona Park] New York about two years ago.  Ms. Jones came to the opening and it was the most wonderful thing, because she still is deeply invested and cares about how I'm doing.  I don't know that I can say that about any of the other teachers that I've had.  I'm talking about second grade.  My son [Ramon Smickle] is in third grade now, so I must have been what, seven or eight years old, but this still remains to me a very profound experience.  The experience of being in that room and realizing that you could do or be anything you wanted to be.
Speaker 1: That's what she taught you?
Speaker 2: Sure. Without--perhaps she knew, perhaps she didn't and perhaps that's exactly what she thought she should be doing.  There was a clear sense of possibility, a clear sense of you're free to achieve whatever you can.
Story_ID: 3311
Speaker 1: The way I remember being in that classroom was very different from what I remembered about the kind of--suspicion, I think, that I drew after that.  Being a smart little black boy was not a suspicious activity in Ms. Jones's class. It wasn't suspect, why shouldn't you be? But, after that, my intelligence seemed to be questioned with some degree of suspicion about how could he know this. (break)  Sometimes that suspicion was very explicit, because there were teachers when I would turn in my homework who would ask me, "Who did this for you? Where did you copy this from?"  I was absolutely flabbergasted at the thought: (a) that I would need to copy it, and (b) that the question would even come up.  So, I think from that point forward my relationship to education and to schools, once I started being bused, my relationship to all of that changed dramatically.
Story_ID: 3312
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you? I just want to know-- before a student, I would like to know what kind of child you were.  How would you describe yourself?  Were you shy and retiring? Were you introspective? Were you precocious?
Speaker 2: I was probably a very introspective child.  I loved to read.  Books were my escape and books were my way of entering into the world, of transporting myself to some place else.  I just loved to read, all of my allowance would go to buying books.  That's something that I took a great deal of pleasure in.  It's nothing that I had to be asked to do.  It's just something that came to me very naturally--the world of books.  That's where I spent a lot of my free time doing--reading.  To me that was one of the most enjoyable and pleasurable activities--reading books.
Speaker 1: Was there a type of book that you preferred reading?
Speaker 2: My mother once commented that I would read anything.  It could be a nursing journal, it could be a side of the cereal box, it didn't matter to me.  As a child, I liked reading mystery books, the "Hardy Boys" series were probably my favorite series of books.  Then as I got older, I--actually what happened was looking through my father's books up in the attic, he had a copy of Siddhartha by Hermann Hesse--this book that transformed my life. Because I probably always had a certain inclination for things spiritual, and in Hermann Hesse's book, I recognized some aspect of myself that I hadn't come in contact with before, and I thought it was quite interesting that my father had this book.  So, as I got older, the things that I read became more about the social and political moments that I was living in.  Certainly, the late '60s [1960s], the early '70s [1970s]--this whole sense of black nationalism was sweeping the country. I was reading Amiri Baraka [poet/author], Haki Madhubuti [poet/author], Sonia Sanchez [poet/author]--all the black poets that as a kid, I just loved to read almost anything, it didn't matter to me.  I thought words were just wonderful things.
Story_ID: 3313
Speaker 1: Now, you--you talked about the relationship with your teachers after the second grade and I'd like to just talk about that a little bit, because there's this whole issue of black boys and how they're handled in the educational--in schools, and I was wondering if you could expound about that a little bit.
Speaker 2: Probably I think the longer I stayed in school, the angrier I was becoming.  I didn't know that initially.  It started off as being perplexed.  I remember one time we had to write. There was an assignment to write a poem.  I loved poetry, I loved reading.  For me composing verse was not that difficult.  I came up with a very nice--what I thought was a very nice piece of writing and I turned it in and the first thing the teacher said was, " Where in the world did you copy this from?"  Copy it?  Now, if it was Ms. Jones, it would have been, " This is extraordinary, let's put this up on the board so everyone could read this. Maybe we should publish this in the school newsletter."  Things changed.  Now, I'm doing work and I'm being asked where did I copy it from.  When you're seven, eight, nine, ten years old, you don't know enough to ask the teacher, " What in the world are you talking about? What made you think I need to copy that? I can probably write better than you!"  (laughter)  You don't know to articulate these things, you don't have the voice.  So, I just remained perplexed for a long time.  I could not figure out what these people were thinking; why they thought I needed to copy a poem of all things, something that came so easily.  Those are the kind of experiences that I continued to have.  There were little dramas that would happen in the class and at that point I would be one of maybe two, at most, three black children in a class of twenty or twenty-five.  If anything were disrupted in the class, I would be the first one questioned about it.  Eventually it took on a kind of--for me as a kid, a kind of twilight zone-like feeling.  People seemed to think things are going on, that you're doing things that you just simply know you're not doing. But these are adults, so you don't question them, but you know that this just isn't happening.  As you get older and the realization of what that is can be called--for whatever reason, I didn't know to go home and say to my mother, " Mom there's something wrong, I'm doing this and these people are accusing me of copying."  I was just so overwhelmed by the strangeness of it all that I just kind of kept it to myself and came back for another day to see what would happen.  As that continued to happen and as I began to realize much later on what was happening, I became quite angry about it, and by the time I got to high school--I could give you an example of where I was by the time I got to high school.  About two, maybe three years ago, I was invited to come back to my high school as alumni who had gone on to do very well in the world, which in terms of my relationship to that high school was pretty ironic.  I was having an exhibition at the museum in Queens [ref. to Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows Corona Park, New York] and they thought it would be a good idea once they heard that I had gone to Benjamin Cardozo High School [Oakland Gardens, Queens, New York], let's bring him back so our students can see that you in fact, can succeed and you can go on to achieve in the world.  It was the most interesting thing, because when I went back--how many years would that have been--thirty years at least.  When I met with the students, we met in the library and I told the students that quite frankly I had a very different relationship with this school than most of you probably have right now.  I said, "I have to tell you this it the first time I have ever been in this library."  I went through four years of high school without ever having gone into the library.  I didn't know what that library looked like until I went there two or three years ago.  Now, you take from being a bright, inquisitive little black boy to someone who gets to high school and spends four years there without ever having gone into the library.  I think that gives you some sense of what my relationship to school was by that time.
Story_ID: 3314
Speaker 1: What role is your mother playing at this point?  You said she is very active with you know--
Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Smickle] was still being very active.  There were things that would happen, situations that would come up, she would call them up and she would go in to meet with them. (pause) My mother was still very active in our educational lives at this point.  She would still attend the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, she would still come to the school any time a situation came up, but things were just coming up more and more frequently.  There's no way you can have your mom in school every day.  I mean there are just things that are happening.  She was still--I think even though my mother was still very much involved to the extent that she could be, I had pretty much shut down at that point.  My grades were not what they should have been, other than in the subjects, the things that I loved, english, probably social studies, anything having to do with reading, because that was still something that I could do and achieve with the minimum amount of effort, but everything else, I was just not getting it.  Either they were not getting to me, or I wasn't letting them get to me or it wasn't getting through, whatever.  It was not a good experience.  By the time I got to high school I was also very politically active.  I was active in the black student union at that point.  Before that, I had been very active in the Black Panther Party [militant political group.]  My whole political relationship to these places was changing.  I was advocating for the kinds of changes in those institutions that I knew needed to happen if they were going to be the kind of places that they should be for black students.  So my relationship to the school, by the time I got to high school, was probably more confrontational than anything else.
Story_ID: 3315
Speaker 1: You know what I find interesting is there was a changing time here, but I just want to ask you about this.  Remember when you said your parents never really discussed the issue of race.  So how did this play out in the whole family dynamic is what I'm wondering?
Speaker 2: It was interesting, because as I became more politically active, my father [Kenneth Smickle Sr.] and I especially began to have a very different kind of dialogue.  My father, although he had been a groundbreaking person, as far as being an African American in his field, my father was not the kind of overt, boat-rocker that I had become.  So probably the best way to describe it--I really politicized my family at that point.  I just created a whole dialogue that just couldn't be denied because of my political activism.  My father started off initially, I think, being somewhat resentful of the fact that I just didn't take advantage of these opportunities that were out there. But as it we ran on, I know that he really began to respect the position that I was taking, because they were principled positions.  My father had always been a principled man.  I know that he began to respect those positions, even as the overt aspect of activism made him somewhat uncomfortable.
Story_ID: 3316
Speaker 1: Now, what motivated you to get active politically?  How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: Initially it was [Southern Christian Leadership Council's] the Poor People's Campaign in Washington [D.C.][1968] when I was in junior high school.  I saw a picture of these people mobilizing and going down to Washington to ask the government to address some issues.  Why I was moved by that in junior high school, I can't tell you, but something about looking at those photographs of those people down there putting something on the line touched something in me that hadn't been touched before.  From there, I think it just went on and changed as the political and social climate in the country changed.  I think the volume just kept getting turned up louder and louder as things changed from the conventional civilized movement to [former field secretary for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Stokely Carmichael's call for black power to the Black Panther Party [militant political organization] saying we're going to seize power by any means necessary and then students taking over buildings, challenging college and high school administrations.  I was just right there with all of that.  The politics of confrontation were my politics.
Speaker 1: Who were the people that you read during this period of time.  Who were influencing you?
Speaker 2: During that time it's interesting because I still have all of his books.  I was being influenced by a range of things from Kenneth B. Clark's [psychologist] studies of urban America, trying to understand exactly what was happening to black people in the urban environment--the more rhetorical things like [poet/author] Amiri Baraka.  What else was I reading?  I got [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s books, 'Letter from a Birmingham Jail'.  I had read by the time I got to high school a book that really influenced my sense of the moral dimension of the world--Kahlil Gibran's book, 'The Prophet'.  There was this kind of a coming together of this activist sense of--it probably came out of [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] study of [Mohandas K.] Mahatma Gandhi,you know,  and I kind of embraced all of that.  There are so many things I was reading it's hard to say, because I read pretty voraciously.
Story_ID: 3317
Speaker 1: Now, let's get to your--art and the photography.  You tell the story--I want you to tell the story of how you even came sort of into the photography.
Speaker 2: I came to photography probably by--I think a lot of us come to things by chance.  It wasn't anything that I had a particular interest in and actually at the time I got my first camera, I had started getting serious about music.  My brother and I had taken piano lessons from the time we were very small, so music has always been a part of our lives.  Then I got my first set of drums when I was fourteen years old.  I thought I was going to be a drummer, that's what I was prepared to do.  In 1968, my godfather passed away.  They also lived in Queens [New York].  My godfather, Arthur Miller, was very politically active in Democratic politics in Queens.  Actually, the conversations in our household were most politicized whenever he came over with my godmother for dinner and he would talk politics: what the Negro has to do, the Negro has to stop bowing down, the Negro has to--he was a very political person.  When he passed away in 1968 and after we came back from probably the wake because as children--we didn't go to many funerals.  We went to the wake and we went to my godmother's house and we were there for a while and as we were leaving, she said, "Hold on a minute, I have something that I want to give you."  I had no idea what it was going to be or why she said, "I want to give this to you."  She could have given it to my brother, she could have given it to anyone, but she went upstairs and I followed her into the bedroom and she held out a camera and she said, "This camera belonged to your godfather and I want you to have it."  I was thirteen years old.  I took the camera merely to be polite.  I wasn't at all interested in it.  It was the camera that had the adjustments on it that I knew nothing about it--shutter speed, f-stops.  I didn't know anything about it, but she decided that I should have this camera.  I took it and I said, "Thank you."  After that, some time after that, I decided maybe I should try to figure out how to operate this thing, because I didn't have a clue, but the fact that I was someone who knew where to get information.  I knew to get information from books and there's got to be some books about cameras and photography.  I started buying photography books and magazines, looking and all of a sudden this camera begins to make sense.  The numbers on this camera: 160th of a second, a 30th of a second, that's 8, that's 11.  You look in the technical section of the book--oh, this picture was made at 125th of a second at F8.  So the relationship between the pictures and the mechanics of the camera began to make sense to me.  Then a year after I got that camera from my godmother,  there was an exhibition, [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] 'Harlem On My Mind', and because even at that point the Poor People's Campaign [campaign against poverty initiated by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.] was happening and I was becoming politicized and I heard about the controversy that was going on around this exhibition.  There were demonstrations.  The black community was upset, because there was an exhibition about the black community and yet, the works in the show were not made by African American photographers.  So the black community felt that their voice was being excluded.  There had been an essay published in the catalog by a young woman who was a student at City College of New York [New York, New York].  I think her name was Candice Van Ellison.  It was an essay that was controversial because of some things that she said about the nature of the relationship between the Jewish shop owners in Harlem [New York] and the black community and how money was being drained out of the black community.  She didn't exactly use language that was that diplomatic and so the Jewish community was upset.  The Jewish community was out front of the museum protesting for their set of issues.  The black community was protesting because they had been left out, and this was all over the talk radio and it was all in the newspapers at that time and I read it and I said something's going on here, let me go check this out.  It wasn't the photographs--I wasn't going to look at the photographs.  I was probably going to decide maybe I'll get on that picket line with the black folks who were upset because they've been excluded from this exhibition.  When I got there, the day that I went for whatever reason, things must have quieted down by that point, because on the day I got there, there was no picket lines.  I just went straight into the [Metropolitan] museum [of Art, New York, New York] and saw the exhibition.  It's interesting, I think, because that show became the first time that I saw photographs on a wall in a museum.  It's the first time that I began to get a sense of the power that photographs could have.  It's the first time that I realized that photography could be more than just pictures in a newspaper or magazine.  People were walking around looking at them, standing in front of them and looking at them for a while, which gave me a sense that something substantial had gone on there.  So between my godmother giving me the camera and the fact that there were no picket lines the day that I got there, which may have actually delayed my going into the museum.  I may never have gone in actually if the picket lines had been there.  Going to that exhibition and seeing those photographs coupled with having just gotten that camera the year before was the thing that made me begin to realize what photography was and what it could be. And how this camera that I had could actually be used to do something quite significant and interesting.
Story_ID: 3318
Speaker 1: You were fourteen around that time of the exhibition [at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: 'Harlem On My Mind' opened in 1969.  I was born in 1953. So that's sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to this exhibition.  Was there anything that struck you besides the fact that you saw these large pieces hanging?  Was there anything else about the exhibit that struck you?
Speaker 2: I thought the museum itself was a very imposing place.  I had only been to museums previously with school groups.  The class would take a class trip to the museum.  You would go to see a specific thing, have lunch in the cafeteria and then go back to school.  This is very different.  Now, I go there and I have to figure out what does it cost first of all.  Going with a school group, it's not even paid, and the Metropolitan Museum in particular, is a very large imposing museum.  At sixteen years old, I walked in and all I knew is, I was looking for this exhibition.  Because the place was so vast, I didn't even know where to begin.  I felt like I should know.  I felt if I walked up to the information desk and asked, they would probably think I was stupid. Like, "Why is he asking, doesn't he know?"  Now I know that's what an information desk is for, to go up and ask for information, but at that time, I felt like everyone else was walking around, they seemed to know where they were going and maybe I'll just walk around and I'll find it. and I did, but it took me a little bit of looking around the museum to find it. But when I finally found the exhibition, it had a really profound effect on me.
Story_ID: 3319
Speaker 1: Now, how long before that had you actually gotten the camera?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: Had you been shooting with it at all?
Speaker 2: I didn't really know what to do with the camera.  That's the interesting thing.  I didn't know what to do with it.  I had barely figured out how to operate it.  When I got the camera, I had no formal training in photography at that point.  There was a camera club at my high school, but it's not something I would have participated in.  I basically figured out how to make pictures and how to develop them technically by reading photography books and magazines.  Before I saw 'Harlem On My Mind' [exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], I had the camera for one year trying to figure out how to work it.  I would look in the magazines--'Popular Photography Annual' and they had a technical section in the back that tells you how all the pictures in the front were made.  I would go out and look for similar situations and using that technical information trying to make a similar kind of picture.  It wasn't a very successful experiment I have to say.  I remember trying to develop my first role of film.  When they said to develop the film in a darkroom, I didn't know they meant a 'dark room', an absolutely dark room.  I would go in the room and turn off the lights, that's dark enough!  I didn't have much of a technical or formal education in photography at the that time I went to see that show. But it was seeing that exhibition that made me realize the potential of photographs to talk about the human experience, you know, because clearly I think, my political activism was driven by certain kind of humanism.  Seeing those photographs made me realize that the camera could be something of an extension of that.
Story_ID: 3320
Speaker 1: Yeah, after, after high school, I went to Queensborough Community College [Bayside, New York], which interestingly enough is just across the street from the high school that I had gone to.  I didn't have any real sense of why I was going.  I knew that it was expected that I would go.  At that point, what the relationship was between a college education and what you do with your life was not very clear to me probably because due to my alienation in high school, I didn't really have anyone to talk to about that.  I don't know that the question really occurred to me.  Then when I went to Queensborough, which I ended up leaving after a year, I was elected president of the black student union and I spent my year on campus at Queensborough Community College running the black student union, organizing activities for the African American students at the college.  I had gotten pretty deeply involved in music at that point.  I invited Ornette Coleman [jazz saxophonist]to come to Queensborough Community College [Bayside, New York.]  I was playing in a band at that time.  I had the band come and play for one of the festivals at the college.  Academically, there wasn't much going on.  I think the only class that I actually took and completed when I was at Queensborough was the class on the history of religions.  Anything else,  I probably took a W [withdrawal] in.  I was probably a full-time administrator who was supposed to have been a student.  I think that's what I was doing, but it was a very valuable experience for me in terms of the things that I was doing with the black student union--the events that I was organizing.  I met someone who became a very close friend of mine-Gerald--who was also part of the black student union, who went on to work on a number of different publications and projects that my brother and I did years later.  So while I didn't know what I was doing there academically, I think it was a very interesting and useful experience for me.  It wasn't until 1976 when I--had been making pictures for a few years and I heard of the School of Visual Arts in New York [New York]--and I decided to apply.  This was the first time that it began to dawn on me exactly what the nature of the relationship was between going to college and what one wants to do with their life.  I had been making photographs for a few years.  I applied to the School of Visual Arts with this group of pictures and got a full scholarship.  That was--I remember that being one of the most self-affirming things that happened to me.  That was 1975, '76 [1976] I applied to the School of Visual Arts.
Story_ID: 3321
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back just to--  I want to go back a few years. The things that were motivating you were the politics and where did music come in and what instrument were you playing?
Speaker 2: I played drums.  I got my first set of drums when I was fourteen years old.  I never stopped playing after that.  I played professionally for a number of years probably from the time I was maybe eighteen years old up until probably the mid '70s [1970s], when I stopped playing professionally.  I started out playing in different local bands, different R&B bands.  Growing up in Queens [New York], everybody was in a band.  It seemed to be the thing that was going on.  Everyone was in a band.  Just on one block that we lived on, 208th Street, there was a band that used to rehearse across the street in the garage.  Down on the next corner was a band that ended up becoming the back up band for [Patti] LaBelle [singer].  Then two doors down from them there was another drummer there and they were having band rehearsals in the basement.  There was a very vibrant music scene in Queens and a number of well-known musicians came out of that music scene.  I was a drummer and I played with a lot of those different bands around Queens, around New York.  I ended up playing jazz and then I also studied traditional African music from a very early age.  Probably around the same time I got my first drum set, I started studying traditional African music.  So music had been something that had been pretty much a constant for me as well.  It's the first art form that I got significantly involved with--[it] was music.
Speaker 1: Do you think you have any sense of--did you see yourself as an artist at that time?  I mean when you were--did you think of yourself as a musician?
Speaker 2: Well, from the time I became a musician, I would say I considered myself certainly to be an artist.  Before that, I was writing a lot of poetry as well, quite a bit of which had gotten published in different literary journals and college journals.  I probably knew more what I didn't want to do.  I never saw myself working a conventional job.  I never saw myself putting on a suit and tie and punching the clock and being anywhere for forty hours a week.  It just never really occurred to me.  It absolutely never occurred to me.  I never thought that that's what I would be doing.  I thought that I would go crazy if that's what my life was going to be.
Story_ID: 3322
Speaker 1: You go to the community college--you--
Speaker 2: Well, I stopped.  After I left Queensborough Community College [Bayside, New York] my time was spent basically learning how to make pictures.  I worked for a while as a remedial reading teacher in District 26 in Queens [New York].  I did a number of things--I worked in a photography lab.  I just did a range of things trying to figure out what am I going to do.
Speaker 1: But the thing is you could have been playing in a band during that time.  I'm just trying to figure out why taking pictures all of a sudden became the--
Speaker 2: Well, for a while I was engaged in both music and photography simultaneously.  Music, certainly music at a professional level, is a group activity. Waiting for people to show up for rehearsals, waiting for people to show up for the gigs.  Photography probably appealed to my more solitary nature.  It's something that I could do by myself --pick up my camera, go out into the world and make pictures.  I didn't have to encounter anyone else for that.  That probably was why I decided at some point to get out of the music business professionally and to start pursuing photography more seriously.  That was probably the moment at which I went to the School of Visual Arts [New York, New York] in 1976.  I made that transition from being one kind of artist, a musician, to being another, a photographer.
Story_ID: 3323
Speaker 1: What impact did that school have on you, on your career and what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Being at the School of Visual Arts, for the first time in a long time, it was a wonderful educational experience.  I found something that I knew how to do.  I got some sense of affirmation from my teachers there, that I knew how to do it well.  I was surrounded by a community of people who were also engaged in this activity.  I began to get a sense of the history of photography, things that I hadn't found out about on my own.  It was a very affirming kind of experience for me.  There were a number of relationships that I struck up during that time that continued even to now, in terms of teachers that I still know, friends of mine who I'm very close to now, who were formerly students at the School of Visual Arts.  That was a very good and wonderful experience, especially because I was there on a full scholarship, so all I had to do was spend my days making pictures, and it was when I first began to get a sense of how I might do that and how I might in fact, make that my life's work.
Speaker 1: And so let's explore that.  What were some of the beginning senses that you got from that experience?  Were you like any sort of young photographer just sort of shooting around?
Speaker 2: During the time at the School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], I started working on this project photographing in Harlem [New York].  That project became the first group of pictures that I exhibited.  I stayed at the School of Visual Arts for two years.  My professors kept asking me what I was doing there.  They said, "You don't need to be here, you need to just go on out in the world and make these photographs. You clearly know what it is you want to do, you know how to do it. We're probably holding you back more than anything else, so why don't you just go ahead and do it?" The opportunity to do that came in 1978 when the Cultural Council Foundation in New York, along with a number of other organizations throughout the country, received money for what became the CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] Artists' Project.  I think it was during the [President Jimmy] Carter administration.  CETA had passed and in New York, they set up a component within--the CETA for artists and they were hiring I think, 300, 350 artists.  While I was at the School of Visual Arts, I applied to be one of the artists to be hired by the CETA artists' project and I was accepted.  I took a leave of absence from the School of Visual Arts and proceeded to the Harlem project full time for two and a half years.  By the time that was over, there was no going back, so I just kept going.  When I finished the Harlem project in 1978 or 1979, I had my first one-person exhibition of those photographs at the Studio Museum in Harlem in New York.
Speaker 1: And that exhibit was called Harlem, USA?
Speaker 2: Harlem, USA. Yes.
Story_ID: 3324
Speaker 1: Why did you choose Harlem as a subject?--is what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Well I decided to choose Harlem [New York] as the subject of my first group of pictures certainly influenced to some degree by my experience of the 'Harlem On My Mind' exhibition, but also because my family had a very real history in that community.  My mother and father met in Harlem.  They had lived in Harlem for a number of years before we moved out to Queens.  It wasn't until my brother and I were born in fact, that they moved to Queens, but before that my mother and father lived in Harlem.  When we were kids, we used to spend time visiting family and relatives who still lived there.  So when I began this project making pictures, I thought that I would use this opportunity of making photographs to re-establish a connection to this community that I had some connection and some history with, but that I had never lived in and never had the opportunity to fully explore.  I thought I would do that through making photographs there.  I spent five years photographing in Harlem and had some interesting experiences, met people.  Because I was too young to remember them, who recognized me as being Ken's boy [Kenneth Smickle Sr].  It was an extraordinary experience for me.
Speaker 1: What was extraordinary about that?  You were growing up in many ways right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was growing up--I was deciding who I was going to be in the world--making photographs, deciding what I wanted to talk about through making photographs.  Photography also became a way for me to come out of myself.  I was probably very shy as a child.  It wasn't the easiest thing for me to talk to people, and at one point I had a very bad stutter.  Photography allowed me to come out of myself in a way that I hadn't previously other than through music.  It probably began through music, but with playing in a band you're dealing with the people in the band, they're friends.  Making photographs the way I was making photographs, going out into the street making photographs of complete strangers, having to strike up a conversation with someone that you don't know, say "Excuse me, ma'am. I'd like to make a picture of you."  "Well, why?"  "Well, I'm just interested in photographs."  It really made me begin to explain myself to the world and to the people that I was photographing in a way that I hadn't had to before that.  So--that's one of the things that was extraordinary about it.  I was finally coming into my own in that sense.
Story_ID: 3325
Speaker 1: In that process, can you talk about your work and what you were trying to do as a young photographer?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, when I started making the photographs of people in Harlem, I was very conscious of certain stereotypes that had been perpetuated through photographs and magazines and photographs made of black people and popular culture, photographs that had entered the culture through maybe Life magazine.  The whole history of black stereotypical images was something that I wanted to address.  Certainly when people talk about Harlem, there was a certain kind of pathology that seemed to cling to the community.  The community was always talked about through the lens of some kind of problem: the crime problem, the drug problem, but because my family had lived there and we knew people there, I knew that the people that they were talking about were not the people that I knew.  Initially, my motivation was to go to Harlem, to become a part of the community to the extent that I could and to just try to make some honest photographs of the people who lived there and to find some way for these photographs to have some kind of public display.  I would just strike up conversations with people and as much as it was about making photographs, it was also about me establishing or trying to re-establish my own connection to that community and to ascribe that connection to the people that I was meeting and photographing.
Story_ID: 3326
Speaker 1: You have that picture over there by James VanDerZee, and I'm wondering that was used in the exhibit and he also documented Harlem.  Was there any of that or anything happening--
Speaker 2: Well, [James] VanDerZee [photographer] was certainly my initial influence.  It's these photographs that I remembered the most from the 'Harlem On My Mind' exhibition.  Of all the things that I showed there, the things that made the strongest impact on me that I remember most strongly were the photographs by James VanDerZee.  The way in which he represented black people in his pictures were the way I thought about the black people that I knew who lived in Harlem [New York] and were in my family.  They were not drug dealers, they were not junkies, they were not the kind of pathological figures that were so often described in the culture. And also there was an elegance to his photographs not only in the subject matter themselves, but in the way in which he described them through his pictures and that became my initial way of thinking about making photographs when I went to Harlem.  The initial group of pictures that I made are very much informed by the photographs of VanDerZee that I had seen and also by that time I was looking at other photographers who weren't African Americans like Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange--people who worked in the Farm Security Administration project and the WPA [Works Progress Administration] photographers.
Speaker 1: At this time you're shooting 35mm right?
Speaker 2: (pause) When I started making pictures, I was using a 35mm camera and black and white film, because I didn't have a lot of money.  I was shooting black and white 35mm film probably the way you'd shoot cheap film, which is film that you'd expose one sheet at a time.  I was very meticulously compose the picture.  I would make one, maybe two exposures, even though you have like thirty-six exposures on a roll, it didn't occur to me to make that many pictures.  I was trying to get it right the first time or maybe the second time.  I was using the 35mm camera in a way that you would think about using a larger camera.  You use a larger camera in a much more deliberate kind of way 35mm cameras is really made for making pictures quickly, and yet I was using it in a very slow, deliberate and methodical kind of way to compose the photographs.
Story_ID: 3327
Speaker 1: So you said you were still being very strategic.  Can you just describe that?  A lot of times they may be capturing something artistic--
Speaker 2: By the time I started photographing in Harlem, I had a sense of the history of photography:  what kinds of pictures I wanted to make, what kind of photographic tradition I wanted to participate in.  I had worked as an apprentice for a little while with a photographer in my neighborhood who had a commercial studio doing a lot of model portfolios and photographs of models for publications.  I worked with him for about a year as an unpaid assistant.  I didn't know I was supposed to have been paid.  I was just happy to be there learning how to develop prints and--but I knew I didn't want to make those kinds of pictures.  I was not interested in photographing models.  I knew I didn't want to work for newspapers.  I knew I didn't want to photograph baseball games.  I knew I didn't want to be a sports photographer in that sense.  So because of the history of the medium and my reading of the history, I was able to figure out what kinds of photographs I wanted to make and at that point what I wanted to do was make black and white documentary photographs.  I was aware of the documentary tradition.  That was the tradition that I wanted to participate in.
Speaker 1: And when you had the Harlem, USA exhibit, can you describe how you felt or what the reaction was and how large was your body of work at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, when I had the exhibition Harlem, USA at the Studio Museum in Harlem, one of the reasons I wanted to have the exhibition there was because I wanted the people who were in the photographs to potentially have the opportunity to see themselves on display in my pictures.  This maybe goes back to my own earlier experience in the Metropolitan Museum [of Art, New York] looking at the Harlem On My Mind exhibition, I don't know, but I wanted to find a way to make a connection between the institution and the people in the street.  I thought by having this exhibition in this museum that was located in the community that the photographs had been made in, that would be the opportunity to perhaps bring people into the museum who hadn't been there before.
Speaker 1: How long--How many pieces did you have?
Speaker 2: In the Harlem USA exhibition, I think I showed a group of twenty-five pictures: a selection of work that I had made over the five years that I worked on the project.  It was the first time that my work was written about.  It was the first time I received critical attention.  It was the first time that I was able to get feedback, a response to my work outside of the community of people that I knew at that point.  People from the community came and told me how good they felt about seeing their images on the wall.  That was just as important to me as whether or not I had done a good job as a photographer.  It's not just about making photographs.  I had a sense that photography could function in some way in the social equation.  That probably has to do with my own sense of the way people deal with institutions, the way I dealt with institutions, the way that museums can be seen as very exclusive kinds of places, very elitist kinds of places.  I wanted the work at that time to kind of create a space that would appeal not only to people who traditionally had gone to the museum, but to open up a space for the people in the photographs who were kind of outside of what we think about it being the normal museum-going audience.
Story_ID: 3328
Speaker 1: That was pretty significant at the time.  You got CETA money to take this time and do the documenting, but I don't understand the--
Speaker 2: I had started spending time at the museum.  This is interesting, because it goes back to that year at Queensborough.  When I was at Queensborough Community College [Bayside, New York], someone asked me if I would be interested in hosting a group of African -American artists:  all three of whom were artists- in- residence at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  That's where I heard about the Studio Museum in Harlem--was during that one year that I was a student at Queensborough Community College.  There was an artist who came by the name of Leroy Clark.  I ended up becoming very good friends with all three of those artists years later, but Leroy Clark in particular was someone who I had a very strong relationship with at that point.  Leroy was probably the first black artist who I came to know very well, and the sense of commitment, the sense of passion, the sense of absolute integrity that he brought to his work and conveyed to me was very significant at that point, considering that he was the first artist that I formed a very significant relationship with.  When the program was finished at Queensborough, Leroy said, " If you ever want to come up to the Studio Museum in Harlem, I'm there every day, come up and see me" Well, after I left Queensborough--it wasn't until after I left--probably the next year or semester that I decided to take him up on this offer to come and see him at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  I can't tell you how many days--all day that I ended up spending at that museum talking to Leroy Clark.  That became the continuation of my education.  I left Queensborough to continue my education, but I continued it at the Studio Museum in Harlem with Leroy Clark.  I met another artist, who was an artist-in-residence by that time:  Lloyd  [Harrison] Stevens.  Lloyd was a painter who was also a percussionist and a drummer.  Lloyd kept his drums at the museum.  I would talk to Leroy for a while, then I would talk to Lloyd.
Story_ID: 3329
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting, because periodically I'll see something happening to someone that appears to be significant, but it's circumstantial.  Like someone will show up late, but as a consequence of that person showing up late to meet someone else, that someone else ends up being the person that you should have been trying to meet in the first place.  You can't turn it, you know.  To me, spending all that time at the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York] with Leroy Clark, Lloyd Stevens, the other two artists who came up, Helen Ramsey, John Kendricks.  This was my introduction to African Americans who had committed their lives to making art a serious kind of intellectual and creative activity.  Before it was all abstract to me.  I mean I saw 'Harlem On My Mind' [exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and that [James] VanDerZee was a commercial photographer who made beautiful pictures, who was rediscovered some years after the fact. And these pictures in 'Harlem On My Mind' are not all that you would consider art.  So my relationship to that was different.  Meeting Leroy Clark and the artists at the Studio Museum in Harlem legitimated this idea of subjective self-expression as a credible way to conduct one's life.  That the mark that you make has validity--the pictures that you make are not just pictures, they're more than that.  They're cultural statements; they're intellectual statements, they're a lot more than that.  Being in that environment with those artists, that's really when my education began. I was asked to teach the first photography class I ever taught at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  From being there, from showing my work, from people getting a sense of who I was--long before I had my show there, I was asked to teach there.  I was forming a relationship to this institution and that's really the thing that has propelled my career is my relationship to people, institutions and communities.  The thing that has allowed me to be as successful as I have become goes back to Leroy Clark, the absolute sense of commitment and principal and integrity that one brings to this.  There's nothing frivolous about this.  It's not just about making pictures, it's not about being famous, it's not about any of that.  It's about making something significant as a black person in your time that will hold up to serious critical, intellectual and creative scrutiny.  How did this hold up with everything else?  It established a certain standard for me.  They were not photographs, but it didn't matter, I would make pictures and go show them to Leroy and ask him, "Leroy, what do you think?" and he would tell me, because in a certain sense--because I teach now, when I look at my students' work, sometimes I talk about whether it works in terms of musical language, the language of music, rhythm and form and structure.  That applies to anything, so I had no problems showing Leroy who was a painter and a poet my photographs.  He didn't know whether it was sitting right on the paper or not.  He became the first person to give me serious, critical feedback.  There was another group of artists in Harlem, the Raisinayumbana
Story_ID: 3330
Speaker 1: You were talking about Leroy Clark looking at your work.
Speaker 2: Leroy was looking at my work.  Around that same time, I think I met [photographer] Roy [DeCarava] for the first time.  I met Roy through my relationship with another institution.  There was an independent gallery that opened in Harlem, called The Benin [Art] Gallery.  The director was a photographer who I met, Ed Sherman. I met the director of the Benin Gallery a few years before at this other artists' base called, The [Larousse] Academy, which was a collection of about four, five, six, I don't remember how many, African American artists who had a brownstone in Harlem [New York] which they used as a collective studio space and a gallery space.  I met them, started spending a lot of time there, and the person that I connected with was the photographer who was a part of that group.  A few years later Ed Sherman--he opened a gallery called, the Benin Gallery and invited [photographer] Roy DeCarava to come to view work by anyone who wanted to bring their work there.  I brought my photographs that I had made up to that point and to show to Roy DeCarava.  There are all these kinds of institutional supports: the Benin Gallery, the [Larousse] Academy, the Studio Museum in Harlem [all in New York, New York] and later on Linda Bryant opened up a gallery, Just Above Midtown.  These are the places towards which people are gravitating and they're meeting each other and they're forming a sense of community.  It's not happening in isolation.  There's a very real sense of community that allows me to do what I do to allow me to sit here and say that I know what I know.
Story_ID: 3331
Speaker 1: When you met Roy DeCarava and he depicted your work, what did he say about it?
Speaker 2: (laughter) Anyone who knows Roy DeCarava--everyone knows that Roy is a very hard critic.  You do not go to Roy to get stroked or treated with kid gloves.  I didn't know that.  I put my work in front of him and he never really talked about the pictures.  He talked about how they were printed, "Why do you keep using this black borderline; why do you keep printing them like this? Here's another one and here's another one. Why are you doing them like that?  I'm not sure about this. Here, think about it."  He was very perfunctory to me, but in retrospect and from talking to people over the years who have known Roy, that's his way of criticizing the work, to find one aspect or to focus on this one thing that you need to pay attention to and maybe when you come back, we'll talk about some other one thing, but first we're going to deal with this one thing.  In addition to Roy DeCarava, the probably only other African American photographer of any stature that I knew at that point was Gordon Parks.  I had already began to make some distinction between Roy DeCarava who was making pictures that were entirely subjective and self motivated and Gordon Parks who was working on assignments for Life magazine.  The kinds of things that I would do at that point led me more towards Roy DeCarava  I'm just out in the street trying to articulate through the camera some sense of this community and the world out there.
Speaker 1: So, let me just say this, so here you get to someone who you would like to be a mentor, who talks about the paper or the black marks on it.  It must have been disappointing, but at the same time do you think that was legitimate-some of his comments?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.  It was.  I was too young to know it at the time.  When I mentioned that story to someone a few years later they said, "Well, I see you don't print with that black border any more."  So it was probably legitimate criticism.  I think all Roy [DeCarava] was doing was calling attention to the fact that the pictures are about the pictures, they're not about the black border.  Ironically enough, I tell my students the very same thing now.  You don't need that black border.  So the criticism that I got from Roy was probably very legitimate.  I was young.  It was the first time that I had received that kind of really hard criticism and it was technical and conceptual.  "Why were you doing this?'  I didn't really know.  I just thought that it looked good, but I hadn't really thought about the relationship between that and the pictures I was making.  So Roy made me aware of that.
Story_ID: 3332
Speaker 1: What did you think of him at the time then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't like him.  I didn't like him.  I respected him tremendously.  Over the years since I have come to know him, I know that Roy is a very tough critic, a very tough person, but I have tremendous respect for him in terms of what he's been able to do as a black person in this society and to continue making the work that he's made over the years.
Speaker 1: And Gordon Parks you had decided he was working as a journalistic photographer and that was not--  By that time I began to make some distinction between being a photojournalist and being an artist or being a fashion photographer.  Gordon Parks is certainly one of my original heroes.  He was an African American man who carried himself with such dignity and flair and class, the way he conducted himself in the world with a kind of worldly sophistication--I identified with the fact too that Gordon was not only a photographer, but he was a musician--he was a writer.  So clearly he could move in and out of the different arenas in a meaningful way, and the way that he did that made Gordon Parks the really significant early influence.  My sense of the photographs not only of his, but of everything that I've looked at, the changes over the years of my interest and what I'm looking to get from photographs changed.  I'm looking to be intellectually challenged by pictures.  I'm not necessarily looking for specific information as much as I am some new insight, some way of seeing something that I hadn't considered looking at that thing or that person before.  Roy DeCarava, I think, had developed a much more highly subjective vocabulary, both in terms of how he made the pictures and how they were printed.  They were printed very dark.  He developed his own toning range for making these prints.  They weren't normal prints in terms of what the norms for what a print should look like, but he very forcefully said, "No, this is the way I see the world. This is the way I'm going to print these, you have to come to terms with this. I'm not coming to terms with you, you have to come to terms with this."  He's done that so consistently that I gravitated towards those works.  I learned a lot from those pictures.
Story_ID: 3333
Speaker 1: So you have this exhibit at the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York, New York] and then out of that what happens?  I'd like you to sort of re--
Speaker 2: The exhibition at the Studio Museum, 'Harlem, USA', allowed me to begin to develop an audience for my work.  My work was very well reviewed from that show.  The first time my work had ever been reviewed.  People began to hear about my work; people began to seek my work out.  It began to create an audience for my work.  It began to introduce my work into the world in a way that before that show, it had not been in a few smaller exhibitions, mostly local exhibitions, but that exhibition at the Studio Museum in Harlem introduced me and my work to the larger world community.
Story_ID: 3334
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about your career from that point to sort of now, the significant points along the way, because there was even a point where you were not even shooting people.  I'd like you to talk about what things were happening since.
Speaker 2: After the exhibition--
Speaker 1: It was what year?
Speaker 2: (pause for camerman) I had the exhibition at the Studio Museum--It opened in November of 1979.  I think it closed in December or January of 1980.  The exhibition at the Studio Museum opened November of 1979.  I was still at that point in the CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] Artists' Project.  I was being paid basically to make my own work and to do some kind of community related work for a certain number of hours a week.  The CETA Artists' Project extended from 1978 to 1981.  After it was over, because for the first time I had been gainfully employed over a certain period of time, I continued doing my work, collected unemployment, continued making photographs, continued to develop a sense of community that had begun not only at the Studio Museum, but at the consequence of being in the CETA Artists' Project.  This is 350 artists from New York who had been brought together in this project, and once a week there would be a meeting of all of them.  That introduced me to a whole other group of people and it introduced me to my wife [Candida Alvarez].  I met my wife.  She was an artist in the CETA Artists' Project.  The exhibition at the Studio Museum was the thing that really began my career.  It gave me a sense of how to begin to maneuver in this thing called the art world; how did one go from making pictures to having them hang on the walls in a museum.  It gave me some sense of the role--the role that institutions play in this, because clearly I wasn't going to be able to continue to develop or find an audience if the work was not seen and the only way the work could be seen was in the context of these institutional spaces.  After that exhibition, I was probably in a few smaller shows after that.  It's hard to remember exactly how one thing followed another, because it seems to almost begin to move along on its own power based on the relationships that you form.
Story_ID: 3335
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's look at it this way.  So you, you after 1981 how were you supporting yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  By that time, I had also started to get a number of grants and fellowships.  Every state has some form of individual artists' fellowship and I began applying for these grants and I got them.  The first one I got was from the New York State Council on the Arts in New York and they had a program called CAPS [Creative Artists Public Service] something. I can't remember what the acronym was for.  I applied for a CAP plan which was $5,000, which at that time you could actually live off of $5,000 for a year.  My overhead was very low.  I had an inexpensive apartment in New York and that's how I began.  I mean you get a grant, you make some work, you find a way to put that work out there so that people see it, give people a chance to respond to it, someone sees it, takes an interest in it.  I'm pretty sure I began to sell a few things by that point.  Although selling work at that stage was not really viable as a way to earn a living, that was simply not happening at that point.  The idea that one could sustain themselves simply through the sale of work--I think that was pretty much true for most of the people who were in the community of artists that I knew.  You made work, tried to survive relatively inexpensively so you could continue to make your work, but everything really centered around making your work, figuring out how to shape your life, to leave yourself enough time to both make the money that you had to make and continuing to make the work. Because it's clear that if anything were going to happen in terms of having a life in this field, it was only going to happen if you continued to produce some work.  The community of photographers in New York--a very large community of African American photographers and you kind of supported each other in that regard.  We were each other's critical sounding board; we were each other's support network.  Any number of photographers--by that time I had met Anthony Barboza.  Another photographer had come to New York--Jules Allen, Frank Stewart, Coreen Simpson, Jeanne Moutoussamy Ashe, Jimmy Mendez, [Louis] Lou Draper.  There was a group called the Kamoinge Workshop that had been formed by Roy DeCarava and Lou Draper and then later on there was another organization of black photographers, and then by the time I came along there was a group called the International Black Photographers.  So, there was a real community of African American photographers in New York that provided a very strong support network for each other's work.  You would make the work, call Jules Allen up, go over and show it to them, "What do you think?"  He would make some pictures, call me up, "What do you think?"  We'd beat each other up, come back again, make some more.  But, it was really about being a part of a community or the way of supporting what each other was trying to do.
Story_ID: 3336
Speaker 1: A lot of times, photographers were kept outside of the artistic world.  It was sometimes not accepted as an artistic form or even a collector, you know--
Speaker 2: But I think Roy DeCarava, especially in terms of black photographers in New York--Roy DeCarava was pretty much at the center of that community, both in terms of being an example of someone who had persevered and made significant work over a period of time. And also someone who made challenging work, because a number of photographers did commercial work, fashion work to support the other work that they were doing.  Anthony Barboza became an extremely successful commercial photographer, even as he was making his own--what you call fine art photographs as well, but Roy DeCarava was an example, and that's why he was so important.  Year after year, he continued to make the work.  Who knows exactly how he was making a living?  We know he was the first African American photographer to get a Guggenheim Fellowship [for artists], that he was an inspiration in that sense--that it is possible.  He had books published.  He had collaborated with [writer] Langston Hughes.  We all knew this work.  This was the thing that kept us going.
Story_ID: 3337
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back on your career and say what were the significant things--We know the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York] was.  That initial exhibit was significant because you had an audience, you had a body of work, you got, you know--you received good--
Speaker 2: Well, probably the next significant thing that happened for me after that also took place in a kind of institutional structure.  There was a black woman by the name of Linda Bryant who started the first black commercial gallery on 57th Street in New York [New York], called Just Above Midtown. Just Above Midtown was the place that was showing conceptual work by African American artists and by a broad spectrum of artists.  My sense of the possibilities for what art could be began to be expanded through my exposure to the work at Just Above Midtown Gallery and probably through my exposure to the works of artists like Mel Edwards at the Studio Museum in Harlem, Sam Gilliam [painter], Al Loving [Jr.] [mixed media artist], Bill Hudson, William T. Williams [painter]--because it was a community of artists,  I didn't make this distinction between I'm a photographer--they're a painter, so therefore, this couldn't possibly be interesting to me. But that probably goes back to my relationship--my close relationship with Leroy Clark.  He was a painter, but I did not think that there was nothing to be learned from this man, so I never really made that distinction.  I had been a musician--I was a musician--I am a musician, but the relationship between these various art forms to me was pretty apparent, and the fact that there was a community of artists allowed me to move through these various situations.  So after my exhibition at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York] and being exposed to the work at Just Above Midtown Gallery--I'm meeting another group of people there to go to the opening to see what they're doing.  You meet people--you meet someone who knows someone--you find someone that you have affinities for--you show them what you're doing, they show you what they're doing--a dialogue takes place.  You keep applying for grants.  There were a number of artists who ended up not becoming artists, but became curators or administrators.  They're now in a position to make something happen with your work in terms of showing it and that's how those kinds of opportunities came up, but it all grew out of this particular community.
Story_ID: 3338
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's constantly--after the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York] show, I worked at making different kinds of pictures for about a year and a half.  The 'Harlem, USA' show was all intimate photographs of people, establishing a relationship with people through making pictures.  After that I stopped photographing people for a year and a half, and it was probably directly related to my experience going to the School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], becoming exposed to different kinds of photographs, different picture-making strategies, different histories.  So I made a group of photographs that were about life in the urban environment.  These pictures also came out of a dialogue that I was having with other photographers, because one of the things that I believe artists do is we talk to each other through our work.  Show me a picture about life, give me an idea about it, but I think I can talk about it in a little different way.  Let me see what I can do with that.  I go out and I make some pictures and I come back and show them to you.  There's a dialogue that's going on not only with the world in terms of making pictures of the world, but looking at other photographs. I wanted to have a dialogue with those photographers, speaking each other's languages, exchanging languages.  I'm making pictures about this; they're making pictures about that; let me talk to you about that a little bit; I'm going to do that in the photographs.  So after a year and a half of making these pictures, there was a gallery that I had known about which had been started by Romare Bearden, Norman Lewis and Ernie Crichlow; three African-American artists who had each achieved a degree of prominence in their careers, who decided that they wanted to create a space to provide those opportunities for younger artists.  Bearden, Crichlow and Lewis got together to form the Sinclair Gallery.  If you were an African American artist in New York during that time, if you knew anything about the history or it was your business to find out, you knew about the Sinclair Gallery [New York, New York].  So I decided I'd like to have a show at the Sinclair Gallery.  I went to the gallery. [Ernest] Ernie Crichlow [painter] looked at the work and said," Yeah, I think you have something here". They knew about me because of my exhibition at the Studio Museum in Harlem, which is very widely reviewed.  So I had the exhibition at the Sinclair Gallery of a very different kind of photograph.  Each exhibition is not only developing ideas, but also expanding the audience for the work that I'm doing.  Probably even before that, before I had the exhibition at the Studio Museum, I had a show at the Benin Gallery [New York, New York]that was founded by Ed Sherman, and that show came out of meeting two photographers at the Studio Museum: Frank Stewart, who at that time was just a photographer at the museum and Jean Moutoussamy [Ashe], who was a young student out of Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, New York] and knew each other and we decided to get together and have a three-person exhibition.  Where can we do it?  Let's go to Benin.  There we did a three-person exhibition at the Benin Gallery.  Gordon Parks [photographer] came to that show.  A number of other people came to that exhibition and that was around 1976, even before I had the show at the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York.]  So it's about deciding how you want to move your work in the world and creating those opportunities for people to see the work.  I've always been pretty consistent about doing that.  I've never wanted to just make the work and put it in a box, because the pictures are about ideas and those ideas are only meaningful if they enter into the popular culture in some kind of way, and they can only do that, move into the broader culture if they're seen, and when they're seen they're talked about and they create some kind of a dialogue.  That's what I've tried to do and to keep expanding my sense of who the audience for my work can be, to try to talk to a broader and larger audience.
Story_ID: 3339
Speaker 1: Now, you say that the work at the Cinque Gallery [New York, New York] was a different type of work.  Was it the work that came out of life?  Didn't you go to Mexico and do some--
Speaker 2: After that show at the Cinque Gallery, I went to Mexico and made pictures.  My wife's family is from Puerto Rico, so we spent time in Puerto Rico and I made some photographs there and they were very different from the kinds of pictures that I made photographing in Harlem.  The photographs in Harlem [New York] were pretty much resolutely about the human subject.  They were very frontal, they were very confrontational; they were very direct--a person standing in front of the camera looking back at the camera.  The pictures that I showed at the Cinque Gallery were much more formal--formally complex.  It was about trying to find a way to make an interesting photograph that didn't depend on the human subject for its content, because at that point, I was making photographs in response to certain questions that I would ask myself.  How can I make an interesting photograph that doesn't rely on simply the human aspect? And then the only way to find out was to go out and make some pictures.  Once you have made them, depicted them on the wall for some kind of discussion--
Speaker 1: Well, what did you find in that?  How did that change your work in ways?  Going to Mexico or Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: Not doing people.
Speaker 1: Well, after making those very formal pictures for about a year and a half, I realized that I wanted to bring the human element back into my work, but when I did bring the human element back into my work, it came back into the work in a different way, because I had incorporated this other kind of formal vocabulary that allowed me to articulate these pictures in a different way.  It allowed me to use light.  It allowed me to use space and form in a very different way.  I just added something else to my vocabulary that I brought to the way that I photographed the human subject.  Before it was just a different kind of form.  I was trying to expand the form of the pictures.
Story_ID: 3340
Speaker 1: What do you think--what are you trying to do through your work?
Speaker 2: I think what I've always tried to do in my photographs is to find some interesting way to describe in photographic form the thing that I'm interested in.  The thing that I've been most consistently interested in had been the human subject.  The work that I did in Harlem [New York] was about describing the black subject in a way that refuted some aspect of how the black subject had previously been described.  They were also about making a certain kind of classical photograph.  They were classical because of my use of some of the ideas that I found in [James] VanDerZee's photographs and Walker Evans's photographs--so a sense of classicism within the work.  I think as the work has evolved, I basically tried to find different ways to describe the person or the thing and it's usually the person in front of the camera.  The challenge to me as an artist is to allow that an interesting idea, to work that idea out through a group of pictures, and then you have to have some other idea.  I never wanted to settle into a kind of attitude where I figure out how to do something and then keep doing that for twenty-five years.  There has to be a challenge to me.  I need to keep finding out something that I don't know about how to describe the relationship between a photographer and a person in front of the camera.  To do that in a way that is emotionally and psychologically engaging, but also in a way that's formally engaging, a way that uses the idea of photography and picture making in some other kind of way so that you get the sense that something is being described to you in a way that it hasn't quite been described to you before.  I want there to be some sense of something being newly revealed to you, even if it's something that you're quite familiar with.  If I were to make a photograph of you, I would hope that you would see the photograph and see some aspect of yourself that you hadn't quite seen before and it could make you uncomfortable, it could make you whatever.  I'm not really interested in making photographs of people that are pleasing or that create a sense of a positive image.  I'm trying to create photographs that have a real sense of critical and formal investigation.  I'm trying to find something out and I can only find that out through making pictures.  A lot of times I don't even know what it is I'm looking for.  I have to begin making the work and see what comes out of that.
Story_ID: 3341
Speaker 1: How do you do that with your subjects, because I find and I'm sure this is--people say this to you, but your photos are very much in-your-face type of photos.  They're very much bold and in a person's face.
Speaker 2: I want them to be that.  I want the work to work on the viewer in a very powerful way.  There are several ways to do this.  For a long time I made photographs in which the gaze of the person in the picture was directed at the viewer.  Now, when I'm making them, they're directed at the camera, but I do that knowing that the photograph that results would be the kind of picture when they do look at it, the person looks back at you.  So there's no escaping this kind of confrontation between you and the subject.  I've made them confrontational in that way, and recently I've made them confrontational in a way due to the physical scale of the--the most recent works that I've made have been larger-than-life size for a number of reasons; one of which is to make them kind of inescapable as objects.  I want them to hold your attention, and also because I think the sense of scale allows you to see things in the photograph that you don't normally see with the eye.  I'm very interested in this idea that a picture should be something other than what we see looking at something with the eyes, otherwise I make the pictures and you can just look at them, you don't have to make photographs.  I think if you're going to make a photograph, it has to in some way reveal something other than what we see looking at a person with the eyes, either by heightening what we see, which I think the photographs have the potential to do.  They can take something and heighten it, give you a certain level of physical description or by making them larger-than-life size, kind of an in-your-face approach.  I'm basically looking to find things out, and then be showing the work, show people what I find out about whatever it is or whoever it is that I'm photographing.  The way in which I've done that has changed.  I've gone from working initially with a 35mm camera, from the 35mm camera, I went to working with a 4x5 camera. The cameras become larger, that doesn't allow me to make pictures as quickly as the 35mm camera, but puts me in a more prolonged contact with the person. But now I have this big camera, I have to stop them and ask them, "Do you have a few minutes, because I need to set this thing up on a tripod.  It's gonna take some time."  Then I started working with the very large 20x24 Polaroid camera, which required even more time to make the pictures.  It required more of a commitment on the part of the subject, but it also gives me more time to see something.  That's really what I'm doing, I'm just looking through the camera, looking to see how things look in photographic form, and then also because I've been for a long time photographing primarily teenagers--I have been interested in this idea about how teenagers are generally represented through the culture; how teenagers are very often left out of the equation when we think about art making.  I think about where I was when I was sixteen, seventeen years old.  It gives me an opportunity to reconsider some of those issues and ideas through making photographs about them, and it allowed me to give a certain kind of prominence to these teenagers that most people simply don't have.
Story_ID: 3342
Speaker 1: Now, where do you think you are in your career right now?
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting question, because if you're constantly looking for something, you never think you're there and that's what keeps me going and looking.  I think I'm at a point in my work certainly where I have a degree of control over what I'm doing that I've been working all these years towards.  By control, I mean I'm able to do the thing that I'm thinking about doing with a good deal more precision.  I'm a lot surer about what I'm seeing.  I know how to use that in making pictures.  I'm aware that my work does have the potential to influence a certain kind of discourse among people who see the pictures, so I'm much more aware of the significance that the work can have in terms of it being placed in certain situations.  If you ask me where I am in my career as an artist, I'd probably say a very good place, and on the other hand, because I'm getting ready to begin a new group of pictures.  You're always going back to the beginning again.  You can go back with a confidence that you didn't initially have, but there's always this sense of starting over, especially because I do try to re-invent my strategies for making pictures periodically and try to shake things up, try to shake myself up, and I try not to get too much into a comfort zone where I know what I'm doing and I just stay with what I know since it seems to work.  Periodically, I have to do things that I don't know how they're going to work out and that's kind of where I am right now.
Story_ID: 3343
Speaker 1: With your representation, what--how is that played into your--I know you--
Speaker 2: I think certainly this idea of representation of the human subject in photographic form is an issue that interests me.  It's a thing that continues to motivate my work.  The fact that photographs are to a degree fiction, to which people ascribe a certain amount of truth--there's a certain tension in that that I'm aware of.  I'm aware that any photograph that I can make of anyone can only describe the moment in which they were in front of the camera.  It cannot describe the full life of that person, but I'm also aware that when those photographs are on public display to a lot of people, the photograph does represent that person.  It doesn't represent a moment, it doesn't represent a subjective way of describing that person through the photograph on the part of the photographer, but it is that person.  I've had people look at my photographs and say, "I love your work. When I look at your pictures, I can see the person's soul."  I think that's wonderful, but I think the pictures are extremely limited in their ability to actually do that, and yet this seems to be the thing that some people describe as being present in the photograph.  I'm aware that photographs are about appearances, they're not about facts.  It's about how you use those appearances.  I think historically when you talk about the black subject in representation, our very appearance has been cast sometimes in a very derogatory kind of way.  What's wrong with the representation that the--how are images used to represent people in such a way that they begin to work the way they do within the broader culture? It's something that I'm interested in.  It's something that has formed the work that I've done with teenagers, because I try to describe them in a very psychological and emotionally complex way through my pictures that I think goes beyond the way in which I think teenagers are also described in a one-dimensional kind of way; the teenage drug problem or the teenage pregnancy problem.  I think while pictures have the ability to significantly inform the way in which we look at something or someone, I'm also aware of the fact that that photograph still is not the truth in representation.  It's something that I know is not possible.
Story_ID: 3344
Speaker 1: Now, why did you choose teenagers?  Why did you choose teenagers as a category period?
Speaker 2: Well, the first opportunity that I got to work with a group of teenagers was when I did a residency at the Addison Gallery of American Art at Phillips [Andover] Academy in Andover [Massachusetts].  I'd been invited to do an exhibition there and when I got there, I spoke to the director about how I might go about doing this thing, because for me it was becoming apparent that it wasn't enough to just put the work on the wall.  This probably has to do with my need to be engaged in the world in a more direct kind of way, much the way it mattered to me when I did the show at the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York, New York]--who came. I am trying to influence this whole sense of relationship between the institution and the audience.  Consideration of the audience and who constituted the audience has become significant to me.  When I went to [Phillips Academy] Andover in 1992, I was invited to do an exhibition and to somehow engage with the students on the campus of Phillips Academy.  In addition to photographing them, I ended up working with them, meeting with them, talking to them and it ended up being a very--for me, satisfying experience as an artist, because it was a way to make my practice as an artist more public.  By that, I mean working with the large Polaroid camera in the studio that I had been doing for a number of years was beginning to feel like a kind of isolated activity, because my history as far as making pictures had been making pictures in a street and now I'm in a room kind of shut off from the world with lights and a camera and people are coming.  When I did the project working with the students at Phillips, I had a semi-public studio.  I set the camera up in one of the rooms in the Addison Gallery and students could come and watch while I was making pictures and ask questions.  I would photograph them.  To me it felt like a very meaningful activity.  It reminded me, especially at that point, because I had been by then making pictures and showing them all over the world--and when I had the opportunity to work with these young people, I realized how much they are not a part of the general construct of what I had been doing as far as the audience. And I wanted to embrace the young people, not only as subject matter for my work, but to begin to bring them into the conception of who the audience for the work could be as well.  Once again, when I made those photographs there, they were also showing them in that same place, so that they could see themselves on the wall and create some kind of dialogue around that.
Story_ID: 3345
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to move into--your wife.
Speaker 2: My wife, Candida Alvarez, is a painter.  We met during the CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] Artist's Project in 1981.  I had known about her during the project and we finally met.  I think it was the last day of the artists' project we had lunch.  Certainly being married to an artist had reinforced in the best way what it is that I do.  I don't think everyone understands what artists do.  I don't think they understand the sacrifice, the commitment of time that it takes, that it's not just extracurricular activity--that it's something that's really the center of your life.  Being married to an artist, I think, certainly reinforces that.  There's been a dialogue that goes on between us about each other's work as well.  I think being married to a painter has given me a different sense of some of the formal strategies for art making that one doesn't necessarily get just from making photographs.
Speaker 1: A give-and-take interchange.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: People don't think of that a lot of times.  They think of an artist in a room by themselves.
Speaker 2: No, it's a dialogue.  I think making art is a real dialogue. There have been times for example, when my wife had incorporated my photographs into her earlier work.  There was a moment when I was working in color and she was working in black and white.  She was making black and white paintings and I was working in color.  There's been this kind of dialogue that goes on through the work that--it would be nice at some point to do an exhibition. I think it would make that very clear that it has been a real dialogue.
Story_ID: 3346
Speaker 1: [(off camera) I had done a residency with the] dean of contemporary photography at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] struck up a very good relationship with them and they said if it were ever possible to get me to come back for a time, they would love to have me.  Right around the time my wife was offered a position at the Art Institute, Columbia College called me up and wanted to know if I was still interested in coming.  I said, "Sure, my wife's coming, I'd better go."  So we were both offered positions here at the same time.
Speaker 2: That's nice, very nice. Almost as though it was meant to be. You still feel very spiritual about things.  Don't you remember saying--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I haven't been developing my skills lately as I should, but yeah.
Story_ID: 3347
Speaker 1: I want to talk about the role that the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York] you think has played in the arts community in the United States today.  What role do you think it has played?
Speaker 2: A significant one.  I think the Studio Museum [of Harlem, New York] has played a significant role, both in terms of being the place where African American artists have been able to exhibit their work when there were few other places where they could, as well as a community of artists that have gravitated towards the museum. The artist-in-residence program that has been a central feature of the museum since its founding.  If you think about all the artists that have gone through that residency program, going back to Leroy Clark, David Hammonds, Kerry James Marshall.  I can't even name all of the artists who have gone through that institution.  For me, it has been a particularly important place, because almost everyone I know who was part of the community of artists that I'm a part of, almost every one of us have some relationship to that place--everyone.  When I did my exhibition at the Walker Art Center [Minneapolis, Minnesota] that traveled throughout the United States and Europe for three years, the woman who curated that exhibition, Carrie Jones, I met her when she was an intern at the Studio Museum in Harlem. She was a curatorial intern there.  There have been a number of relationships that center around that institution.
Story_ID: 3348
Speaker 1: I went back to school very late.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's talk about that.
Speaker 1: That goes back to my father. I had a very full career by the time I went back to grad school.  I went to grad [graduate] school in 1991.
Speaker 2: What made you decide to do that?
Speaker 1: Well, with the exception of the time that I was a student at the School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], I didn't have much of a conventional formal education in art making at the time, although I had been very close to a number of artists, such as Leroy Clark and others, who established a kind of critical community for me as well.  I hadn't had that kind of formal experience that I had always wondered what I might have missed as a consequence, and also because I started teaching in 1976 and by 1988, I was still teaching and it's something about teaching in particular when you come in contact with some really strong teachers who have a real impact on you.  It makes you think about the formal training for teaching.  It makes you think about where do you learn the pedagogical strategies for conveying information.  Also, for me the decision to go to grad school had to do again with wanting to continue to expand the sense of the community for my work, to create--probably to create other opportunities for my work, to find out if there was anything that I had missed, because I didn't know.  When I was at the School of Visual Arts, after being there two years, I was encouraged to leave, and I had always wondered if there was anything that I had missed.  Also, because a number of artists whom I respected: William T. Williams [painter], Howard Pendell (ph.), Martin Puryear [sculptor], photographer Michael Spano--they had all come out of the Graduate School of Art at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] which made me wonder what value there might be to that experience, because all of them spoke about it very highly.  So I was teaching at Empire State College [Saratoga Springs, New York], which is part of the State University of New York.  I think I had been teaching there for two years and I decided that if I was going to continue to teach, I should probably be as well prepared as possible for any situations that might come up.  So, I made the decision to leave that position, which was only an adjunct position anyway and that's all it was ever going to be.  I made that decision to leave there and go to grad school.  Of all the places that I could have gone, because of what I knew about Yale from other people who had been there, the work ethic of the place seemed very close to my own work ethic and I identified with it in that sense.  There was clearly a sense that in order to be an artist, one has to make art, and the more consistently and rigorously one does that, the better an artist you would be.  Because of what I knew about the wide range of people who have come out of that program, it seemed to make sense to me, so I decided to go.
Story_ID: 3349
Speaker 1: Now, what impact do you think that experience had on you and your work.
Speaker 2: It had a very good impact on me, because you never know what you don't know until you know it.  I knew a lot, certainly from having been a working artist for a number of years. But it gave me a different critical sounding board.  It opened my work up to a whole other group of people and it gave them an opportunity to respond to it in a way that it was very helpful to me.  It broadened my sense of community.  I still have a very close connection to that institution.  I go there from time to time and do lectures.  I've been invited to come back.  I had done an exhibition at the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] Art Gallery. So I have a very close relationship to the institution, but for me it was about broadening the audience for my work, trying to see if there were any new skills that could be picked up.  Just trying to find out if I had missed something along the way.
Speaker 1: And did you find you had?
Speaker 2: Technically, there's always something you can learn that you didn't know, especially if you're dealing with people who have been doing it even longer than you have.  There was someone there, one of my professors, a wonderful man by the name of Richard Benson who had gotten a [John D. and Catherine T.] MacArthur [Foundation] Fellowship [in 1986.]  He got the MacArthur Fellowship, not for his photographs, but for his printing.  He's a master photographic printer.  He's a master printer in lithography, master printer in inks, master printer in all the different forms of photographic printmaking.  How are you not going to learn something that you don't know, from something like that-- someone like that.  I think for me, it was a very good experience.  It was an interesting experience too, because by the same token in relation to my classmates, I never really felt entirely a part of the class.  I was older than most of them.  I had certainly had more experience than most of them.  I was in an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] the first semester I was there.  So my relationship to the situation was different from what I imagined a conventional grad school experience to be, but that didn't suggest to me that there wasn't something to be gotten out of it.
Speaker 1: You had a certain celebrity there, I take it.(laughter)
Speaker 2: I had an interesting time there, because I was doing a lot of things that I don't think they expect someone who was in school to be doing.
Story_ID: 3350
Speaker 1: Now, since you spent a lot of time teaching, what is important for you to impart to your students.
Speaker 2: I see teaching as an empowering act.  To give someone the sense that they can do whatever it is that they set out to do, if they equip themselves with the necessary technical and critical skill--that's the thing that I try to impart to my students.  I also try to get them to consider their relationship to the world through making pictures, which is really what I think photography for me is.  It's a way of establishing a relationship to the world and you make that relationship apparent through the pictures that you make.  So you first have to figure out who you are in the world before you have anything to make photographs of or about.  I spend a lot of time with students clarifying what their values are because I think that the work we make conveys certain values, but just trying to get them to understand who they are in the world, what are their subjective observations--what do they care about.  Once you know what you care about, that kind of tells you what it is you need to make photographs about.  I don't think making pictures doesn't come first, it comes second.  The first thing you have to do is clarifying who you are, what do you care about, what are your concerns.  Then it's about learning how to articulate those concerns through this particular medium and process.
Story_ID: 3351
Speaker 1: Now, at the beginning there was a big role of politics and the relationship to even how you got involved in art, and I'm wondering where is the Dawoud Bey of today in many ways and where does that--does it play a role in your art?
Speaker 2: I think it does.  It certainly plays a role in the way I go about dealing with teaching, the way I think about teaching, the way I deal with the institutional structure around teaching, the way I think about teaching as being about real personal relationships--real human relationships.  The idea of trying to empower someone, I think it's probably the thing that creates a kind of consistent thread through all of this, you know, the idea of empowering, of giving people a voice.  I try to give my students a voice.  I try to help them find their voice.  I let them know that I have values, that the work that I do has certain values and that their work should have some value to it as well.  It doesn't have to be mine, but you should know or be clear about what your values are, because I don't think that making art is just about making art.  So to me this idea of teaching photography or teaching art making is tied up in a whole other set of human values, about changing the equation, who has power and who doesn't.  It's about giving some of that power to the students so that they can go out into the world and effect whatever change they want to effect due to pictures that they make in a large or small way.
Story_ID: 3352
Speaker 1: Now, when you--two more questions.  One is about African American artists, because there are those people who came before you and did not have the critical acclaim that you have, and can you recount in very good form of how you've come out of this community and the community's been very supportive to you in many ways, but my question is what are your--when you look back at those particular artists and the choices maybe they had to make versus the opportunities that you have--what are sort of your views on that subject and what do you tag on to that.  What do you see as a future of African American artists?
Speaker 2: I think the future for African American artists has to do with African American artists like any artist, continuing to produce work.  That may sound kind of simplistic, but I really do believe that if one is persistent about making work, if one is persistent about letting other people know about the work that one is making, if one doesn't isolate themselves from the world, if one realizes the value of community that we don't succeed individually.  I think if one realizes the value and the significance of all of those things, I think the future for African American artists is probably as good as it ever has been.  If you think all the way back to William Henry Johnson [painter]; if you think back more recently to Romare Bearden [painter]; if you think back to Jacob Lawrence [painter]; if you think back to Augusta Savage [sculptor]--then in contemporary artists, people who are my contemporaries: Kerry James Marshall [painter], Carrie Mae Weems [photographer], Lorna Simpson [photographer], younger photographers like Rashid Johnson.  I think as long as we continue to produce work that is full of integrity first of all; as long as we continue to produce work that's full of integrity; as long as we continue to produce work that engages in an interesting way a set of ideas; as long as we continue to push the envelope of possibilities for expression, which I think artists like David Hammonds continue to do in a wonderful kind of way, I think we're going to be here for quite some time.  I'm not at all pessimistic about the possibilities for our continued expression.  We just have to keep demanding our space and then once we get there, occupy it in a meaningful way.
Story_ID: 3353
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy? My legacy, I hope is one of having made a mark on my time.  To be honest with you, I haven't quite thought about it so much as a legacy, because I'm still in the midst of doing it.  A legacy sounds too much like a summing up and I'm not quite ready to sum it up yet, but if one looked at the body of work that I have done over the last twenty-five, thirty years, hopefully they see an ongoing kind of inquisitive investigation and engagement with the world, which is what I hope to continue to do. But as for legacies, it sounds too much like a summing up and I'd like to leave the book open.  I think there's still a few more chapters to go.
Story_ID: 3354
Speaker 1: This is me and my wife  [Candida Alvarez], a photograph that we made for our wedding.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Candida Alvarez.
Speaker 2: How do you spell it?
Speaker 1: C-A-N-D-I-D-A, A-L-V-A-R-E-Z, Alvarez.  She's from Brooklyn [New York]
Speaker 2: [Wedding photo of Dawoud Bey and his wife Candida Alvarez, 1983. From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3355
Speaker 1: This is me [Dawoud Bey, a.k.a. David Smickle] on the right and my brother, [Kenneth] Ken Smickle, [Jr.] on the left, and that's my mom, Mary Smickle in the middle.  This is from 1957 when we lived on 119th Avenue in St. Albans, Queens, New York.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey (right) with his older brother, Ken Smickle, Jr., and their mother, Mary Smickle, Queens, New York, 1957.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3356
Speaker 1: This is me [Dawoud Bey, a.k.a. David Smickle] on the left in this picture, my brother Ken Smickle [Jr.] on the right and that's my dad, Ken Smickle, Sr. And this is also on 119th Avenue in St. Albans [Queens, New York] in 1957.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey (left) with his brother Ken Smickle, Jr. and father, Ken Smickle Sr., Queens, New York, 1957.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3357
Speaker 1: This photograph was made at Moneta Sleet's opening.  That's the exhibition at the New York Public Library [New York].  That's Jean Moutoussamy Ashe on my right, photographer and another photographer from New York, Coreen Simpson.  Coreen went on to design jewelry that's become incredibly popular--the black cameo.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey at an art exhibit with Coreen Simpson (left) and Jean Moutoussamy Ashe (right), New York, New York, not dated, from the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3358
Speaker 1: This photograph was probably made in 1989 when I was teaching at Empire State College [Saratoga Springs, New York.]  I had invited Lorna Simpson, the photographer who you see sitting next to me to come and give a lecture for my class and that's my wife, Candida Alvarez sitting in the background listening there.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey teaching class at Empire State College, Saratoga Springs, New York, ca. 1989; Seated at far left is Candida Alvarez, Dawoud Bey's wife.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3359
Speaker 1: This photograph was made in 1989 in [Claude] Monet's Garden in France.  It was the first time I had gone to France.  While I was there, I met with the curator of the Bibliotheque National in Paris.  They ended up buying I think about eight or nine photographs, but this is the first time I had ever gone to France.  I'm taking over Monet's space in that picture.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey in artist Claude Monet's garden in Giverny, France, 1989.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3360
Speaker 1: This is my son, Ramon, Ramon Alvarez Smickle and he appears to be all of a few months.  This picture had to be made in the year he was born in 1991.  He's nine years old now.  He was born February 16, 1991.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey with his wife Candida Alvarez and his son, Ramon Alvarez Smickle, 1991.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3361
Speaker 1: This photograph was made in London [England]. I was doing an exhibition there as part of the show, called the US/UK Exchange.  There were three black photographers from London and three photographers from the [United] States who did an exchange exhibition together.  This is in 1989 also.  That's the filmmaker, Isaac Julien on the left and a photographer also from London on the right, Sunil Gupta.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey (center) with filmmaker Issac Julien (left) and photographer Sunil Gupta (right) at his photography exhibit, London, England, 1989. From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3362
Speaker 1: This photograph was made in 1995.  These are a group of teenagers that I was working with, photographing them and doing some other projects with them when I was at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota in residence.  After I completed this residency, my exhibition opened in the Walker Art Center in 1995 and then traveled for three years and ended up in the Barbican Arts Centre in London [England] in 1998.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey (second row, third from left) with students as an artist-in-residence at the Walker Arts Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1995. From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3363
Speaker 1: This photograph was made during the opening reception for my exhibition at the Walker Art Center and I'm playing shekere [African percussion instrument] with a group of musicians from Minneapolis [Minnesota.]  This was after the gentleman in the middle, Wallace Hill, who is a Babalao [a Santeria priest] from Minneapolis, who performed a libation ceremony to open my exhibition at the Walker Art Center in 1995.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey (left) at a libation ceremony to open his exhibition the Walker Arts Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1995.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3364
Speaker 1: This photograph was made in 1990 in front of the Jamaica [Queens, New York] Arts Center and in the photograph are the three photographers from London [England] who were in the US/UK Exhibition as well as the photographers from the [United] States and the two curators. Going from the left is Kelly Jones, who at that time was the visual arts director for the Jamaica Arts Center, who is now an art historian at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and then one of the British photographers, Ingrid Pollard and then Maxine Walker and then from California, Mikki Ferrill [photographer] and then the next person in the photograph, a Nigerian living in London who passed away shortly after this picture was made, photographer Rotimi Fani-Kayode and then Charles Biasiny-Rivera, photographer and director of En Foco [non-profit photographic organization] in the Bronx [New York] and then myself and David A. Bailey, photographer and art historian from London [England].
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey with fellow artists at the Jamaica Arts Center, Queens, New York, 1990; (L. to R.): Kelly Jones, Ingrid Pollard, Maxine Walker, Mikki Ferrill, Rotimi Fani-Kayode, Charles Biasiny-Rivera, Dawoud Bey, and David A. Bailey.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3365
Speaker 1: And this is a self-portrait that I made commissioned by the 'Village Voice' [newspaper] in New York for an article they were doing on the 1990.  It was made in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey's self-portrait for an article in the 'Village Voice' newspaper, Brooklyn, New York, 1990.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
Story_ID: 3366
Speaker 1: And this is my second grade teacher, Ms. Hortense Jones.  The photograph was made in 1998 during the opening of an exhibition that I had at the Queens Museum of Art in New York.
Speaker 2: [Dawoud Bey kissing his second grade teacher, Hortense Jones, Queens, New York, 1998.  From the collection of Dawoud Bey.]
