Story_ID: 33262
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, and our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I am Vincent Keith Brooks, and that's V-I-N-C-E-N-T, Keith, K-E-I-T-H, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The 24th of October, 1958 at Fort Richardson--really, Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am currently serving in the United States Army as an active-duty Lieutenant General, and I command Third Army, U.S. Army Central.
Speaker 1: All right, and you--I don't know if it's (unclear)--you have been appointed four-star general or you're up for appointment as a four-star general?
Speaker 2: Right, have been confirmed--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --confirmed for promotion by the Senate and will be promoted on the 2nd of July, which is two weeks from now.
Speaker 1: All right, and that promotion would make you the--
Speaker 2: The eighth African American Army Four-Star General, and I guess there's thirteen or so total in the Army currently.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: I suppose I will be.  Among the African Americans, yes, but on all four-star generals, one officer who's a year behind me has already been promoted.  So he's actually the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 21st of June, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Patton Hall, which is the headquarters of the Third Army, U.S. Army Central at Shaw Air Force Base, in South Carolina, just outside of the city of Sumter.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 33263
Speaker 1: Now, we before go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we always ask.  And they only require a short answer.  They're sort of a warm up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), I really don't.  I like lots of different foods but have changed diet recently.  So, I've eaten a number of different things in my experiences through the years.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have--
Speaker 2: Now, it's all fruits, nuts, plants, grains and vegetables.  That's the current diet.
Speaker 1: Good, good.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue, royal blue I like a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall are my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place that has a lot of water and a lot of sand, and that combination is important, especially after so many years in the Middle East, where I had sand, but not the water.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I do.  There're things that I emphasize a lot, especially as a commander.  I talk about the nature of one's commitment to service, and those kinds of things.  But I probably don't have a favorite saying.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 33264
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm gonna ask about your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But--and then we'll try to put 'em together, right.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Naomi, that's N-A-O-M-I, Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, Lewis.  And she married my father, Leo Brooks, and became Naomi Lewis Brooks.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Did I give you all the spelling you need on that?
Speaker 1: Well,--
Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S, is the Lewis in the case, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Naomi--
Speaker 2: N-A-O-M-I, L-E-W-I-S, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It is the 14th of April, 1934, in Alexandria, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace her side, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, we can trace both her father and mother's branch and parts of their parents' branches as well.  The longest branch is my mother's mother's [Eunice Lewis] father's branch, okay, my mother's mother's father's branch.  And that is a very long line that's documented back into the 1600s in northern Virginia.  The family name is Quander.  And it's quite a bit of research on them.  We can also trace--and my mother's actually been quite active in helping to find all of the branches of the family tree over several years, in conjunction with several cousins.  And we actually have discovered lots of cousins, especially in northern Virginia, which is where both my parents are from.  But she has another branch.  Her father, of course, is a Lewis, and that Lewis branch goes back into Loudoun County, Virginia, L-O-U-D-O-U-N County, Virginia, back into the--we can trace that one back into the early 1800s.  Her mother's, my mother's father's mother, okay, my mother's father's mother's branch is a Roy family which is also a northern Virginia family; a little bit less distance, in terms of being able to trace it, but several branches within the late 1800s and early 1900s, also in the Virginia, Maryland area.  And then the Quander that I talked about.  So my mother's mother's side, really long history, includes slavery.  So I, as a soon-to-be Army Four Star General, and a fulfillment of some of the promises of what America has stood for, for so long, and what we've always talked about, but haven't always fulfilled, that there is equality for all.  And there's an opportunity for everyone to achieve, that the American dream can be fulfilled.  All these things that are the American ideal, but have been deprived from African Americans especially, for so long.  And that Quander branch going from slavery at Mount Vernon, through Manumission in northern Virginia, and owning plenty of sets of forty acres and a mule, but over time, losing virtually all of that.  And now to have a family that has three generals in two generations is part of that fulfillment.  My father's branch is a little bit different.  And that's a little bit harder to trace, but we've got some pretty good lineage that's emerged on that side too.
Story_ID: 33265
Speaker 1: Now, just about the Quander--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --side [maternal], one of the things that's really unusual, even in this set of historical interviews with people, people really can't trace an ancestor back to Africa.  And you can actually do that on the Quander side, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We've actually run into people--that name still exists in Africa.  In fact, the last Quander reunion I was able to attend--and we've been doing this for over 87 or 88 years without fail, as it alternates between Washington, D.C., Alexandria, Virginia and Pennsylvania, usually, and parts of Maryland sometimes also.  That's where, that's where the cluster is.  It's a very large family.  After all my time in the Middle East, it's safe to call it a tribe.  It's a large family that covers many, many branches.  And the original name Amkwando (ph.).  And --
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Well, we've seen it spelled several different name--ways.  Obviously, it's phonetic, but the general spelling that we see is A-M-K-W-A-N-D-O or D-O-H.  You may see an "H" at the end of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, Amkwando.
Speaker 2: Yes, now, the, the person we met last year, or I guess it was one or two years ago.  I can't remember exactly what summer it was.  I guess maybe last summer, at the Quander reunion, which was in Virginia, and I was able to attend it, his name was Amkwandah (ph.), which is even closer to the way we pronounce Quander.  But Amkwandah, which was an A-H, at the end.  And he's from Ghana.  And this is where we believed our original family roots were, Ghana, West Africa.  And well, I mentioned several were involved in slavery, and we have that documented.  One of my relatives was a docent at Mount Vernon for a very long time until, until her death.  Her name was Gladys Tansel Quander--I'm sorry backwards.  Gladys Quander Tansel (ph.), excuse me, Gladys Quander Tansel.  And she was very instrumental in helping completely understand what life may have been like for our ancestors there and was really speaking, as she was leading tours at one of America's most notable tourist attractions in history, historical sites.  She's talking about her family history.  And she shared quite a bit of that with all of us.  That's an interesting relationship there.  When you have a large tribe, you have lots of strange connections.  So, her brother, for example, and she are cousins of my mother, second cousins.  But Gladys' brother, Wilton Quander, married my father's sister.  So their children are both first cousin and second cousin for me.  It's that kind of thing that happens, and they're very close to me.  It was excellent, frankly, as a military brat, moving around quite a bit as military children do and military families do, my father's career had us stay in Virginia for a number of years in long blocks.  It was really an unusual experience for military brats, with him being assigned in Washington [District of Columbia] a couple of times or while he was in Vietnam, while he was in military education, and we can talk about that a bit more as you wanna go into it.  But the moral of the story here is, it allowed me to actually get to know many extended branches of my family.  I actually feel like I'm from somewhere, even though I'm a military brat, and we pick up and move, I always had a place to come back to.  And that home root is Alexandria, Virginia in both directions, my father and my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33266
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, so the family's been, the Quander family [maternal side], at least, has been--I don't know about the other branches, but the Quander family's been, the story has been broadcast on public radio--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's been written up in several newspapers--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there was a display in the Museum--
Speaker 1: --'The Washington Post'--
Speaker 2: of American History at the Smithsonian for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it's still active right now, but it featured the Quander family as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There're several who are still serving in the military, as it turns out, that are Quander descendants, not just my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.; also a HistoryMaker] and I and my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] in our history.  But I've got several cousins who are serving right now, as [U.S.] Army officers and others.
Speaker 1: All right, and you have a--is it a great aunt who was one of the founders of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha; sorority]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name is Nellie Quander.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's well known.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was from, she was from the Washington branch of the Quanders.  In the area where we were--of course, if you come from Mount Vernon, Virginia, up along the Potomac River, that area that now leads over to Alexandria [Virginia].  So current names are places like Gum Springs and Hydler (ph.) Valley and Bellevue, Bell Haven, that, that strip of land that runs from Mount Vernon up to the City of Alexandria, if you cross the river directly, as some did, given the rules that existed for slavery and economic opportunity, and where jobs were and what kind of industry they might have been involved in, some migrated directly across the river.  And the branch then formed in the Maryland coastal shore of the Potomac and Anacostia Rivers.  And it proceeds on up right to the corner of where the Washington Navy Yard and the U.S. Marine Corp barracks are located now, a lot of that land also, was family land.  It now is gone, and so it's--for several reasons.  Some of it was sold off, some of it, people were swindled out of, the things that happened.  Some of it was simply federal land taking that happened at the, in the late 1800s and early 1900s.  But there's really not much left except for the family name which is in lots of places through D.C., Washington, Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: I know there's a Quander Road or--
Speaker 2: That's in Alexandria.  So it's, that's in part of that area where there's still a strong cluster, if you will, of tribal branch, and that is where my mother's mother and her father and siblings had their homes.  And those homes are still there, on Quander Road.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Quander Road School, a Baptist church there, Mount Calvary Baptist Church, it was--still where the family has its deep roots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33267
Speaker 1: I don't wanna short change the Lewises.  So are there any stories about the Lewises?
Speaker 2: There are lots of stories about the Lewises.  And go back to my mother's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] father first, James Lewis, Jr., who for, I guess it was somewhere on the order of sixty-plus years, worked for the United Mine Workers and was a trusted member of the leadership team there, even back in the days of segregation.  He was a chauffeur, driver, valet, body guard, all wrapped into one, for John L. Lewis, who formed the United Mine Workers.  He was his driver and did much, much more than that.  And I will tell you that we certainly attribute, through my mother's storytelling and her father and mother sharing with us, the education that my family enjoys.  We've been blessed to have many generations of well educated, African American adults.  And certainly, on my mother's side--she's one of five, the way that John L. Lewis--and we're not related, at least to the best we know, John L. Lewis, took care of my grandfather, James Lewis, Jr., made it possible for us to have education in my mother's generation that her parents could not have, and then certainly to pass on to my generation as well.  So the Lewis branch is full of incredible stories, but that's, that's the one we tell the most because that's really the, the life-changing movement.
Story_ID: 33268
Speaker 1: But when you go further back, my grandfather [James] Lewis [Jr.], was a deacon of a church there, right in the City of Alexandria, in an area right now that is still referred to as Seminary.  It's where the theological seminary for the Episcopal Church is located, off of Seminary Road in Alexandria, and the church that he was the deacon of and chairman of the deacon board is called Oakland Baptist Church, still standing.  His father was the chairman of the deacon board as well.  So we really had leadership in that church for, you know, somewhere, all of the twentieth century certainly, and part of the twenty-first Century.  My grandfather passed in 2003, two days before I began to talk to the world about Operation Iraqi Freedom as a spokesperson.  And I'd had a great Christmas with him right before that.  We spent lots of quality time together.  He was still well, in his right mind, had just retired from work a few months before there, even though he was ninety-three years old at that point in time, went to work every single day, always had a cheerful disposition.  I never saw him without a necktie, except once.  I remember we went to Ocean City [Maryland] to a beach when I was like eight years old.  I think that was the only time I ever saw him without a necktie.  But he was cheerful and positive, upbeat and had a work ethic that I know translates into the way my family operates now, and certainly, the way I operate.  His father then--
Speaker 2: And I know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: -- chairman of the deacon board, yeah--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  What was Reverend Lewis' name, your grandfather?
Speaker 1: What was who?
Speaker 2: Your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: James Lewis, Jr.
Speaker 2: James Lewis, Jr.
Speaker 1: James Lewis, Jr., no middle name, James Lewis, Jr.  His father was James Lewis.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so the Reverend was James Lewis.
Speaker 1: Well, the Reverend was my other grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we can go into that branch in a second.  My grandfather, Brooks, was a Baptist minister.  My grandfather Lewis, was a Baptist deacon--
Speaker 2: A deacon, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --at that church, and his father was also.  So deacon of, chairman of the deacon board.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Anyway, there are many, many stories about my grandfather Lewis' experience with John L. Lewis on the road, in the days at United Mineworkers.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us some stories?
Speaker 1: Well, he only served a few.  He was very discreet.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I mean he really was, and I give that--
Speaker 2: John L. Lewis is a seminal figure in American history--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, he is.
Speaker 2: --somebody that really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, he is.
Speaker 2: --changed America.
Speaker 1: As it turned out, my grandfather ended up driving for every president of the United Mineworkers, until his death, every single one of them, he was their driver.  And I remember going over to the United Mineworkers of America office building in downtown [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. And I was a brigadier general then.  And I had been visible, but I was in, it was in the Pentagon at the time, before Operation Iraqi Freedom started.  And so my grandfather was still living and was well known to them.  And I stopped in there, and just wanted to say hello to 'em 'cause I was downtown, and I had never been to where he worked before.  And they had a small office for him, and he was known to everyone in the building, Mr. James.  That was his name at the United Mineworkers, and he kind of operated as the chaplain of the United Mineworkers.  Whenever they had any kind of event, including some very large events on the capital of the--I'm sorry, on the steps of the U.S. Capitol, the invocation was given by my grandfather.  And that's certainly documented out there as well.  But he was a very faithful man and a very honest man and built--he was part of an effort to create a middle-class neighborhood, not too far from Quander Road, by the way, that we just talked about, called Randall Estates.  And it still exists.  In fact, I drove through there just a few days ago when I was in the Washington area.  And a specific part of Randall Estates, he and a few other men who had been given good opportunity back in the early '60s [1960s], created, it was on Shiver Drive.  And the actual developer was an African American developer named Joop Shiver.  And so the road was named after the Shiver family.  It's still called Shiver Drive even now.  And so he was one of the original home builder, homeowners that lived in that area.  And we have lots and lots of memories about spending time there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Lots of memories.  And that's where I had that Christmas with him, it was in his own house, just an amazing man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 33269
Speaker 1: Now, you were going back.  Can you go back further on the Lewises [maternal side] or should we--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  The Lewises go back, I think we can go back five, five more layers than that and very interesting stories of migration from out in Loudoun County, Virginia, but ultimately, working their way in to that Seminary area.  And both my grandfather [James] Lewis, and my grandmother [Eunice] Lewis, come from large families, as was the case then.  But they were property owners.  They had their own land, and they had their own house that they'd built.  The family was in other parts of the same land, so you lived with extended generations, not in the same house.  Each had their own house, but it was a plot of land.  And that was, that was something to behold also.  And it was important to have a place that you actually came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33270
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks]--how did your mother grow up?  Can you kind of talk about that and what were her stories?
Speaker 2: Well, she's the oldest of five children.  And her nickname in the house, as given to her by her father [James Lewis] was the "boss" because in many ways, she kind of stepped in as the oldest child, helping her mother [Eunice Lewis] with her younger siblings, while my grandfather was out on the road with John L. Lewis.  So she's very independent, athletic, went to the segregated high schools in Alexandria, Virginia.  It was one high school called Parker Gray High School, and she's part of the Hall of Fame of Parker Gray High School, but was very athletic, outgoing lefthander, basketball player.  That would come back a generation later in her son being a left-handed basketball player.  She probably had a lot more talent than I did, but I know where it came from at least.  Her younger brother, she was, four women and one male out of that generation of hers, my mother being the oldest.  It was daughter, one, two, three, four, then son.  So my uncle, Jim Lewis III is the last among that, that issue, was an All-American basketball player himself, played at Parker Gray, same school, until desegregation occurred in Alexandria.  And he was relocated to integrate Groveton High School, which no longer exists, but Groveton is right above all the Quander in Virginia, at least it was during that time.  And he was a star basketball player.  He had bad knees, but he still was a high scorer and a great jumper, and was recruited to play basketball at the West Virginia University, and brook the color line there as well.  He later went on--he's still alive and with us, but he later went on to coach men's basketball at the collegiate level, women's basketball collegiate and professional level.  He was the first coach of the Washington Mystics, for example, when those first formed a few years ago.  So athletics moves through the family in several different branches, but principally, it's on the Quander-Lewis side that we have the greatest amount of athletic talent.  And their other side, I've got cousins, my mother's sister, right behind her, has a daughter who is an All-American basket player, a coach at the University of Maryland, a sports caster now, with sports in the [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] area, and Hall of Famer for the University of Maryland in women's basketball.  So there's quite a bit of talent out there.  Jim Lewis' son, my first cousin, Christopher Lewis, is a Harvard [University] graduate and played basketball at Harvard [University].  So--and by the way, I'm the short one around that crowd.  I'm 6'4" [six feet, four inches; height].  I'm tallest in my family of Brooks', but when you put those Quander genes in there, my cousin, Christopher, is 6'8".  My cousin, Wilton Quander, Jr. that I talked about, my double-first cousin, as Jerry Clower (ph.) says is, he's about 6'6", 6'5".  We've got a lot of tallness in the family.  My mother is very tall.  My sister [Marquita Brooks] is tall.  My cousin, I was telling you that played basketball, women's basketball at the University of Maryland, is probably 6'2", so--.
Story_ID: 33271
Speaker 1: This, the Lewis family has quite a few stories as well.  I mean there're many, many more I could tell you about.  You know, really, one of them that I have to at least open the door to, and we can talk about more if you want to, that area of Seminary, there're some interesting confluence of history and how they manifest themselves.  This will open the door to several more questions for you.  As I mentioned, my grandfather [James] Lewis [Jr.], and his father's [James Lewis] family were up in the Seminary area.  Most of the men in that family worked somehow, related to the Episcopal seminary, whether they were running the boiler room, and we had a relative who did that or if they were doing custodial services or what have you, as was the case in Virginia in that era, the famous Jim Crowe era, it was menial work that they were doing.  But they were able to earn a living doing that and take care of their families which were very large right then.  Just beyond the Seminary is a place called Fort Ward, W-A-R-D.  It's now a historic park, but on the outside edge of Fort Ward is a cemetery, just tucked off on the side.  And it's the cemetery for Oakland Baptist Church that I mentioned, which is maybe a half a mile away from there.  Now, it's all closed out in woods and housing areas, but that used to be a pathway that would go from Oakland Baptist Church over to the Fort Ward Cemetery.  And inside of there are many, many, many layers of my family.  So that's where several great grand, and great, great grand relatives are located.  And in coming back to the Seminary, the strange confluence that I talked about there, my wife's grandfather was also a cleric.  He was Episcopal priest, an African American Episcopal [AME] priest in a time of segregation.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: His, Odell Greenleaf Harris from North Carolina, from Henderson, North Carolina.  And ultimately, he was able to break the color line in the Episcopal Seminary at that very same place, Episcopal Theological Seminary in Alexandria, Virginia.  And so on one side, my grandfather and great grandfather and relatives were keeping the facility going.  Then ultimately, my wife's grandfather was able to break the color line on--he's got books that are documented.  He wrote about it, one was called, 'It Can Be Done', and it's in the library there at the Episcopal Seminary.  My mother-in-law helped to get that published years ago.  This is just the strange way that life guides us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is, this is something.  It's remarkable (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean my roots in Virginia are so deep and so broad that it's really, it's fascinating, I mean I could talk about it forever.
Story_ID: 33272
Speaker 1: So, now, your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks], did she grow up near the Seminary area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, right there off Quaker Lane is the area--several roads come together right there by Oakland Baptist Church, but Quaker Lane is the road where their house was.  And I remember being in that house, and that's where my grandfather [James Lewis, Jr.] and grandmother [Eunice] Lewis, lived right next to his siblings, who stayed in his father's house.  As I mentioned, several families were in the same strip of land.  This is on my mother's father's side.  Now, this gets a little bit confusing 'cause it's similar to my mother's mother's side.  But on my mother's father's side, the Lewis side, several homes in the same strip of land that was owned by the Lewis family.  And that's where they lived until such time as they created that new housing area that I had told you about, Randall Estates on Shiver Drive in the mid-'60s [1960s].  But I remember, I have fond memories of going to that home also.  In fact, that's where we were when my sister [Marquita Brooks] was born.  My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] was in Vietnam.  My sister was born in 1963, and my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and I, young, rambunctious boys at that point in time, were at my grandmother's house, while my sister was born at Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  And so that was my, that was my last period of memories there.  It was a few years later that they moved.
Story_ID: 33273
Speaker 1: All right.  So your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] went to school in that area [Alexandria, Virginia], around the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --seminary [Alexandria], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And she played basketball and--
Speaker 2: She was a basketball player, yes.
Speaker 1: And where--now, she had a chance to go to college.  She was the first generation--
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: --to do so, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to Virginia State College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As it was called then.  It's Virginia State University now in Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know she ended up as an educator, right?  She--
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She graduated Virginia State in 1955.  My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] graduated in 1954.  And they were married the following December after she joined him in his first assignment.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother talk about what her aspirations were as a young person, what she wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, what she did share with me is that her father [James Lewis, Jr.] emphasized first getting an education, and secondly, being an educator.  That was one of the best pathways to have steady employment for African American women.  Also, domestic work obviously was there.  That was the long experience.  But in terms of using a skill and using education, being an educator, being a teacher was very commonplace in my family.  So most of my female relatives were educators.  And I would say that's also true in my wife's family.  So that's what she pursued.  She became an educator, and at the same time, raised a family inside of the United States Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So her whole time--as I mentioned, my father was, graduated in 1954, the year before, and was commissioned in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] as a Second Lieutenant in 1954, the year the desegregation order went into effect.  And so they moved to, in a variety of places and created opportunities for us, but also achieved.  They were part of the military community.  And she was very active in that, very active in the military community.
Story_ID: 33274
Speaker 1: I guess it's a good time maybe to go over to your father's side of the family, and I'll ask you about him and his side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Leo, L-E-O Austin, A-U-S-T-I-N, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It is the ninth of August, 1932.  And I think Alexandria [Virginia] is what we refer to, but at that point in time, a lot of people, a lot of black families had to go into Washington [District of Columbia] to actually get a hospital that would treat 'em.  So, Alexandria, Washington is really what we'd say.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: His mother's branch, we can trace further than his father's branch.  So the Lemon tree, as we call it--his mother was, last named Lemon, traces back through Western Virginia to a Irish doctor who came to America named Dr. McCutchen.  We don't have a first name.  We don't know much other than he was from County Cork in Ireland.  And at what point in time he met Mariah who became his common law wife, we're not sure how all that started and what the connection was or even what her roots are.  But she was a woman of color.  Now, what we're not certain about on that is what does that mean?  Was that Mulattous?  Was it Cherokee?  What was it?  We don't know.  And so there're differing stories out there or whether or not that's an Indian strain for us or an African American strain?  Clearly, there was some of both, it appears to be.  So, common law then leads to my grandmother's father, Benjamin Echard, E-C-H-A-R-D Lemon who established a home for his family and like everyone else, had eleven or twelve children, boys and girls.  So there's several branches that are still out there from that, more than I can trace, but we've captured a lot of that in a document called the "Lemon Tree."  My grandmother was right in the middle of the issue for her generation.  And her name is Evelyn, E-V-E-Y--E-V-E-L-Y-N, Evelyn.  And there's some differing views on what her real middle name was.  Some documents say Julie.  Some say Nisbel, N-I-S-B-E-L, and very few of them say that, but that's out there.  So Evelyn Julie Lemon.  And she came in from out in Western Virginia to try to seek better education in the Washington [District of Columbia] area where women of color could go to school.  She was very light skinned and long beautiful, black hair, lived to be 101 years, just died, just a few years ago in Northern Virginia.  So that line, we can trace reasonably well back to Dr. McCutchen with four generations.  My father's father, Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N, George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S, Sr. was a Baptist minister, as I mentioned.  In his later years, he was pastor of a church in Rockville, Maryland, Mount Calvary, different Mount Calvary from the Quander [Brooks' maternal grandmother's family] family, by the way, which is in Alexandria, Virginia.  But his was Mount Calvary Baptist Church in Rockville, Maryland, where he was the pastor or pastor emeritus from 1963 until his death in, I guess it was 1985, I wanna say.  It was, I think that was the year.  And his father was Henry Curtis Brooks.  And this is where the line gets a bit distorted.  His father was Richard Henry Brooks, and we have a diary from Richard Henry Brooks who served with both the Confederacy and the Union forces as it turned out in Northern, Virginia and a very interesting story.  He was literate even though he was a slave, wrote beautifully in his own handwriting.  We've got, we've got this material in his own hand of telling the stories of being at Bull Run, being the body servant was the term that was used at that time.  So he took care of the uniforms, the swords, the weapons for a Confederate officer, a Virginia militia officer who was killed.  And he left him and crossed the lines out somewhere near where Lands Down is in Virginia, just out by Leesburg [Virginia], crossed the Potomac River, fleeing the pursuant of Confederate patrollers who wanted to roll him up.  Getting across the river and following the C and O Canal, the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal that runs along the Potomac River out of Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], down toward D.C., and being pursued by federal persons as well who were trying to roll him up and by criminals.  And so it's a very interesting story.  But then he finally made it to Washington, D.C. and became a body servant for a Union officer and fought several more engagements, a very, very interesting story.  He was trying to do the best he could for his family and for his siblings to try to get them a chance to come out of slavery also.  Now, there's cem--their graves are actually in Alexandria.  Oddly enough, there're about a hundred meters away from where the Quanders are buried in the same cemetery in Alexandria, Virginia.  And so when I, I go there from time to time just to kind of walk the ground and be reminded of those very deep roots in multiple directions.  And there are several others.
Story_ID: 33275
Speaker 1: But my [paternal] grandfather [Houston George Brooks, Sr.] did not have any siblings, at least the best we can tell.  He was initially orphaned.  So we don't know his mother.  That's part of the history that is hidden for some reason, which we have still not discovered.  He was raised by a foster mother for a period of time who then married my great, great grandfather--my great grandfather, my grandfather's father [Henry Curtis Brooks], married him.  And then they raised my grandfather.  And they said from the time he was nine [years old], but his original birth date is not known.  We have estimates on that, but there are no birth records.  So he always talked about that, all the way up to the time of his death, of having been orphaned and had--it still burnt a hole in him in many, many ways.  And he was very close and protective as a patriarch as a result, very close and protective of his family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So those were the two branches of my father's line, a little bit harder to trace as a result of that.  We do know that there was some migration of Brooks after the Civil War, down to Pensacola, Florida and back up into Virginia, but mostly in the Alexandria area.  The Brooks that we do know of who are really cousins of my grandfather or uncles and aunts of my grandfather were entrepreneurs in Alexandria, Virginia.  There's no record of slavery other than that one that I talked about as a body servant on both sides during the Civil War.
Story_ID: 33276
Speaker 1: Slavery is not part of that line [Brooks' paternal family].  Entrepreneurship is, and so whether it was running painting companies or bus companies and--or assisting underground railroad or helping to build Alfred Street Baptist Church, which is the first African American church in downtown Alexandria [Virginia].  It split away from the First Baptist Church of Alexandria.  And they just celebrated 200 years together a few years ago.  My father's [Leo Brooks, Sr.] a, an emeritus deacon there, by the way, and most of my mother's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] siblings got married in that church over the years.  My mother's mother's family, the Quanders, had historic roots there.  But so did the Brooks as it turns out, right there in Alexandria, Virginia, huge church now.  It's a mega church, but it wasn't all those years.  But it was the foundation of the community, the educators of the community all attended that church, way back in the 1800s.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is, once again, this Mount Calvary?
Speaker 1: Yet another church.
Speaker 2: There's another--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: There are several churches that are really important to my family.
Speaker 2: So the one in Alexandria is what?
Speaker 1: Alfred Street--
Speaker 2: Alfred Street.
Speaker 1: --Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D Street Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Baptist, okay.
Speaker 1: And it is right at the intersection of Alfred and Duke [streets] in Alexandria.  It's unmistakable right now, 'cause it now takes up several blocks.
Story_ID: 33277
Speaker 1: Now you father [Leo Brooks, Sr.], was he raised in Alexandria [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I take it, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all right.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a, it's an interesting story as well in terms of where that is.  I mentioned my mother's father [James Lewis, Jr.] became part of a black middle class that established a neighborhood called Randall Estates on Shiver Drive in Alexandria, Virginia, not far from where Quander Road is.  My father's father [Houston George Brooks, Sr.] also being a community leader, he had a home-painting business and also was a Baptist minister, as I mentioned, a pastor of several churches, was a middle-class leader in the community and helped establish a place called Sunnyside.  And that's close to an area that's now known as Delray, Virginia, but he was a civic leader there as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what was Sunnyside?
Speaker 2: Sunnyside was a, it literally was just a two-street neighborhood that ran from near Russell Road, Glebe (ph.) Road area near the Four-Mile Run area of Alexandria, Virginia, right where Alexandria and Arlington [Virginia] come together and run up to Executive Avenue.  So that space, and the road is called Elbert Avenue.  There are townhouses and things there now, but there are a few of the original homes that are still there.  So he and several other African American men of means, if you will, and they weren't super wealthy, but they were clearly the middle class at that point in time, were able to build their own homes, own their own homes and create a neighborhood of people who went on to do good things.
Story_ID: 33278
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned a bus company.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And well, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: In the segregated era of Alexandria [Virginia], and Alexandria has a long history of segregation, but the "separate but equal" worlds did overlap in many cases.  And this was an example of it.  So a bus company that did work in the City of Alexandria alone, Brooks men had helped to organize that.  I don't know what the name of the company was.  I wish I did, and that's one of those things that when I retire, I'm sure I'm gonna go do a whole lot of family archeology to see what I can discover.  But this is one of the stories that remains in the family, that they were entrepreneurs.  They were people who could make things happen in the City of Alexandria, and had quite a bit of influence as a result.  My father's [Leo Brooks, Sr.] father [Houston George Brooks, Sr.] was known as Mr. Henry.  That was the nickname that everybody called him in town, white and black.  But the family called him Pat.
Speaker 1: So the bus company came and went and--
Speaker 2: Came and went.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was--
Speaker 2: And there's no vestige of it now, as best I can tell.  There's no records that I've been able to find yet.
Speaker 1: Did it fade due to integration?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know what the cause was.  I mean it certainly went away before integration occurred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause as I mentioned, Alexandria was late coming to integration.  This made--very interesting stories out there about, if you remember a movie just a few years ago called 'Remember the Titans'.  And it features the merging--it's probably not worth calling it integration, at least not initially, but the merging of two schools, a black high school and a white high school in the City of Alexandria, Virginia, into a new high school, a mega high school, frankly, called 'T. C. Williams'.  And it's interesting that it was given that name.  I remember when I had it 'cause we lived in Northern Virginia at the time, and my mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] and several of my aunts were teaching in the City of Alexandria.  But T. C. Williams was a strident racist who insisted that there would never, there would never be integration in the City of Alexandria as long as he was the superintendent of schools.  And so the integrated high school was named for him to send a message still.  I remember that in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  And that actual creation occurred in the early 1970s, but that's when I was in junior high school.  And a few years later we played against T. C. Williams which was then integrated and had many of my cousins from Seminary--by the way, it is immediately adjacent to Oakland Baptist Church where my father--my grandfather was chairman of the deacon board, my maternal grandfather [James Lewis, Jr.].  It's immediately adjacent.  It's the property right beside it, is where that high school was created.  So that's sitting on family land too, I mean really, in many ways.  And I remember that because it was a powerhouse.  Interestingly, just a couple of years ago, when I was a brigadier general at the Pentagon, serving as the [U.S.] Army's chief of public affairs, I got to meet those two coaches who were featured in the movie--Bill Yoast and Herman Boone were both Alexandria icons.
Story_ID: 33279
Speaker 1: Your family is really, you know, really deeply ensconced, well, you said it again and again, is in a (unclear) of everything--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in that part of Virginia, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I just--now, your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] grew up in Alexandria [Virginia].  Did--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were his aspirations as a youth and what was he--
Speaker 2: My grandfather, nicknamed Pap Henry Curtis Brooks, in addition to being an entrepreneur and a community leader, was musically inclined.  So there's a music line that runs through the Brooks family tree.  My father enjoyed music, so he enjoyed music and student government.  He was a student council president in high school.  He was student council president at Virginia State University or Virginia State College [Petersburg, Virginia], as it was at the time.  So student government was always important to him and playing music.  And so he went to Virginia State and majored in music and happened to take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  He was encouraged that, that would be a good thing.  Of course, it was a state land grant college and ROTC programs were required for most men there, at least for two years in those days.  But he took ROTC.  It appealed to him.  He did very, very well as a cadet at Virginia State College, and when it came time to graduate, his professor of military science told him he ought to accept a commission.  He says, well, I really wanna go teach music. [Professor] says, accept the commission, try it for a while, and then you can see.  And twenty-nine and a half years later, he departed the [U.S.] Army as a major general.  But he still likes music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those were, I think, his aspirations.  Now, he was the fourth out of five.  My mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was five as well.  She was one out of five.  My father is four out of five in his generation, and it's the reverse.  Where my mother's family had four girls and a boy, my father's family had four boys and a girl.  So the sequence was Houston G. Brooks, Jr., who was first, my father's oldest brother, Nellie Brooks Quander, not to be confused with the other Nellie Quander, but as I mentioned, you know, we got the double first cousin thing going on there.  So my father's sister married my mother's cousin who is a Quander.  Her name now is Nellie Brooks Quander.  Then Henry Curtis Brooks, Jr., and then--I'm sorry, Henry Curtis Brooks, named for his grandfather, then my father Leo Austin Brooks.  Then there was a gap of a several years.  I think it was maybe ten years that separate my father and his younger brother, Francis Kenneth Brooks.  That was an independent bunch to be sure.  But all of 'em are highly educated.  Achievement and excellence was something that my father grew up on and it certainly translated into my family also.  I mentioned my mother's side had the opportunity for education because of the sustained good work of my grandfather [James Lewis], but working for and being supported by John L. Lewis.  My father's side, my first uncle ended up becoming a Ph.D. [doctorate] in chemistry.  The next uncle became a Doctor of Divinity and Ph.D. in psychology and part of the Andover Newton Theological Seminary in Massachusetts--Boston, Massachusetts.  My aunt was a school principal, did not complete her doctorate, but is a ABD, an all but dissertation from George Washington University [Washington, District of Columbia], later went on to be a board member of the National Education Association.  My father, of course, served as a Army major general and then managing director of the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in retirement as well as other civic and social activity.  And then his younger brother, Francis Kenneth Brooks, served as a representative of District 5 Vermont in the Vermont State House where there's not a large African American concentration.  But he was a member of that house, I wanna say eight terms.  I may have that mistaken.  There's actually a new book out on him called 'Brooks of Montpelier' [by Robert L. Walsh], but he was an educator there, a football coach at the high school there, a volunteer fireman there, and a member of the State House as a representative of his district for many, many years, community leader, still there.
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, the first two have passed, but the remaining three, my father and my aunt and my youngest uncle are still alive.
Speaker 1: Your youngest uncle, Francis, he was--was he the first African American to be elected to the Vermont State House?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think still, the only.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought he might be (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's a very small population, very small number of blacks in the State of Vermont.  But he's well regarded there.
Story_ID: 33280
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.], as you were describing, your father went to college--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he was in ROTC [at Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia; Reserve Officers' Training Corps], but he really wanted to be a musician.  What was his instrument?
Speaker 2: He played a variety of instruments, but it was mostly horns.  I think his favorite is baritone.  He seems to prefer that the most.  And so he passed that on to my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and I.  We weren't quite as good as he was, but I played the trombone, for example.  My brother played the trumpet.  And at one Quander reunion--and this is certainly documented out there somewhere, I guess it was probably 1968 or '69 [1969], somewhere thereabouts, we lived in the Northern Virginia area.  We were all there, so he wasn't in Vietnam at that point in time.  And we created the "Brooks Band."  And we got to perform some music for the Quander relatives who were there, right there on Quander Road, at Quander Road School.  So whenever I see it, I still think about that.  It was in the cafeteria where we were able to get some space to hold the Quander reunion that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 33281
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd known each other for some time.  They were in high school together at Parker Gray [High School, Alexandria, Virginia].  And they apparently weren't that interested in each other.  My father was a, as a--you know, being a student-body leader and being as dashing as his son is, was, he was very popular at Parker Gray.  And my mother was very popular as well, but they weren't in the same circle.  They knew each other, but weren't really in the same circle.  At Virginia State, suddenly the interest was piqued.  I don't know what the provoking condition was, what actually caused that to occur when they finally really noticed each other.  But then they were hooked.  So probably the last two and a half, three years of my father's time at Virginia State, much of my mother's time at Virginia State, they were pretty focused on each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33282
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about their [Brooks' parents, Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, you know, even how tall they are, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on who you ask.  But if you ask me, I think I take after both of them.  They can't deny me.  So there's parts of both of them in me.  I'm tall like my mother.  Many of my facial features are like my mother's, but I also resemble my father in many ways.  And as I've aged, I look more like my father than I did when I was young.  It's interesting how that, how that is, but my features have changed a little bit as I've aged.  I look a lot more like my father now than I did when I was eight or nine years old.  So we have evidence that he's really my daddy, and they can't, they can't deny me.  But the height comes from my mother's side.  I would say both of them are gregarious and outgoing.  I actually prefer and am really naturally inclined to be an introvert.  So I don't know who that comes from.  Maybe it's the opposite of both of them.  They can meet anybody and be friends with 'em in a minute.  And I'm able to do that because I've been socialized to do that, but I prefer to be by myself and quiet in terms of real personality.  I'd say that the focus on excellence comes from both of them.  That's absolutely part of who I am right now.  I wanna say I'm more patient, I'm patient like my mother, not as impatient as my father.  And so somewhere between the two.  And I think I'm most patient among my siblings.  I think I'm more patient than my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and my sister [Marquita Brooks] both, but they may argue differently.  So similarities and differences--combination of both, really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33283
Speaker 1: Now, you've got two brothers and a sister?
Speaker 2: I have one brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.], who's--
Speaker 1: One brother and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --older than me, one sister [Marquita Brooks] who's younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, where you fall in the order and can you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my brother, Leo Austin Brooks, Jr., is fourteen months older than me.  And in many ways we're, we were almost raised like twins.  There is a rumor out there that we've never been able to destroy in the U.S. Army that we are twins.  We're not twins.  I can say that for the record.  We are not twins.
Speaker 1: Do you look alike?
Speaker 2: I don't think we look that much alike.  There are definitely similarities, and we've both been approached by people on the street who knew one of us, but not both, and picked us out as the "brother of."  So there has to be enough similarity.  Now, some people think we are spitting images of each other.  But I'm four inches taller than he is.  And I've always been that way.  He's a year older than me, fourteen months older, but I've always been taller since two or three years old.  Our body styles are very different.  Our hair is different.  Our complexion is different.  But, you know, there's enough similarities--it's really through here [pointing at forehead and eyes] that people see the similarities, right, right in this area, we're very similar.  I think our expressions are very similar too.
Story_ID: 33284
Speaker 1: Oh, and tell us about your sister [Marquita Brooks].  That's--
Speaker 2: Yes, my sister, Marquita, that's M-A-R-Q-U-I-T-A, Marquita Karen Brooks, is five years younger than I am.  By the way, I didn't mention, my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] was born August 15th, 1957, also in Anchorage, Alaska.  My sister is, was born on the 7th of June, 1963 at Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  So, she's, she's the one that got to move the most as we were growing up as [U.S.] Army brats, just based on where my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] was in his career.  I mentioned that we were lucky to stay seven straight years in the Northern Virginia area, as my father had multiple assignments in the Pentagon, attended War College, went to Vietnam, came back, worked at Army Material Command, also in Northern Virginia.  So the family didn't move around very much during that period of time.  We moved at the end of my sophomore year in high school.  So I did my last two years in the State of California.  My brother, of course, got moved at the start of his senior year, which can be really disruptive.  My sister got moved multiple times 'cause she was the one who grew up when my father was a general and ended up moving several times in junior high school and high school, ultimately graduating in the same high school class as my wife's sister, younger sister, which we can come back to.  But that was in Petersburg, Virginia at Fort Lee, Virginia, same place my wife and I met and ultimately got married.  So at James Madison University, undergraduate, there in Virginia, and then later, Howard University Law School [Washington, District of Columbia].  So she's the family lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother, of course, is also a West Point [United States Military Academy] graduate from the class right in front of mine.  He's the class of 1979, and I'm from the class of 1980 at West Point.  He was in the last class without women.  I was in the first class with women, which becomes an interesting point of discussion from time to time.
Story_ID: 33285
Speaker 1: Tell me, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I have a strange memory.  I remember things very, very early in life.  The ones I remember the most begin in Ohio.  I can remember the neighborhood.  In fact, I drove back to it just a few years ago, and tried to pinpoint it--
Speaker 1: Well, where is it?
Speaker 2: Xenia, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Xenia--
Speaker 2: You know the Xenia area?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm from --
Speaker 2: --and you mentioned Ohio, small areas in Ohio.
Speaker 1: --I'm from Dayton [Ohio], so--
Speaker 2: Oh, how about that?
Speaker 1: --I'm up there a lot, so.
Speaker 2: You know where we're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] was on ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] duty at Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: My brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] probably had him 'cause he was at Central in 1960--I don't know if that's--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In 1960 to 1962, so he was in that window.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in ROTC then, so he, yeah.
Speaker 2: How about that?
Speaker 1: Arthur Thomas was there, you know, who became a school president, and other people, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I have memories of that, memories of the campus.  I was able to go back there just a few years ago as an [U.S.] Army general, and spoke to the ROTC cadets and met with the university president, some of the faculty members, saw the old ROTC building.  I was looking for--there were two cannons, and I remember, this is more prompted by a photograph that goes into the memory over time.  But there were two cannons that used to be out in front of the ROTC building, and there's a picture of my brother and I out there on those cannons.  So I remember that neighborhood.  I remember playing in the neighborhood, crawling through the pet door, next door and getting cookies and drinking gasoline.  I have to blame my brother.  He probably set me up on it, but lawnmower gasoline, getting my stomach pumped.  I have lots of memories from Arlington, Virginia where we went next.  And that was the year that my father was in Vietnam, of course, but I found that place also.  I remember the way the back hill went down.  I remember the white fence was in front of the house.  I remember the way the cul-de-sac was made.  I remember older kids setting me up to say something to somebody that I shouldn't have said to somebody when they came into the neighborhood.  I can remember a youngster named Bobby Jean who lived a couple of doors away from us, and a sliding board.  I remember getting stitches in my head when the sliding board was picked up and the edge of it hit me and cut me open.  While my father was in Vietnam, of course, all of--these things always happened when he was deployed.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: This is all 1962, '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: 1962, '63 [1963], okay.  So your father was there--
Speaker 2: Very early.
Speaker 1: --at the, what they call the American advisors--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in Vietnam.
Speaker 2: He was in the advisor group, early on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Arlington, Virginia, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And so I, lots of memories from that far back.  And they're vivid enough for me to go back and pinpoint it from my memory on what it looked like.  And I've actually found both places just in the last five or ten years.
Story_ID: 33286
Speaker 1: You grew up in so many places, and we--the way we're going, maybe the best way to do it is to kind of do them chronologically, I don't know, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we always ask, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Let me start by, I describe those things from Xenia [Ohio], the sights of the cul-de-sac that we lived on, the, the sights and sounds of being in a hospital, getting stitches.  I can still remember, there was a piece of paper that was put over top of the head, the open area where the surgery was gonna be done.  I can remember hearing the sutures as they were being put in.  I can remember that and still hear that.  I remember when President [John F.] Kennedy was killed 'cause we lived in Arlington [Virginia], and there were helicopters that were in the air, flying around as the funeral possession was ongoing.  I remember hearing that.  There are many.  I remember the feelings when Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed.  The memory is interesting in terms of how it stores sights and sounds and smells, but they're--many of them come back as I, as I'm thinking about it now.
Speaker 1: So you're ten years old when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, and you were living then, where?
Speaker 2: Lived in Bryn Mawr Park--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was a racially integrated community in Northern Virginia, Alexandria.
Speaker 1: So this is a period of time, I guess, from 1962 for about seven years, you're in, in and around Virginia, around your--
Speaker 2: Yes, much of the time as it turns out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were in Arlington, as I mentioned in the '62 [1962], '63 [1963] period of time, then in Baltimore, Maryland in '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  Then Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, '65 [1965], '66 [1966] or '66 [1966], '67 [1967] rather, then back to Virginia, and we had that long run that went up to 1974.
Speaker 1: And then to California?
Speaker 2: Then to California, to Sacramento, California, '74 [1974], until my departure in 1976, I left home, going off to the [United States] Military Academy [West Point, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, my family then moved that same summer that I went off to West Point incommunicado, and they moved.  So I didn't even know where home was.  When it was all said and done, they moved to Texas to Fort Hood and from there to Fort Lee, Virginia, and from there to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, which was my father's [Leo Brooks, Sr.] final assignment.  And he retired in 1984.
Story_ID: 33287
Speaker 1: Now, when you consider all of these locations, are they--do they all have a distinct, you know, are they all distinct to you or, when you're in the military, does it all kind of seem like it's the same--
Speaker 2: No, every one of 'em is very distinct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oddly enough.  And you measure it by a variety of different things, but military life is often measured by where you are.  So it's when we were at Leavenworth.  And so the locations remain very, very clear, very distinct.  And you remember things like being in the basement as tornadoes came by several days in a row in Kansas at Fort Leavenworth.  You, I can smell the swimming pool where I was being taught to swim at Fort Leavenworth and the instructor did not like the fact that my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and I were in the pool with other kids.  And so segregation still had issues in different parts of the country, and individuals were applying their own view of racial equality, despite what the law said at that point in time, with the Civil Rights Act having been made official and enacted years before that.  But still, culturally, there were still places where that was an issue everywhere we went through that time, the entire time.
Speaker 1: And as the sons and, well, one daughter [Marquita Brooks] or the children of a high-ranking African American officer, were there other African Americans around, I mean children (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, there were.  There were.  And he wasn't high ranking at that point in time, so he was coming up through is career, and when we were at Leavenworth, he was a major, for example--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --mid grade in his career, and majors and lieutenant colonels were the student body.  So there were other African Americans who were either a year or so older than he was or right around the same age and experience that came in around the same time. So they're, they were the front wave of the integrated Army, and that was an integrated location at Fort Leavenworth.  And, frankly, growing up in the military gave us a completely different view of how races interact with one another.  Society was one way, but inside the military society, it was long since an issue.  It was past.  We did everything together.  And so my great friend next door in Kansas, David Barry and I, well, he was white, and I'm black, we didn't care.  We were just close friends.  We were best buddies.  It didn't matter.  And to see the way society was torn at that point in time, was always a little bit confusing, frankly.  And that's why I mentioned, I remember when Dr. King was killed because it seemed to ignite a sense that there was something different about us.  And our next door neighbor friends, the three boys who were next door, we were all very close, we were in squabbles about that, about whether he was a firebrand and shouldn't have been doing what he was doing or whether he was doing exactly what he should have been doing and shouldn't have been killed.  I mean we had very different views that suddenly emerged just like American society showed great division at that point in time instead of great unity.  I remember that.  But in the military culture, that was foreign, being close and not worrying about race, not worrying about the difference was normal.  And it, it certainly has an effect on how I see the world now.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 33288
Speaker 1: Now, where did--do you remember where you started school?
Speaker 2: At Thomas Jefferson Elementary School in Baltimore, Maryland--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --first and second grade.
Speaker 1: No kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to preschool.  Because we moved around, they, the start age changed.  If I had started in Virginia, for example, I would be one year behind where I actually came out in school because of where the age line is.  And because I started in Maryland, I was one year ahead of where people my age are for most other states.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And so there wasn't a kindergarten per se.  I went to a preschool that was an experimental preschool at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], called the Lucinda Cook School.
Speaker 1: Is it part of the campus?
Speaker 2: It was part of the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't, it doesn't exist now.  But it was an experimental preschool at that point in time, part of the campus.
Speaker 1: I know you probably don't know this, but I gotta ask anyway.  Do you remember who Lucinda Cook was or any story--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --about what--
Speaker 2: I don't know any story about Lucinda Cook.
Speaker 1: She's probably some African American educator--
Speaker 2: Probably, yes, most likely.  I wish I did know.  Now, you've provoked me so I'm gonna go find out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Thomas Jefferson Elementary which was a public elementary school, not too far from our house in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: So okay, so you didn't go to school in Arlington [Virginia] at all?
Speaker 2: Did not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, so you were at home with your mother [Naomi lewis Brooks] and brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and sister [Marquita Brooks], I guess?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Well, my sister wasn't there yet.
Speaker 1: Oh, she wasn't.  That's right.
Speaker 2: But my brother and I were there, and he was in first grade there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: I guess now--actually, as I think about it, I guess I did go to kindergarten in Arlington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 33289
Speaker 1: Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I'd say generally, yes, first and second grade [at Thomas Jefferson Elementary School in Baltimore, Maryland], no.  I got beat up every day.  So it was, there was a bully between my house and school.  So first and second grade was miserable.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) you were bullied, now, here you are, you're, you know--it's hard to imagine somebody trying to--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't 6'4" when I was in first grade (laughter).  So I got bullied and had to learn how to box.  So, how to begin to protect myself.
Speaker 1: So is--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Frankly, I ended up relying on my brother quite a bit.  I think it's part of what caused us to become so close so early, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he helped you out and--
Speaker 2: When he could.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did he teach you how to box?
Speaker 2: My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It came in handy when I got into boxing at West Point [United States Military Academy], which is a required subject for all of us, did reasonably well.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something that kind of lies in the past.  You don't see it as much now.  But I know my brother--
Speaker 2: It's still out there though.
Speaker 1: My brother taught me how to box, but--
Speaker 2: Ah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --it's out of a generation where Joe Louis was a big hero--
Speaker 2: That's right, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --to everyone in the black community.  Now, I think everybody thought they could box, whether they could or not in those days--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --'cause they--I don't see it as much anymore.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, so once you learned how to box, did things ease up a little bit?
Speaker 2: It helped a little bit, but what helped really was we got reassigned--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and to be honest with you, and that caused--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So this was just a mean--
Speaker 2: --that to go away.
Speaker 1: --a mean kid or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, who knows what his real issue was, you know, that happens.  Now that I'm older, I understand the kinds of things that cause kids to go into bullying often is something that happened inside of their home.  So there's something that happened that led them to that.  They're acting out in a certain way, but you don't know that when you're in the middle of getting bullied.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Would you have any advice for kids today who are being bullied?
Speaker 2: Well, first is, if you're not the one being bullied, and you're not the one bullying, stop the two who are involved in it.  That's the first piece of advice.  Don't let it happen.  Don't let someone do that to someone else 'cause it, I mean it lasts for a long time.  It lasts for a lifetime when it's all said and done and has an effect on self confidence, self esteem, who knows?  And if you're--I don't know what it looks like from the side of the bully, but I can tell you for me, it, it damaged my self esteem for a long time.  I know that.  Now, by the time we got to Kansas, it was different.  I can't remember whether it was racial or not there in, in Baltimore because again, it was early, early on.  And that did periodically come up as an issue.  Race came up as an issue for a child like me growing up.  So I don't know if that was part of it or not.  I remember the, the kid that was involved was white, but I don't remember what the issue was.  So whether it was name calling that went with that or not, I don't remember.
Story_ID: 33290
Speaker 1: But Kansas was on a military installation [Fort Leavenworth].  So that was at Douglas McArthur Elementary School, and it was an integrated experience on a military installation, all military kids, in a very close neighborhood.  We lived in an area called Kansa Village, which is on the military installation.  And I recall going back out there as a, as a captain years later, as an [U.S.] Army officer myself and going to find the house.  I had this habit of going to find the places where I lived before.  And all the memories come right back, but it was interesting there that so many of the kids on that cul-de-sac--it was just a small court, so many of us ended up at the U.S. Military Academy [West Point, New York] at the same time, several of us, eight or nine of us from that same court, all at the same time.
Speaker 2: Do you have any idea as to why?
Speaker 1: I think it's several things.  First, it's a function of the age we were in and the fact that military, the military academies were visible to us.  Now, many of them were children of West Point graduates, and in my case, of course, where the child of an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] graduate, so they knew it was an option.  All of us had been, I think imbued with the culture of achievement and excellence, athletics, leadership, scholarship, these same kind of part of military brad life.  That certainly was the case at Fort Leavenworth, which is one of my fondest years growing up actually.  I mean I remember so much detail about the third grade year and the friendships that I made inside of there, the teachers that I had.  So I think those things all combined, that's part of what guided us to the academy at the same time.  And, of course, we're the same age, roughly, yeah, scattered across about a four-year period.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, so you were there for a year, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: One year?
Speaker 1: While my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] was a student at the Commanding General Staff College [CGSC].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 33291
Speaker 1: Then you moved to Virginia?
Speaker 2: Moved to Virginia, to Bryn Mawr Park, Alexandria--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I continued elementary school at Bryn Mawr Elementary.  Now, this is in the, I guess it's important to note, this is in the Fairfax County School system, public school system, which certainly played an important role in my life, but it's broadly featured in the Brooks tree, if you will, and all the branches that extend from me.
Speaker 1: So, is the first elementary school not associated with the military or were the others--
Speaker 2: Oddly enough, we only lived on a military installation once as I was growing up, until high school.  So I should say, technically, it's twice, but it--at least during school years.  Inside of there, I left out one short period at Fort Lee, Virginia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but that was a very small period before I was in school.  And I have memories of that too, by the way.  Anyway, so the military schools or schools on military installations were at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, that one year, third grade, and then we lived on a military base in my last two years of high school, but there was no school on it, not a high school.  So I only went to one school out of all those years, those twelve years of formative education in a military school, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Now, having said that, we were assigned to places where there were heavy military concentrations.  So probably my elementary school, junior high school and high school were probably 30 to 50 percent military kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is there really a difference in, I mean, you know, just--can you generalize a difference between a school on a military installation versus one in the public sector?
Speaker 2: There were some differences, at least as I recall them.  Now, things have changed now in terms of where schools are or are not, and which system runs them and what have you.  So, but at that time, first the idea of the, integration, and the absence of racial issues.  That was clearly the case in the military schools or schools on military installations.  There, I, I think there was a higher degree of discipline expected from the students.  There was a, an absolute involvement of parents, because, you know, your kids could hold parents accountable.  And so if kids were something wrong in school, parents were held accountable on military installations.  And so parents stayed involved, at least it sure seemed like it to me, more so than what I saw when I got to public education in other places.  The prevalence of dual-parent homes, it was extremely unusual to have a single-parent home on military installations then.  That's not the case now.  Our demographics are different in the military, but then in the '60s [1960s], every child had two parents.  Now, they might be in big fights, but every child has two parents.  These are, I think sociological differences.  The quality of education was very similar, as it turned out, because it was a high quality education at the school on the military installation, and when I got to Fairfax County, it was one of the highest in the nation.  That's not the case everywhere, but it was for me, going into that particular school system.
Story_ID: 33292
Speaker 1: So, this was a long stretch in Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --relatively--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, '67 [1967] to '74 [1974]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Unusual for a military kid.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so at this stage, now, you're in the heart of elementary school and middle school and the beginning of high school, what were you interested in?  Did you--had you decided at that point that you were gonna go into the military yourself or did you have some other occupation?
Speaker 2: No, I definitely had not decided that I was gonna go into the military.  I was gonna go into medicine, and I was very interested that early.  I, I think that first emerged while I was in Virginia.  I don't recall thinking about medicine that much when I was in third grade, but fourth grade on, absolutely.  That's what I was gonna do.  I was gonna go into medicine.  And so I had anatomy models that would let you disassemble the human body and clear plastic on the outside and the organs on the inside and spending time painting each organ properly and then putting it in the right relationship--I was studying anatomy at a very early age, and enjoyed it quite a bit.  John L. Lewis, as I mentioned, was very good to my family.  And my [maternal] grandfather [James Lewis, Jr.], not only was his driver, valet, bodyguard, etc., he also ran the books at John L. Lewis' home in downtown Alexandria, Virginia.  It's now the Lee-Fendall House is how it's marked and it's on the historic tour in Alexandria City.  But he was reliable, he was trustworthy.  John L. Lewis passed on several volumes of books to my grandfather.  One of John L. Lewis' children was a medical doctor, and so 'Gray's Anatomy' was on the bookshelf in our house.  And I studied Gray's Anatomy from a very early age.  My wife is a physical therapist and now teaches anatomy, physiology and kinesiology in adult education, and we often have discussions about human anatomy.  She thinks I learned it from her, but the fact of the matter is I learned it a long time ago.  I just never got to apply it as a doctor.  That's what I was interested in and baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That changed, by the way, but it was baseball when I was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you have like a--was there, I guess, an inspiration to pursue medicine that came from popular culture or was it a personal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know where it came from.  I honestly don't know.  I don't know if I had some high regard for some doctor that I met.  There wasn't a doctor in the family.  We didn't have any medical doctors in any branch of my family.  So it wasn't from that.  I'm not sure where it came from.  I honestly don't know, but I do remember being very interested in it for a long time.  I mean really, all the way up to the point where I decided to go to West Point [United States Military Academy].
Speaker 1: I know that was the age of the beginning of the TV doctor shows.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: Ben Casey--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Dr. Kildare, and--
Speaker 2: That's right, and it could have been inspired by that.  I just don't remember what the original inspiration was to be honest with you.
Speaker 1: I remember kids even having 'Ben Casey' shirts one year--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the summertime.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Little doctor's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And doctor kits and everything else, and I had all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you also had access to the anatomy books and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and visible human and all--models.
Speaker 2: But I also had military things too.  So my brother [Leo Brooks, Jr.] and I were very militaristic in our games that we played as children.  You know, a lot of boys played "war," for example.  But we had fatigue uniforms and stuff that my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] would give us, just to keep us connected to what he was doing.  And those are very fond memories for me.  So carrying a weapon, carrying a helmet--and these are toy weapons, obviously, having a monkey gun, these kind of things were part of, part of the fabric of what we grew up doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 33293
Speaker 1: Was your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] around a lot?  I know as a--
Speaker 2: We were fortunate in that regard.  Now, a lot of times military people are taken away quite a bit, but he was there unless he was in Vietnam.  And to his great credit--I don't know how he did it, but when he was there, even while he was working at the Pentagon grueling hours, if he had duty officer or watch officer or something like that in the Joint Staff or in the Army Staff, he'd still escape, get released by his supervisors, come to a basketball game or a football game or a track meet and go back.  And so he didn't miss and it was--my father was absolutely my life.  This is one of those things that I think is one of the great blessings that I enjoy, and not everyone can.  And I certainly appreciate it and try to pass it on to others.  But the men in my life, the fathers, the uncles were abundant.  And I was fortunate.  I know a lot of people that I serve with didn't know the men in their lives.  Their fathers left early in life, were absent quite a bit during segments of their life, may have separated from the family one way or another.  And that's not what I experienced.  The men were all there, so both my grandfathers were devoted to their wives until they died.  My uncles were there.  I knew my uncles.  My uncles were close to their wives and to their brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law.  It was just close knit, and I have to believe that that has an impact on my psychology.  I'm certain of it, but it certainly gives me an opportunity--I don't have any children of my own.  My wife and I don't have any children, biological children.  And so in many ways, I'm a surrogate father to a lot of military men whose fathers left them early in life, and I, I--as I look back, I discover that I'm, I spend lots of time with men like that, just to--not consciously, but I think probably in reality, subconsciously, trying to be that for them because I know how important it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 33294
Speaker 1: Are there any particular teachers or mentors other than your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.] and mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks], other than your parents that emerged during this time in growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember, I remember a lot of my teachers.  The mentors, probably is not the right word.  I have had contact with one of them in my adult life, but I remember all of them.  And they were inspirations to me.  They were disciplinarians, which I needed 'cause I was a curious child.  I was into a lot of things.  I was, I'd say a pretty smart child, but that smartness sometimes had to be harnessed to be focused in the right direction.  And so they provided that for me in many, many ways.  So I can remember Mrs. Whence (ph.) in third grade, Ms. McPhillips in fourth grade who I heard from in 2003 when I was so visible.  I can tell you a story about that at some point and time if you'd like.
Speaker 1: Well, this is the time, I think, so.
Speaker 2: So it's Shirley McPhillips, Bryn Mawr Elementary School [Alexandria, Virginia], my fourth grade teacher.  She was a young, a young woman at the time, but married.  And I think I probably had a school-boy crush on her in fourth grade.  But I remember that her husband, she told us, was from England and was an actor in New York.  And so most of the time, she was there in Virginia and her husband was up in New York.  And I remember giving her a cup of tea one day because it was clear she was thinking about her husband, and she still remembered that in 2003 when I was the operations spokesman for Operation Iraqi Freedom, working for U.S. Central Command [CENTCOM], and I was on TV every single day.  I got an email one day from an S. McPhillips.  It said, I just have to ask, I've been watching you on television, and I needed to know, "Are you my Vincent that brought me a cup of tea?"  And I said, yes, this is your Vincent.  And she's in New York still.  I haven't had a chance to catch up with her yet, but I sure want to.  So I told her, and, oh, by the way, I had a kid's crush on you, by the way, I think I oughta tell you that.  So I remember her very, very well.  I remember my fifth grade teacher, Ms. Meredith, who made it very clear, she was a stern disciplinarian, and tried to bring the best out of me at a time when I was extremely mischievous.  So I spent a lot of time in the hallway and in the principal's office when I was in Ms. Meredith's class in fifth grade.  She didn't like my penmanship 'cause I'm left handed, and at that point in time, we used to have penmanship classes, and, you know, left handers have a hard time not smearing or hooking or something that's unusual in writing.  And so I got bad grades in penmanship from Ms. Meredith, and I also remember Ms. Meredith writing in one report card, "Vincent doesn't make use of all the resources available to him."  And since then, I've been very committed to make sure I use every resource that's available to me, much to the chagrin of my staff.
