Story_ID: 95989
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Leon Douglas Bibb, L-E-O-N, D-O-U-G-L-A-S is the middle name, and the last name is B-I-B-B.
Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October the 5th, 1944, in a place called Butler, Alabama, Choctaw County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a television newscaster, and anchorman, and reporter, and all of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 13th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the studios of WEWS Television, the ABC station in Cleveland, Ohio.  Our station is located at 3001 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44115.
Story_ID: 95990
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as just kind of a warm-up.  They're not--these questions don't deserve a long answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Wow, maybe, maybe shrimp would, would be a favorite food.  It would be--it would be one of them.  A good bowl of chili would be another, and do like mahi-mahi fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, unless it would be--unless it would be blue.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn, October--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --early October, when the leaves have begun to change.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii--Maui, Hawaii, that island, Maui.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The true wealth of a nation lies not in its gold or silver, but instead in the knowledge of its sons and daughters.
Story_ID: 95991
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side and then we'll put 'em both together.  So can you give us the--your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Georgia Crowell Bibb, Georgia, traditional spelling, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Crowell is her maiden name, C-R-O-W-E-L-L, last name Bibb, B-I-B-B.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on December the 14th--we think 1920; sometimes we feel 1919, 1918--but December the 14th.  Her death of death was June 11th, 2011.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Lisman, Alabama
Speaker 1: That's L-I--
Speaker 2: L-I-S-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where is Lisman by?
Speaker 2: Lisman is about fifty miles from Mobile, Alabama--north of Mobile, Alabama.  Probably the closest, biggest city for Lisman would be Meridian, Mississippi, across the state line, Choctaw County--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Alabama.
Speaker 1: So near the Gulf, not too far from the Gulf.
Speaker 2: Near the Gulf.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them, and what activities were they engaged in?
Speaker 2: I, I, I can go back certainly to her, her mother and father.  After--before that, it, it, it gets a little--a little--a little murky.  Her father was Henry Crowell, and, and, and he married Katie Easley [Crowell].  She was from a place called Ryderwood, Alabama, R-Y-D-E-R-W-O-O-D--I believe Ryder, maybe R-I-D-E-R, but Ryderwood, Alabama.  And he was in his early 30s when they married, and she was I'm, I'm guessing around 18.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were--they were, I supposed married around the turn of the century, right or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't know the exact--
Speaker 1: Or, or well, in the 9--
Speaker 2: I've seen--
Speaker 1: --in the 1920s--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --probably.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so they were probably born around the turn of the century, huh?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, he, he was born--doggone it.  He lived to be 94.  He died in 1978--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whatever that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --tells you.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he was born in 18--around 18--in the 1880s--late 1880s [sic, 1884].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now were there, there any stories about--what, what did they do for a living in--
Speaker 2: I like to tell people that my grandfather was a carpenter like Jesus, and that's pretty much what he did.  He, he was self-taught.  He could not read nor write.  And he built many a house, many a church building I suppose, all kinds of buildings; but he was a carpenter.  And grandmother was a--well, they had a little farm.  They owned a little garden.  They had cows and a couple of hogs and chickens of course, and, and she ran--she ran the home and the garden.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a small farmer.  And, and, and he wasn't I guess just, just a carpenter.  He was some sort of a contractor too if he built--he, he built--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I, I, I, I don't know how much of a contracting--I mean in those days--I mean he was--he was building whatever, whatever needed to be built, and he did farming on the side.  I do know that when I was sixteen in the--in the early 1960s, I went to visit them in Alabama.  My family, my mother, father [Leon Bibb], and sister, we went to visit, and he had a job at a--at, at a--at a former mansion at, at, at what he called a "slavery time house," had big pillars like you see in those in, in, in the documentaries.  And he did some concrete work there.  So I, I don't know how he got that job, but, but it was kind of a like a pickup job.
Story_ID: 95992
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories on your mother's [Georgia Crowell Bibb] side of the family through your grandparents [Katie Crowell and Henry Crowell] about emancipation or Reconstruction or that period of time in the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at one time--my mother always said at one time the family--this would be before my grandfather's time, during--right after the Civil War, we owned, or the family owned, 960 acres of Alabama land.  And I guess that land was purchased immediately after the Civil War, when the Union troops were still in the South and Reconstruction was going on before the Black Laws took over.  And that land got divided up by, by, by, by the--by the--by, by the--by the black people in the family.  It got divided up one way or other--others of it got stolen.  It, it, it just went away.  And my granddad always felt that he had a piece of that land coming.  His half-brothers had some of the land I'm told.  I don't think they had anywhere near 960 acres, which is about 960 football fields, if you wanna know what an acre is.  And he died wanting to go back to Alabama to get that--to get his share of that land.  I wish he could have.  It would have been handed down to me too.
Speaker 1: Right, that--that's, that's something.
Story_ID: 95993
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so--now did your--oh, I, I didn't ask about your [maternal] grandmother, Katie Easley [Crowell].
Speaker 2: Katie Easley.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know, know my--much about her.  There, there was some--I--other than there was some Indian background there.  And, and, and, and some white background.  You could look at her and see that she was very, very light-skinned woman.  And as everybody said, she had long hair all the way down her back.  I mean I would always hear that.  That always--those two phrases always went together.  I, I remember meeting her mother, which would be my great-grandmother.  I remember meeting her once, but I was very, very little, very small, but, but I do remember here meet--meeting her--don't know a lot of stories about them before they got married.  But I'd hear stories--but I got to know them because, you know, they, they lived-granddad [Henery Crowell] lived up until--you know, into my adulthood.  Grandmother died when I was in college.
Story_ID: 95994
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did your mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] talk about what, what it was like when she grew up?  Now did she grow up in, in Lisman [Alabama] then?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Lisman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She talked about it was hard work farming, running the garden, and sloppin' the hogs, and the outdoor toilet and, and no running water.  She talked about, as a child, studying by lamplight.  I remember my kids asked her one day well, "What did you do if you had to go into another room that was dark."  She says "Well, the other room wouldn't be dark because I would take the light with me."  So she, she grew up--she and my dad used to talk about--kid each other about when their towns--my dad was in northern Alabama and my mother, mother in southern Alabama--about when their towns got electricity.  And my father [Leon Bibb] would always say "Well, my town was a little bit--a forerunner of your town.  We got electricity earlier--early than you folks got electricity."  So it was kind of a--kind of a standing joke.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your mother have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she graduated from high school, and she went to college.  She went to Alabama State Teachers College, which is now called Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know the name of her local school she came out of?
Speaker 2: She had graduated from Choctaw County Training School.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's important, Choctaw County Training School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There seemed to be a convention where schools for black people--African Americans--were always called training schools--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --instead of--yeah.  So, so she went to Choctaw County Training School, indicates it's supported by the county--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on some level, and then to Alabama State.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she study education?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she become a teacher as a result?
Speaker 2: She became a teacher.  She, she got on an associate degree is what I was told.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she became a teacher and I, I--and at one time she was--well, I guess this would have been after I was born.  After they got married in 1942, I was born in '44 [1944].  At some point early on, mother and dad were back in his hometown [Hartselle, Alabama], although they got married here in Cleveland [Ohio].  They were back in his hometown when the war [World War II] ended, and she was teaching down there for a while at, at a school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Black school obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so she got what, what would be an associate's degree or--seem like they--is that what they call a normal degree I those days (unclear) call--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called--I know--I know--and I never knew how that, that word normal came.  But it was Alabama--I've, I've seen writings where it made a reference to Alabama State Normal School or Alabama State Normal University or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, usually that's a teach--it's a--with that degree you can teach school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in, in the state system or, or county system.  Okay, so, so she--alright-- so she went to Alabama State.  So, so she was there for two years then right, in--this is in ma--Montgomery?
Speaker 2: Montgomery.  And, and I know she spent some time at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University in Huntsville, Alabama].  I don't know how that worked out, if that was in between, but, but she, she was at both places, but mostly Alabama State--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Teacher's School, where she--where she met my father.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was an upperclassman, and, and she was I guess a freshman.
Speaker 1: All right, well, I'mma go to him right now, and we'll, we'll--then we'll put 'em together after we--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --get his background.
Story_ID: 95995
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full name is Leon Bibb.  No middle name--
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: --although he tried several times to give himself a middle name.
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: When I was born he said that boy is gonna have a middle name because I've always felt incomplete.  So I--they made sure I had a middle name, so I'm Leon Douglas Bibb; he was Leon Bibb.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so--and, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 16th, 1917, and he died December the 15th, 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Hartselle, Alabama, H-A-R-T-S-E-L-L-E, which is in Morgan County, Northern Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so once again then, how far back can you trace your father's side of the family, and what activities were they engaged in?
Speaker 2: We can go back to--his mother was Estelle Garth [Bibb], G-A-R-T-H, Estelle Garth, and she married Lee Bibb, my father's father.  Lee Bibb was the child of a white man and a black woman.  I'm uncertain of my--of his mother's name, my, my great-grandmother.  I'm uncertain of--there are a couple of names that rattle around in my brain that I'd heard--Mary or Amanda, something like that.  But, but at any rate, she was a Bibb, and, and he, he, he--she, she gave birth to this half-white child.  My granddad says--told the story, as told to me from my parents, that he once met his father walking down a road.  And he says to the white man: "They tell me you're my--you're my daddy."  And the man says, "Who tells you I'm your daddy?"  He says, "Everybody in town tells me you're my daddy."  And he says, "No, I ain't your daddy."  And then he walks down the road a little bit farther, and the man says yeah, "I'm your daddy, so what?"  And that was his relationship with his father.  That was the only relationship he had.  He was born--I've got the figure.  I've got it somewhere, 'cause I've got some papers down, down in my desk at work-18-- something.  But, I do know when World War II came up, he was like forty years old, but he had to--World War I, rather, World War I--and he had to sign up for selective service.  But, but that--that's the storyline of Lee Bibb, who had been married once before, and his wife died of natural causes, very young--young woman, 18 to 22, somewhere in that time period.  And, and Estelle met him, and supposedly she said "Well, you know, you and I can get together; I'm a strong woman, and I can do this and I can do that."  And, and they married, and they had a houseful of children in--which included my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so, now what did Lee Bibb do for a living?
Speaker 2: Lee Bibb was a--was a, a farmer too.  At one time, they had--they had something called the farm.  They had some land and--but that got lost in the Depression.  My father said that his father, Lee Bibb, was not a very good businessman, and they lost the farm.  And my dad said that his mother, my grandmother, Estelle, bought a house in town, in Hartselle, Alabama.  And she said supposedly Lee, the children and I had bought a house and we're moving into town, if you like you may come with us.  But supposedly the house was in her name.  I know she sold ointments for Sayman Salve, S-A-Y-M-A-N--Sayman Salve, Sayman Products.  And she would get these in the--in the mail order, and she would sell them around, around the community there to, to, to help with the--with the money that they made from farming and raising hogs and milking cows, and all of that.
Speaker 1: Sayman's--how do you spell that again?  S--
Speaker 2: S-A-Y-M-A-N, Sayman.
Speaker 1: Salve--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sayman, yes--Sayman Products.  It was--but they had a--they had a salve.  I remember 'cause my father kept the salve, and, and I used the salve as a child.  Anything you had--if you had a skin irritation, he'd say put some Sayman Salve on it.  And he'd go get this bottle of Sayman Salve, and they would put it on the ointment on your hand--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, was it the, the kind of thing that you could put it on burns and/or put it on your hair or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, cures, cures everything.
Speaker 1: Rub it on your chest if you have a cold.
Speaker 2: You got--all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, there were--there are still some products like that that are sold in the country now that do that.  But yeah, I guess there are several different kinds of these products.  But okay, so she had a--so she had a side business selling these?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95996
Speaker 1: So now did--your father [Leon Bibb] now, he had a chance to go to school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I saw his graduation picture.  What was the name of his school?
Speaker 2: He went to Morgan County Training School right there in Hartselle, Alabama--Hartselle [dif. pronunciation], as they call it.  And then he went off to the, the Alabama State Teachers College.  He, he had a teacher by the--that he called Mr. Fred, and I assume that's Mr. Fred's picture--that's pictured in my dad's gradu--high school graduation picture.  And it was Mr. Fred who told him that he had an ability and that he should go to college.  And my father went and told his parents [Lee Bibb and Estelle Bibb] that he wanted to go to college.  And they, of course, said "Well, you know we don't have any money, but we got enough kids here on the farm to help the farm, keep the farm going."  My father was one of seven or eight kids.  And so they took him to the railroad station there, and they put him on the train.  And they reached in their pockets, and all they had was about a dollar, and they gave him the dollar.  And Lee Bibb told young Leon Bibb, eighteen years old--he says I want you to remember who you are and who your family is.  I want you to write your mother often and let us know how you're doing.  And I want you to remember to look out for women, and treat them with respect and kindness.  And I want you to go down to that school, and I want you to do the very best you can.  And my father got on the train with one dollar, and went to the Alabama State Teachers College; got off the train there in Montgomery; got on a segregated bus line of Montgomery--this would be twenty years and two months before Rosa Parks and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--and took the bus to the school.  And when he got there they told him how much money he owed.  And he said "Well, I don't have any money," which he did not, and--but they had a program where he could work it out.  And he cut lawns and washed dishes, and did whatever they told him to do; and that's how he put himself through school.  Took him five years to get it, but, but he got it.  He got a degree, and he was--came out as a school teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he have any stories about school that he--
Speaker 2: He--when he met my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb], he said he met her at a--I think he used the word "lyceum."  That--for some reason that stays.  I don't--whatever that means, but he met her at a dance.  And she dropped her ID card, and he picked it up.  And he looked at it and knew her name then, and then he kind of went up to her and told her all about herself.  And she says how you know about me?  How do you know?  He says oh, "I know all about you.  I know you're Georgia Crowell, and I know you're from Lisman, Alabama," you know, that kind of thing.  And that's how--that's how they got together.  But, but he talked about that sometimes, and they would laugh about that, 'cause they stayed married until he died, more than sixty years.  During a time period, he dropped out of college and showed back home in Hartselle.  And Mr. Fred saw him on the street, the principal of school, and says "What are you doing here?"  And my dad said "Well, I dropped out 'cause I just don't have the money."  And Mr. Fred chastised him, and he says "You get your butt back into that school because something happens if you come home from school.  You'll get tempted.  Something will keep you from going.  You need to get back to that school."  And the next semester my dad was back in school.  He found a way to get back in there and get enough money to do whatever he had to do.
Speaker 1: Well these are tough times for anybody--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --who wanted an education.
Speaker 2: --tough times.  This is during the Depression.  This is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He went to college in 1935, graduated in 1940.
Speaker 1: So even though school was tough, it was probably tough at home too, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Tough everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Tough everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Mr. Fred really made a difference in his life.
Speaker 2: He did.  He, he, he could--my father could, could, could talk about Mr. Fred to the point where tears would come in his eyes as he talked about this man.
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2: Mr. Fred was--I think he was a relatively young man himself.  I don't think he was that old himself to be the principal of, of, of the black school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he's probably the first generation that had an education.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the--that's the--you know, we think about that time, you know, a lot of young school teachers because there, there couldn't be any old ones, you know, or they--or they were rare--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in that setting anyway.  All--everybody that had an education was someplace else--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --not in the rural South.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never thought of it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --like that; I guess it would be.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They were all young.
Speaker 1: So did you ever meet Mr. Fred at all?
Speaker 2: I never did.
Speaker 1: Did he--did, did your father have any idea where, where, where Mr. Fred went?
Speaker 2: No, he, he never--it seems to me they-dad said they had talked on the phone some years later; seem--that sounds familiar now, but, but I, I never met him and knew him to be Mr. Fred, the principal.
Story_ID: 95997
Speaker 1: All right, so this is--so your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb], you told us how they met and--so they--your father was older than your mother and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when they met and after he graduated [from Alabama State Teachers College in Montgomery, Alabama] and she got her normal degree, they--or her associate's degree they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they--
Speaker 2: And they were back down in, in Alabama; they got married up here [Cleveland, Ohio] in '42 [1942].  Dad was in military uniform.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did, did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She went--she went--
Speaker 1: --drafted in--
Speaker 2: I was born during the war, so that's why mother would have gone back to Alabama to be with me 'cause dad was in Europe, along with your father over there in, in Belgium, and France, and Britain, and, and in the final days of the war, Germany itself; in fact he was in Belgium when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So do, do, do you know what brought--now, something brought a lot of black people from Alabama to Cleveland [Ohio] (laughter), and to Ohio period.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so yeah, yeah, this is going on.  They were getting out of Alabama.  And it may seem like a question where the answer is self-evident, but--
Speaker 2: The great migration.
Speaker 1: --did they--yeah.  Did, did they have a specific reason?  Did he know somebody here?  Did he have a job waiting for him or?
Speaker 2: I think he came here--well, well, they had relatives.  Mother had an aunt here, and dad had two uncles here; Lee Bibb's half-brothers were here.  And, and, and so they both came to Cleveland I guess independent of each other in 1940, 1941, somewhere down there, because they were both here on Pearl Harbor day [December 7, 1941] in '41 [1941] before they got married.  And so they, they came to stay with, with relatives, and, and they did.  Dad took a job at--as a--as a chauffeur for a doctor who lived in Shaker Heights [Ohio], where I now live.  And he was a chauffeur for the family, and he drove them wherever they needed to go.  And I'm pretty certain that was before the war [World War II].  My mother was working at a drugstore called Marshall Drugstore [Marshall Drug Co.].  It was I think a local chain here in Cleveland.  Her Aunt Clara Ruffin, R-U-F-F-I-N--Clara Ruffin was the sister of my mother's father, Henry Crowell.  She was married, and, and, and, and so mother moved in with her.  She got off the train, went to the house, and Aunt Clara said "I know this man by the name of John O. Holly."  The main post office is name--in Cleveland is named after John O. Holly.  He was a black man who ran something called the Future Outlook League.  And mother went to John O. Holly on the advice of her Aunt Clara, who was politically connected.  Mr. Holly said "So you're Clara Ruffin's niece; can you work?"  And mother says "Yeah, I can work."  Now this is the day she got in town off the train.  He says he wrote a note: take this note to the white man--or the manager--at the Marshall Drugstore at East 55th and Woodland Avenue, which was right around the corner from where Aunt Clara lived.  Mother walked over there, gave him the note.  The man ran the note and says "Mr. Holly says you're a good worker."  And so he says "Well, maybe I ought to hire you.  He says can you start tomorrow."  Mother says "I can start today."  Well, she started tomorrow, the next day.  My mother had a job within twenty-four hours of getting off the train from Alabama in Cleveland.  And when I looked at a photograph of John O. Holly--I never knew the man.  When I look at a photograph, I sing his praises because of what he did for my mother before I was even conceived, and how he helped her get a start here in Cleveland.  And she and my father later--well, at that time, I--they probably knew each other was coming to Cleveland--hooked up again as--and dated, and, and then got married.
Speaker 1: So they, they, they met in--at Alabama Teachers College?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Dated--
Speaker 2: Dated--
Speaker 1: --there I guess and then--
Speaker 2: Dated there.
Speaker 1: --and came to Cleveland separately.
Speaker 2: Came separately.
Speaker 1: Unbeknownst--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) each other.  Well, I think--
Speaker 1: And then met--
Speaker 2: --they probably knew each other.  That might have been why they were coming.  But, but the, the--they, they, they came separately, but I guess each knew the other was coming.  And, and they were living in the same--it was all in the same neighborhood.  And then they, they got--they got together here.  And on Thanksgiving Day, 1942, they came downtown Cleveland and saw a judge and got married.
Story_ID: 95998
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about John O. Holly, who is now--I mean a, a noted black Clevelander.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's a post office named for him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, last name is Holly.
Speaker 1: H-O-L-L-Y?
Speaker 2: H-O-L-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were telling us--you were--you were gonna tell, tell me about the Future Outlook League.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he ran the Future Outlook League here in Cleveland [Ohio], whatever that was.  I took it to be a kind of a, a helping organization, maybe like an Urban League.  The Urban League existed then, but, but, but he was politically connected to city hall.  I don't think--he, he was not elected to any position, but he was one of the black representatives.  And the city did not have a huge black population at that time, not like it has today.  So he was one of the--one of the, the go-to guys that, that, that city officials went to regarding black affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Future Outlook League.  That's something for me to look up or for anybody watching--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --us could look up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is really sounds--
Speaker 2: I, I, I remember all of this because maybe I got a--I got a mind for the--for that kind of thing, and maybe because I've always wanted to be a journalist, whenever they would talk, I would just drink it all in; I would just listen.  And then I would question my father [Leon Bibb], you know, as you're questioning me about--wait a minute now.  Who, who was this?  Now when did that happen?  I, I would talk to my parents that way, so, so I, I remember a lot.
Speaker 1: Cleveland has a rich history in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the African American community.  We were just interviewing a man who made reference to John Malvin, back in the ni--ni--19th century.  He was an important figure in the black community, much like Holly--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was when, when your parents came.
Story_ID: 95999
Speaker 1: But, so okay, so your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] are married in nineteen four--four-forty-two [1942].  Your father gets drafted, right?
Speaker 2: Dad got drafted.  He was in uniform when they got married.  Pearl Harbor was December the 7th, 1941.  Dad was working at the VA [Veterans Affairs] Hospital as an orderly on Pearl Harbor day, that Sunday.  He talks about everybody tuned to the radio and wanted to know, and then he--everybody ran to the map to find out where was Pearl Harbor.  And within, within weeks he is drafted in to the U.S. Army.  I think he reported for duty in around February of 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear) your father you were telling me earlier was part of the Red Ball Express, right?
Speaker 2: He had mentioned the Red Ball Express.  He had mentioned the Quartermaster Corps, and he said he drove trucks, and, and delivered goods, and ammunition, and food, and all kinds of things like that.  He said he went in through Normandy, not on D-Day [June 6, 1944], but he figures it was some days after Norman--after D-Day.  It might have been a week--two weeks or so after D-Day, so he said.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he had a--there's something of in, in--interest occurred in Belgium, right?  He stayed with a family in, in Belgium?  What was it--
Speaker 2: In, in, in the--in, in the Netherlands.  He, he talked about this, this family.  And I know in one of the photographs I showed you earlier, for the first time a couple of weeks ago, when I knew you were coming, I, I took that out of the plastic case and, and peeled it off the back, and there, there was the young man's name he had given my--the, the family name and, and, and where they--where--I guess the city they lived in.  Of course I've tried to find information, Googled that and I couldn't find too much about, about the family name.  But, but, but that's where they--that's where he said he lived with this family for a while.  Now I don't know if that was a day or two, but, but he always talked about the Netherlands.  He always talked about Holland.  And I do remember he brought home a couple of mementos from, from, from Holland during the war that, that--he brought 'em home after the war, and I grew up seeing those things in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, now (unclear)--this is the time when it was a segregated Army, and this is the first time, or one of the--this is the most intense time probably when the segregated Army was used as a segregated Army.  We had like in World War I black soldiers were attached to the French Army, and they weren't subject to American racism and (unclear), but in World War II they were.  So they are--so did he have any stories about how he was treated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he talked about--he said that he even heard German prisoners of war kind of mocking the United States by saying to the black soldiers: "You say you're fighting for freedom.  How can you say that when you have a black army and you have a white army in the United States?"  Now I don't know if my father heard that himself, but, but he said he had seen German POWs I guess they had just captured.  I don't know what he was doing with them.  I don't think he was guarding them or capturing them, but, but he was--he was there.  And, and so he'd, he'd talk about that story, and he talked about enjoying France, but, but, but--and, and he would talk about the, the, the black--the, the, the, the blacks with he--with whom he served here in the United States and, and, and, and overseas, and about just how they, they shared stories about their lives back home.  He, he once had my mother almost in tears as he was talking about ducking bullets, and, and they bullets were landing all around him.  He was dug in a foxhole, and, and the bullets were hittin' the dirt all around him at the top of the hole--kinda unnerved my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in the midst of action in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the war and--
Speaker 2: And for a while before he shipped out overseas, he studied at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts] for the Army.  Now not--because he, he loved Boston [Massachusetts].  He, he always talked about MIT and Boston.  And my mother joined him up there for a while.  He was on some sort of duty at MIT.  Now I don't know what he was studying and, and why he was in Boston, but it was under the Army, and he was in uniform.
Speaker 1: Well that's mysterious.
Speaker 2: He was kind of proud of that too.  I don't know what, what he was doing there, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's before he was shipped out, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that would have been before he was shipped out.
Story_ID: 96000
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, take it your father [Leon Bibb]--now, now when did he come back from--
Speaker 2: He came--well, he came back at the end of the war [World War II].  Let's see, I'm born in '44 [1944] October.  I was 13 months old when he saw me for the first time.  That would have been November of '45 [1945] he saw me for the first time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he came back to--by then we are living in Lisman [Alabama] with my mother's parents.  'Cause that's where I was born in that--in that part of the state, 'cause dad was gone, and mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] wanted to be with family so she came back to Alabama--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and went back to Alabama.  And that's where I was born, and that's where we stayed.  I did--I didn't--I didn't take to him at first 'cause I didn't know him and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he said "boy, I'm, I'm your father."  And well, that didn't matter to me.  He, he was brand new in the household.  I didn't know who he was at thirteen months old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but soon you were--you were in Cleveland [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: We came to Cleveland.  I guess we would have come to Cleveland shortly thereafter.  I would estimate we were in Cleveland by 1946, sometime in 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You basically--
Speaker 2: Because we--
Speaker 1: --grow up in Cleveland.  That's, that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's, that's the truth of it--
Speaker 2: That's all--all I remember is Cleveland.  I don't--I don't remember Alabama at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is when your--your father gets a job at the post office eventually, right?
Speaker 2: He got a job with the U.S. Navy Department at first as a clerk of some sort, and then he got a job at, at, at the U.S. Post Office.  I would imagine he went to the post office probably around 1947--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we lived with relatives on East 86th Street.  In fact I've done stories on that house when we--the, the Census of 1940 came out just fairly recently, and you can look at up all, all the, you know, where people were living.  And I could see my father was living at this house on East 86th Street in, in Cleveland, right off--right off Buckeye Avenue.  And I've gone back doing a story on, on the Census being release; and to personalize it, I talked about this house here is where my father lived for a while.  And my mother lived there and I--and I guess--I think he lived there a little bit before the war [World War II], and he lived there a little bit--he and mother lived there after the war, and I would have lived there too.  I don't remember living there, but I know in 1947 they bought a home in the Glenville area of Cleveland on Parkgate Avenue.  And all the relatives said: "Why y'all moving so far out?"  Well, it really wasn't that far out, but for us at that time period it was.  It was a predominantly Jewish neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) we bought in 1947.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is the--is this the home you really grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yes, this would--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --be the house.  We lived there for seventeen years.
Story_ID: 96001
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, can you--well, before I go any further, when you think about your parents' personalities, their, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, how they walked, how they talked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father [Leon Bibb].  My father was a man of words.  He, he, he would--he spoke in church as, as a deacon and as a trustee, and later on as the president of the credit union.  He was the church clerk for twenty-two years, and, and people used to like to hear him speak.  And, and when I go to the church I grew up in, people say "You're just like your daddy.  You, you talk just like your daddy."  So, I, I, I grew up taking a lot after him and taking a lot after my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] as well.  They, they worked it well.  I guess he was the head of the household, but mother was always kind of quiet and in the background.  But I think she, she pulled the--she pulled strings when she needed to pull strings, 'cause I could hear them talking.  They'd be in the bed talking sometimes, and sometimes they'd be talking about me.  You know, "What are we gonna do with this boy; gotta get this boy-"you know--you know, doing puberty and all, all that kind of thing.  I was never a bad boy, but they were just always concerned about their firstborn.  And--but I, I think I take after probably both of them, but a lot after my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: In demeanor.  He, he, he loved to--oh, he picked up a few French words during the war.  And he, he--at dinner he might say me "donnez-moi un verre d'eau," "give me--give me a glass of water."  You know he was--he was just--he liked to do that, and he could put on airs when he wanted to.  And, and we all smiled about that 'cause he really liked that, and, and he, he was proud of his education.  He was proud that he was a college man.  He was very proud of that.
Story_ID: 96002
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have one sister--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Shirley, Shirley Blackwell--Shirley Bibb Blackwell.  I guess she, she doesn't use the Bibb, but, but she, she was a Bibb, and she married, married.  Her husband died a year ago, but Shirley Blackwell, and she was born in April 9th, 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay, she's much younger than you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Eight years makes a difference when you're--
Speaker 2: Almost eight years--
Speaker 1: --little kids.
Speaker 2: --seven and a half years thereabouts, un-hum.
Speaker 1: So you, you were basically an only child for a long time.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember the day my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] asked me how would I feel about having a brother or sister, and I didn't know how to answer it.  I--"Well, okay," I--you know, I didn't know the process.  I didn't understand the process of, of having children or siring children or conceiving children.  And some months later Shirley was there.  And I remember they (unclear)--you know how the parents do--"How do you like your new sister?"  And I remember my exact words: "She's okay."  But we're very close.  We're still close, very close.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now do you have--now, now did--what, what does she do today?
Speaker 2: She just retired from AT&T, where she was a department director--director of Outside Planning.  And she had about 250 to 300 employees who would report to her in Ohio and maybe a little bit in the surrounding states.  But she just retired.  The only job she ever had--well, she had had--only company she ever worked for.  She came out of college and went straight to Ohio Bell, which later became SBC, AT&T, and Ameritech, gone through a whole bunch of names, and she just retired after all those years.
Story_ID: 96003
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, moving into the house on Parkgate Avenue [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio].  It just--it's just as vivid.  I would have been three.  Au--it would have been the Autumn of 1947.  And I remember pulling up in a taxicab with my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] because we did not own a hou--a car.  And my father [Leon Bibb] rode in the moving van with the moving van driver, who was bringing what little stuff we had.  And I remember that my aunt--my Aunt Ruby, my father's sister, Ruby Bibb Moreland [ph.], was on the front porch with her son, my cousin, Allen, who was younger than me by a year and a half or so.  It was a duplex--9122 where we lived; 9124 where the Morelands lived.  And my father and--did not have enough money to buy the whole house.  Mother really wanted a single house, but they got a deal on this duplex.  And the real estate man told my father: well, if you got a relative who's a veteran like you, I mean the two of you could buy this house together, and which is what they did.  And so the house was really owned by two families.  The mortgage came to two families, which was--which was, now I look up on it as dangerous to do.  But we moved in--we moved in that day, and my father was, was, was proud of that.  I mean he was really proud.  He had gone through the war [World War II], gone through college of course, and, and had lived with relatives.  And they were just tired of that, and, and, and he wanted to live in his own place and so did mother, so they bought this house.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is Glen--Glen--Glenview?
Speaker 2: Glenville.
Speaker 1: Glenville, all right.  Glenville and--
Speaker 2: The neighborhood.
Speaker 1: --this is on the east side of Cleveland.  And this is--what was--well, what was the major artery running through Glen--
Speaker 2: I would think the major commercial street is East 105th Street.  In those days it had everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everything.  You, you didn't really have to get off East 105th for anything.  You could buy clothes, shoes, hats, barbecue, ribs, chicken, shoes, hardware, grocery stores, everything; there were nightclubs.  As it became more of a black community, that first wave of blacks of which we were in--as it became--it was the black middle class.  And many people grew up in, in that neighborhood.  But that was the, the main commercial artery through the Glenville area.  We, we lived within oh, I'd say about 400 yards of East 105th Street.
Story_ID: 96004
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell us, in terms of that--the atmosphere in the neighborhood, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: On one end of us was the Cultural Gardens, which ware internationally known.  You can look that up, the Cultural Gardens of Cleveland [Ohio].  We lived right near the Italian Cultural Garden.  That was at the other end of Parkgate [Avenue], down toward the park end.  And so throughout--from Lake Erie all the way to University Circle are garden which are celebrations of the people who helped settle Cleveland, the, the various ethnic groups.  And there were many of these gardens.  The, the land was given by John D. Rockefeller [Sr.] to always be a park, so they built the Cultural Gardens I would imagine in the 1930s or late '20s [1920s][sic, the first garden was built in 1916].  That was on one end.  So it was a--it was a green space, which is still there.  You could walk along then and see tributes in this garden, the German Garden, the Hungarian Garden, the Hebrew Garden, the British Garden, the Russian Garden.  On the other end of east--of, of Parkgate Avenue was East 105th Street.  There were nightclubs there that, that that the, the black middle class went to.  Count Basie might, might perform there or, or Sarah Vaughan.  I can remember seeing signs, "Sarah Vaughan is singing tonight"--nightclubs, and as I told you, the, the shoe stores, and the grocery stores--many grocery stores.  We went to a grocery store which was owned by a man whose name was Morris.  They called him Moe.  He was a Jewish man.  I don't recall whether that's his first name or last name, but they would go to Moe until the supermarkets came.  And then Moe was very much worried about the supermarkets.  And we were started going to the A&P and another one called Fisher Foods [later called Fazio's], which was on, on East 105th Street, about, about two miles away--two and a half miles away.  We started going there.  But it was vibrant, neon lights, good looking men in suits, good looking women in dresses and high heels on Friday and Saturday nights, and it was vibrant--churches, which had been former synagogues when the Jews had East 105th Street.  Many of the Jewish merchants were still there however, drugstores--Rubin Drugstore was at the corner of Summerset Avenue and East 105th.  There was a thing called Parkgate something at the end of Parkgate, my street, on East 105th Street.  Soda fountains were in there, and you could go get a scoop of ice cream and some soda pop, and make yourself a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a drink right there or--and you could--there was a, a hotdog place next door to that.  There was a place that sold records next to that, the first recordings--music records--I ever bought was on East 105th Street.  And there were movie theaters at the corner of East 105th and Superior Avenue, one of the main streets in Cleveland.  And Liberty Theater was there, and I would say probably half my life has been spent in that movie theater, even ha--even today I--we went there on Saturdays, we went on Sundays, and we stayed all day.  So there was always something to do, and it was safe and pleasant.  We were bicyclers, the boys in the neighborhood.  We rode our bicycles all over town, and nobody ever worried about not coming home, and our parents never worried about where we were.  They just know we were on our bicycle.  We could be five miles away, and we were--and, and nobody worried about getting shot, or robbed, or abducted.  That just was not on our radar screen.  I imagine some of those things were happening, but I never knew anybody who was shot, and I never knew anybody who knew somebody who was shot, and I never heard a gunshot unless it was on New Year's Eve somebody would fire a weapon into the--into the air to, to celebrate the turn of the New Year.
Story_ID: 96005
Speaker 1: School was right across the street.  My elementary school was right across the street, and I remember--
Speaker 2: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 1: Miles Standish Elementary School.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It is still there.  It is now called Michael R. White Elementary School, named after the former mayor of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Somebody a little close to home than Miles Standish--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A--yeah, Miles--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: --Standish being, what, the captain of the Mayflower or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Miles Standish was--he was involved with, with--during those Pilgrim/Puritan times.  I'm not certain where he was, but, but seemed to me--I know he's, he's in historical lore in, in history.  And, and that school is still there, and, and I--in fact I've been in that school recently to do a promo for Channel 5, saying it was in this school where I began to write.  And it was in this school in the 6th grade my 6th grade teacher came up to me and told me that I had a, a talent for writing, and he encouraged me to go into journalism.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we've gone back in--I've--so I was in that school fairly recently.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you--so you liked to write when you were in school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And you were going to the movies--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Going to the movies all the time.  I still do.  I still look at movie--I still look at old movies.  I mean if I see an old movie that I saw in the Liberty Theater, it's like I'm back in a movie theater again.
Speaker 2: And you're also listening to the narratives of your relatives and asking questions.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is interesting.  So this is--this is really setting you up to be a reporter or to be in the news or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was--it's so--
Speaker 2: And I mean these, these are--
Speaker 1: It's what I remember.  Now the story about--as I told you about when my granddad [Lee Bibb] died--I think we were on camera when we were talking about that--and went to the funeral in 1955, and the old white people around.  Nobody in the family remembered that but me.  And when I mentioned it, people say you know I haven't thought about that since that happened in 1955.  But I was almost 11--10 years old, and I guess I, I, I was--I grieved over my granddad's loss, but I didn't know him that well, so I was just drinking in the scene while they were crying.  I'm just drinking in the scene remembering, and it made an impression on me.  And so early on family members, and, and my classmates, and my teachers realized that, that I had a gift for words and description.
Story_ID: 96006
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when you were coming along, how soon did your family get television?  Was, was it--'cause you're right in that age where television was just starting to come.  You must have been about five I guess or six when the television came into--
Speaker 2: I would have been six.  We got it in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: I remember--I remember the day.  I remember the year 'cause we really wanted one.  We got a twenty-inch Muntz television, M-U-N-T-Z.  And I think about it every time I drive Euclid Avenue, because the building we bought it at is still there.  I mean they don't sell televisions.  They're doing something else, but, but--
Speaker 1: Muntz, I haven't heard of that brand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Muntz television.  It was a 20--I think it was 20-inch I believe.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty good size for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Pretty good si--maybe it was a 20-inch, but--like that--I guess--I don't know--about like that I guess.
Speaker 1: They call--yeah, they had--they had a lot of 21 inches for some reason in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That seemed like a popular size, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when your--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was a round screen or did it have the--
Speaker 2: It was kind--it was, you know, more rectangular--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --rounded on the corners.  And, and I remember the, the first show I remember looking at was "Ed Sullivan's Toast of the Town."  And that's what--the "Ed Sullivan Show" was called before it became the "Ed Sullivan Show"--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --"Ed Sullivan's Toast of the Town."  I think that had been--I think that had been the name of his column when Ed Sullivan was a columnist in New York.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's right.  So the "Ed Sullivan Show," the--so did, did you watch a lot of television or?
Speaker 2: A lot of television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Especially on the weekends, you know, the Saturday--the Saturday lineup.  I mean "Fury," "Captain Midnight," the cowboys, the cartoons, "The Three Stooges," "The Little Rascals," all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact I got friends I talk to, and we talk about--we talk about it like it was yesterday.  In fact somebody asked me about--the other day.  Do you remember the Andy Devine show ["Andy's Gang"]?  I says yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's--they had a character, Froggy the Gremlin on that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: --remember that.
Speaker 2: "Froggy, plunk your magic twanger" [sic, "pluck your magic twanger, Froggy"].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Now who else would know that but you and me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's amazing.  Like, a lot of people I interview, they, they--they're in households that--especially if they're success--successful, they, they don't see that much television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but I--but I do remember it.  So, yeah, so TV--what, what about radio?  Did you--
Speaker 2: We had a radio.  We had a big standup radio.  And before we got the TV, I used to listen to a broadcast that came on WJW on the radio, 850 on the AM dial, and it was "No School Today."  I think that was the name of it.  Yeah, "No School Today."  And the--and the, the theme song was the "The Teddy Bears' Picnic."  Why--I tell you I, I remember.
Speaker 1: That was a recreational show for kids.
Speaker 2: For kids--it was a children's radio show before TV had gotten its big foothold, and then maybe--some of those shows just came over to TV, you know some of those shows that we looked at, you know, those comedy shows that--you know, "Burns and Allen," [George Burns and Gracie Allen] and "Amos 'n' Andy," all of it that come over from radio.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, the news I think was fifteen minutes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Network news.  You had Douglas Edwards and pe--people like that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: John Cameron Swayze.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That's in--that's my area.  So all of that--all of that is going in here.  And early on I'm saying that's what I wanna do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know at that time I could not do it because I was black, but I didn't know that at the time when I was--as a child looking at this.  But, but you know, John Cameron Swayze's--I think the newscast was called "The Camel Caravan" [sic, "Camel News Caravan"].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: All of that was coming in.  And, and I'm a child.  I'm a child of, of, of, of the television age, and it, it, it colors so much of, of my life, and, and it, it, it affected so much in my life.  And, and to this day I can remember--I can remember specific news reports I saw as a child, and how they phrased themselves, and how they handled themselves.  And for a while I wanted to be a, a pitchman.  I wanted to be an announcer, and I wanted to sell cigarettes, 'cause the guys who sold cigarettes on TV sounded so great.  And I've gone back on YouTube and looked at a lot of this in recent years, as a guy, guy who says, you know--he'd take a drag--smoke Parliament, the best taste yet in a filtered cigarette (laughter).  That's what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 96007
Speaker 1: In terms of television, was there any particular news story from the era when you were growing up that really--that you really remember that really made a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Certainly the civil rights--the whole civil rights thing.  I mean I remember when--I think her name was Autherine Lucy at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  I think I got the name right.  I remember--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --seeing that and, and how that--how that frightened me as a--as a--as a kid, you know, what--how, how the segregationists didn't want her there, and, and you know, I wondered what was wrong with her; what--why couldn't she go to that school?  And then the, the whole Civil Rights Movement, I, I saw that unfold on television, including the--you know the, the historic "I Have a Dream" speech [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], 1963, and the Little Rock story [the Little Rock Nine] of '57 [1957], and all, all of it, that, that whole thing.
Speaker 1: Now the Montgomery Bus Boycott must have really resonated at--in your household, with your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] having gone to Alabama Teacher's College--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it did.
Speaker 1: --and Alabama State [Alabama State Teacher's College] (unclear)--right there in Montgomery.
Speaker 2: It, it did, you know.  And that's why when I talked about my father riding the bus to go from the train station to college there, once he got into Montgomery--I always say this was twenty years and two months before Martin Luther King and, and Rosa Parks.
Speaker 1: Now one of the strangest sights--one of the bat--most baffling things I've ever seen when I actually was in Montgomery and saw the relationship between Dexter Avenue [King Memorial Baptist] Church and the Justice Department of the State of Alabama and the Statehouse.  They're all on the same street that you can--
Speaker 2: Oh is that--
Speaker 1: It's almost like, like a play.  You can look from the church to the Department of Justice down to the Statehouse.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: They're right--they're right there together.
Speaker 2: I got a call the other day from somebody saying that those four girls were, were, were, were killed at the--when the sixth--16th Street [Baptist Church] I think it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in Birmingham [Alabama] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when they were killed in Birmingham, there was a fifth child with them.  I don't know if she was wounded or hurt, but somebody sur--or a friend.  She was coming to Cleveland [Ohio] speak, and they were trying to get her--get--get an interview for her.  I got a phone call on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah it's--
Speaker 2: So that's been very much on my mind, you know, the, the civil rights time and the bombings in, in Birmingham, and, and all the stuff in Montgomery and--
Story_ID: 96008
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so now were, were, were your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] involved in any of the civil rights organizations in the Urban League or in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or any of that in--
Speaker 2: I--not, not, not greatly involved.  They, they lent certainly emotional support, and maybe some financial support, but I do not remember my parents walking in, in, in, in demonstrations here in Cleveland [Ohio].  I do not remember that.  They may have here or there, but I do not remember that at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, yeah, okay.  Now and that's, that's later on, right?  Or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's, that's later on during my college years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you remember the Emmett Till incident in the Jet mag--I mean the photos in Jet--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah in--was that 1954?  Am I right--'54 [1954], '55 [1955] in that time period [sic, 1955]?
Speaker 1: You were either 10--
Speaker 2: I do remember--
Speaker 1: --or 11 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember that.  And, and it was kind of like--my dad would talk to me about it.  And, and of course, you know photograph was flashed all over the--all over Jet magazine.  And in recent years, I, I, I have learned that, that his mother wanted that photograph in, in Jet magazine so she could see what they'd done to her son.  And I, I remember that, and, and that, that played on my mind when we would travel South during the segregation years.  We would always leave Cleveland around 2:00 in the morning, so that we could drive nighttime as much as possible in Ohio, so that when we got to Cincinnati [Ohio] to cross over the Ohio River into Kentucky that the sun was just coming up.  And we would take advantage of the sunlight all day love to drive into the South, so as not to be driving in the South in the darkness as much as we could.  And I remember having images of the Emmett Till story and of the Ku Klux Klan, and being afraid as we sat in the car driving South to visit my grandparents or to go to a funeral of a grandparent.  And I would hear the older folks--my parents and the older ones, older than them, talk about it, and how my father would always caution me to be aware of where I was, and if I saw white folks walking down the street in the South to just step off the sidewalk and let them pass so that he didn't want me to be Emmett Till.  He didn't want me to get in a mess.  He didn't want me to say the wrong thing, and to always say "yes sir" and "yes ma'am" because we were just trying travel South.  And they often talked, and sometimes parents forget that the children were in the backseat listening.  And they would talk about their Northern license plates on our car, and that we didn't want somebody to think that we were coming down there trying to upset the society down there.  We were simply going to visit grandparents.
Speaker 1: Yep, sheriffs and police departments down South were on the lookout for Northern agitators--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and people they thought were coming down to--
Speaker 2: I remember we stopped, I think it was in Kentucky, and we stopped at a--at a roadside--it was in the city--it was in a city.  We stopped at a--at a roadside hamburger place.  And I remember my father went up to the window to order some, some Coca-Colas.  And I remember how he put on his best voice and tried to look as neat as possible to ask if it was okay if we got a few Coca-Colas.  And they served him the Coca-Colas in, in cups and straws, and we got in the car and we drove away, and, and they kind of laughed about--you know, that was a success, and we didn't have any problems.  Well, when you're--talking about we didn't have any problems ordering our soda pop, I'm in the backseat sipping my soda pop wondering "What kind of world is this, and why I gotta--why does it have to be this way?  And why must I have to watch what I say and how I walk and, and just keep my mouth shut?"  And, and they would tell me, and, and, and, and I, I hated to go South.  I mean I--I guess I wanted to see my grandparents I guess, but I just didn't like that society.  I didn't like that.  I--I'm from Cleveland, and I'm used to going pretty much wherever I wanted to go, although I didn't spend a lot of time in, in white neighborhoods, you know.  But, but I was used to not being worried about riding my bicycle someplace.  And, and that laid heavy on my mind, and, and I've written about that, about--through the eyes of this child how I remember, you know, segregated toilet facilities and, and all that kind of stuff.  And, and, and it, it did bother me.  And, and I would--they would always caution me, and, and I guess I always cautioned myself just to--I did not want to be Emmett Till.
Story_ID: 96009
Speaker 1: Now was, was church important when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I grew up at Liberty Hill Baptist Church.  And I was presented in that church, I guess, when I was a little boy here in Cleveland [Ohio].  And I was blessed, as they bless children in the Baptist Church.  And years later I, I was baptized at the--at the age of ten.  In fact, I've got a photograph somewhere.  I wish I'd brought it with me--photograph of my being baptized by the Reverend Milton E. Wilson, Sr.  And I remember how he--my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] and my father [Leon Bibb], of course, sitting in the congregation, very much involved in the church, and how I joined the church a few Sundays before when a whole bunch of kids joined.  My kids love to hear me tell the story that Reverend Wilson that Sunday was preaching hard to the children.  They had all the children come and sit on the front row, or the front two pews, and he was gonna preach directly to us.  And periodically a kid would join the church and you know, go up and shake the pastor's hand.  My father was on the usher board, so he was always on his feet.  He could move around almost unnoticed during those times in the church.  And he came and whispered in my ear: "This'd be a good day for you to join the church just like the other kids."  I, I did nothing.  Reverend Wilson continued.  He had a full head of steam, and he was preaching the gospel.  A couple more kids joined.  Twelve kids joined, and I was still sitting there.  My father came to me a third time, and he says--grabbed me under the arm, held my arm up and says "Give the pastor your hand; you're joining the church today."  So I went up and gave the pastor my hand, and he says "and we have little Leon Bibb, little Leon, Jr."--although I was not a junior, but--"here's little Leon Bibb, Jr. joining the church; and what is your testimony son?"  I was ten years old.  I said "Uh, uh, uh, uh, I found the Lord" (laughter).  And everybody said "Amen, Amen."  And my father looked at me and he smiled, and nodded his head approval, and later told me: "I understand that I kind of pushed you," he says.  "But you'll understand; by and by you'll understand."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I told that story in that same church when we buried my father many years later, about how my father was so wise and how he wanted me to have a Christian life.
Story_ID: 96010
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now in school, now were there, there--were there any special teachers or mentors at the grade school level?
Speaker 2: Robert Taylor was my sixth grade teacher [at Miles Standish Elementary School in Cleveland, Ohio].  He was about twenty-five years old at the time, estimated I would imagine, black man, lived in the neighborhood, and he probably was the teacher who inspired me the most.  We--as we were graduating or close to graduation, a few months away--a few weeks away--he says "I noticed you're pretty good with words, Leon.  Would you like to write the graduation play?"  And I says "Yes, I would," so he and I worked on the play.  And even after school we worked on the play a little bit.  And my parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] knew where--knew him.  He lived in the neighborhood.  The school was right across the street, so it was okay for me to be an hour late coming home if they knew what I was doing.  And I wrote the play, and put myself in the play and--not the lead role, but in a supporting role.  End of that graduation period, we put the play on, and mothers and fathers applauded.  Mr. Taylor came up to me in the gymnasium as we were having cake and ice cream and punch.  And he said "Son, I want you to know something.  You have a God given gift, and it's words."  That's exactly what he said.  He said if "I were you I would think about a career where I could use words.  I see you as a playwright or as a journalist."  The lights went on in my brain.  From that moment on, that precise moment in time, 1956, I knew exactly what I wanted to be.  I was 11 years old, soon to be 12 at the end of three more months, and I, I was inspired by that.  Years later, when I came back to Cleveland after working in a couple of other cities in television, back in the early '80s [1980s] I'm here, Mr. Taylor retired from school as a teacher and later a principal.  I was one of the special guests invited to a big event they had-- soiree they had for him that evening--one of the specially invited guests.  School kids over the years come back, and I told the story.  Mr. Taylor remembered me; he remembered the, the play that I wrote; he remembered my graduation class; but he did not remember telling me to be a journalist because he only took ten seconds to tell it.  He took less time than I've taken to tell the story, but it transformed my life.  And he cried; I cried; we embraced; and he audience cried.  And I says "How can I repay you?"  He says "Tell our story."  And so I have vowed whenever I give a speech about education specifically, I always tell his story, or our story.
Speaker 1: So he was your Mr. Fred [Bibb's father's mentor].
Speaker 2: He was my Mr. Fred, very much so, very much so.  He died some years later, and I read about it in the paper.  I went to the--to the service that day.  His wife saw me come in.  And I was sitting in the back of the--of the chapel where we were at, and she looked at me and she says "come forward, Leon.  Sit with me," she said.  "You were like a son to Bob; you are family."
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Now as you listen to that story, and you dig deep into that story, as you drill down in that story, there are lessons there.  And I tell those lessons when I talk to the kids about what they can be, and about parents, about how they can inspire; and I tell that to teachers.  And when I tell that story to teachers, when I'd speak to teacher groups or conventions of educators, man, you ought to see the tears.  Teachers start crying, 'cause I tell them about the power that you have with these young minds.  And I really think that's Bob Taylor's legacy--Mr. Taylor's legacy.  He--he's in me.  And oftentimes when I go to give a speech about education, I take his photograph and I put it right in my pocket, put it right up against my heart.
Story_ID: 96011
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you go to middle school?  Was there a middle school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Empire Junior High [School].  We called it junior high in those days, but I went--between the 7th grade and the 9th grade is junior high.  And I went to Empire, which was in the neighborhood--great teachers there as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, now did anything special happen there at Empire?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I think just puberty (laughter); puberty is what happened there, and, and beginning to notice the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is '57 [1957] to about 19--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been September '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956] to--
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956] to '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 96012
Speaker 1: Now you were--you mentioned the movies being important.  Now, what, what, what movies made a big impact on you?
Speaker 2: Well, just about all of them.  I mean to this day I look at--I look at movies I've been looking at for 50 years--40 years.  I, I, I think the--I like the Clark Gable, 1959 [sic, 1958] with Doris Day, "Teacher's Pet."  He played a newspaper man.  Humphrey Bogart played a newspaper man.  I forget the name of that movie [Deadline-U.S.A], but he, he played a--he played a newspaper man that was strong-willed, getting the truth out about crime that was happening in the city.  War movies--I always knew that I would be in a war.  "The Bridges at Toko-Ri" with, with William Holden, and Grace Kelly, and, and Frederic March, and, and Mickey Rooney, "The Bridges at Toki-Ri," just about all, all the--all the, the, the war movies, war--I, I loved that time period.  And if I can find a war movie like "From Here to Eternity," which was right at the beginning of World War II--in fact I'm reading the book [by James Jones] right now--if I can find a war movie that has a--that--that's the backdrop is the war, and there's a romantic involvement in that war--"The Proud and the Profane" with William Holden, I love that kind of thing.  All those movies had an impact on me.  "Shane," the western made in 1953, starring Alan Ladd, Van Heflin, Jean Arthur, Brandon De Wilde, Walter Jack Palance, as he used that name in those days, Jack Palance.  That, that movie--I've seen that movie 36 times because it's photographed through the eyes of Brandon De Wilde, who at the time was nine years old, and I was nine years old.  So those movies--and I liked the arts world and the theater world.  I dabble in theater.  I like that world, and, and I like storytelling.  And, and I, I own hundreds of films, and, and my wife [Marguerite Bibb]--I was in bed last night.  My wife came up to bed, and she looked at the TV screen.  "Oh, another black and white film."  She knows that's where I am.  I says, you know--I says well, this is what I like, you know, and she likes them too, but, but perhaps not as much as I.  But every day when I'm getting dressed for work, I usually have a film on.  After I do the news, look at the news, see where the world is, I may tune over and I may look at ten minutes of a film, something while I get dressed.  It's just back--background music or background pictures.
Speaker 1: So I take it the old movies are--you, you like them better than, than--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --today's new movies.
Speaker 2: I, I do, although I like some of today's movies.  I mean I would call "The Godfather"--that would be today's movie, 'cause I'm looking at stuff in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s].  But, but (unclear) I do--I do like the, the old movies with Bogart and, and [Lauren] Bacall, and, and, and, and Mickey Rooney, and, and people like that, the classic movies.  Now there was a lot of junk that was made back then too.  I, I don't fool with that too much, but, but if they were the classic movies--a lot of stuff on Turner Classic Movies I look at.  And, and I could always see myself in there.  And, and, and to this day, when, when I--when I work in television and I'm doing a story, there are--there are scenes that I remember seeing in movies that I try to duplicate on my own camera.  Like the camera you're using right now, I try to duplicate that on, on the camera that, that my camera man is using; tell 'em "I want it shot like this.  I'm thinking of a movie scene, and, and, and I wanna say something inside this frame and, and inside this picture that, that, that we've got."  So, so movies have longed played an important part of my life.  Obviously I love to talk about them; I love to look at them; I love to exchange notes with other people about 'em.  There are people I have emailed back and forth across the country who I know like movies, and we will just email just about movies.  Some people I've never really met, or only met a couple of times, here in the greater Cleveland area, but we talk about movies.  We have a penchant or desire to, to see those movies again.  So, but that's always played a part in, in my life.  And there were movies with black people in 'em and movies with white people in 'em.  As long as it was a good story, you know, I, I, I could look at it.
Story_ID: 96013
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you're really a totally--tau--a total movie buff in that sense that you are thinking about the visuals as well as the storytelling and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm looking at all of that, and you know--because I've seen "Shane" so much, I know the script.  I know what's being said.  The audio doesn't even have to be out.  I mean I could just look, and I say "Well, I know what he's saying right now.  I know what they're saying right now," you know, so, so I like that and the movies like "The Godfather" and, and "Citizen Kane," all the Bogart/Bacall movies, [James] Jimmy Stewart movies.  When you think about it, Larry, what I may know about Charles Lindberg is pretty much colored by Jimmy Stewart's portrayal of him in a 1957 movie ["The Spirt of St. Louis"].  What I may know about Jean Lafitte may be--I think Yul Brynner played--was in that film ["The Buccaneer"]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --you know, may--may be colored but--so I would go to the movie theaters, and they would do a lot of biography kind of stuff, but it would be Hollywoodized all up, I mean part true and part fiction.  But I at least knew the basic storyline of who these people were and, and what they did.  And I think that helped me understand a lot of American history.  It's, it's how it was portrayed in movies.  I'm a veteran of the war in Vietnam, but I know much more about World War II because of movies.
Story_ID: 96014
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, now did you ever think of, you know, be--becoming a film critic or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I've done--I've been in films.  I've been in a couple of films.  We just made one last year [2013] called "Made in Cleveland," and I had a starring role in, in the film.
Speaker 1: This is a commercial movie or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a commercial movie.  It, it may not do that well.  I, I, I don't--I don't think it's doing that well, but, but it was a two-hour long movie.  It was a, a film with 11 different vignettes in it, and I starred in one of the vignettes called "Love of Country."  I play the father of a--of a--of a marine who's killed in the war in Afghanistan.  But all of these stories, separate and unto themselves, are linked by the word love, about love of country, love of people, love something else.  But they all have a common theme through them, and they were all made right here in Cleveland.  It was the largest independent film made entirely in Cleveland I think is what--and the guy right around the corner here one of our--one of our promotion people wa--was one of the co-producers of it.  His wife was my director [Amy Tankersley Swinderman].  So I dabble in, in, in, in, in a couple of movies, and I dabble in live theater as well.  I've done a couple of live theater things, which, which, which I enjoy.  It's hard work, but 'cause I'm still working over here too.
Story_ID: 96015
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So in high school--now, now did you do any theater in high school?
Speaker 2: I had a role in "The Diary of Anne Frank."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the play Mr. Van Daan, one of the Jewish men hiding out from the Nazis in, in I think it was Am--Amsterdam I think is the location of it.  And we were all black, and we were doing--playing all Jews, but that's theater.  And about three weeks before show time I quit.  I don't know why.  Well, I guess I do know why.  I, I, I, I listened to some people who made me feel badly.  And they hurt my feelings about what I was doing, and I walked out, and I shouldn't have done that.  And this is therapeutic for me because I need to apologize to the people who put that play on, and they had to get somebody else to do it.  I wish I'd stayed in it because theater really could have become much more of a love of mine.  I might have gone into theater had I stayed in it.  I went back to Mrs.--Ms. Vasalakis [ph.] at Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio] who was the director, and she was the theater teacher.  I went back once I'd gotten in college, or right after college, to apologize and found out that she had died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So maybe this is my way of apologizing for walking out on something.  And I've told the story a few times too to young people in theater and young people who are doing other things about sticking to--"do what you say you're gonna do; stick to it, and, and, and, and, and follow through."  And that is proba--that is a regret.  I, I, I walked out, and I'm ashamed of that.  And--
Speaker 1: Now did you--well, go, go ahead.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and I, I, I shouldn't have done that, and I'm ashamed that I walked out, but I learned some lessons. And for that reason I don't walk out on people now.  I don't--I don't--even if my feelings get hurt.  If I say I'm gonna do something, I'm gonna do it.  If I say I'm gonna be there, and be in this production, or be in this, I show up and I do my job.
Story_ID: 96016
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did, did you--how were your grades in high school [Glenville High School in Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh God, I was--I was not a good student.  I had a job at, at, at a hospital working in the--in the--in the kitchen for about thirteen months.  And during that time period, my grades really went down.  This was after school--three hours after school and maybe eight hours on the weekends, Saturdays or Sundays, or maybe sometimes both.  And my grades suffered, and I was really getting real concerned about getting into college.  And somehow I got in college.
Speaker 1: So you were in a college prep course, right?
Speaker 2: Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio]--yeah, I was in a college prep course.
Speaker 1: College prep course at Glenville--
Speaker 2: At Glenville, Glen--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Glenville High School.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now did, did you--I, I noticed you did a lot of running in the '70s [1970s] on--as a--as a--you know when you ran here, here as a--as a newsman did, did you run in high school?  Did you run track--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I ran--I ran cross country.
Speaker 1: Cu--cross--
Speaker 2: Ran cross country for one year until I took this job.  I shouldn't have taken that job, 'cause it, it, it really impacted my grades and, and I had pull myself together once I got to college.  Ha--how they--how I talked myself into a college, but I, I got into a college, and, and really kind of turned life around.  I really began to turn it around.
Speaker 1: Now did--now you probably, you know, assumed you were going to college I mean 'cause your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] had gone to college, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and did you have any--what was your counseling like at, at Glenville?
Speaker 2: I think it was very good in those days.  We had very good teachers and, and very good counselors.  The, the--this was the home of the--one of the--one of the pockets of the black middle class in Cleveland.  We had superb teachers.  The, the education I got--although my grades may have not reflected it, but the education I got in the Cleveland school system I would put up against anybody's education in the nation.  I mean at that time period--I mean the physics, the chemistry; oh, the [William] Shakespeare--I still do--I still know Shakespeare from, from being in high school.  I mean I had to memorize long soliloquies.  I still know that.  And a lot of stuff that, that, that, that we had to know I learned, and, and, and I was--I--my, my interest in theater got piqued even more when we would visit theaters and, and see plays.  I remember seeing "Macbeth" and the "Taming of the Shrew" by, by William Shakespeare.  And it was--it was a fine time to get--to get a good education.  Cleveland was called the city--the best big city education.  Nobody ever said urban.  I never heard that word until fairly recently.  The best big city education you could get in the United States was--was told--we were told was in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: What, what about Karamu House?  Did you go there for plays and all--
Speaker 2: I, I did not--I did not work at Karamu House.  I've since gone to there in the--in the last years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you know about it when you were growing up when, when you were kid?  Or, or, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't know much about it.  I knew about it, but, but I, I didn't know much about it.  I probably would've--had I known a little bit more about it, I probably would have become--would have gone over there because I, I did have a feeling for theater, but mostly I had a feeling for journalism.
Story_ID: 96017
Speaker 1: Were, were there any African Americans on television or on the radio in those days as reporters or, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: I saw none, none that I--none that I know of.  I do know that I, I later--years later--met--I forget his name now.  He was the first African-American correspondent on ABC [Malvin Russell Goode].
Speaker 1: Oh, Max Robinson.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: Before Max.  A man older than Max was.  It'll come to me perhaps, but he was out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  But no, there were none that I saw, I mean none.  I, I, I didn't see any.   In high school and, and before I didn't see black folks doing commercials.  Nobody was on television.  I mean--
Speaker 1: You're, you're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --unless it was "Amos 'n' Andy," or Beulah ["The Beulah Show" starred Hattie McDaniel starting in 1947] or somebody like that in, in a comedic role.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're, you're right.  I believe you, yeah.  Na--nobody--what about radio?  Were there any black radio shows or, or hosts when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Just on--just on the black radio stations, WJMO, WABQ here in Cleveland [Ohio], that, that programmed directly to the black community.  I, I knew they were black.  I could hear them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did have some stations that catered to the black community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They played music--you know music stations.
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school--Motown sound, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was a lot of cities--Chicago [Illinois] didn't get WVON until '64 [1964, sic, 1963].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in '64 [1964] so--
Speaker 2: But I remember in, in high school there, there, there were--there were stations, yeah.  There was a guy by the name of "Jockey John" Slade, who was a disc jockey on WJMO, 1490 on the AM dial.  And, and I listen--used to listen to that, and I also--but, but I also began to listen to radio around the country.  I, I would tune in.  I had this little radio that--like a little crystal set that I bought.  And I would lay in bed with a little earphone, and I would go around the country.  I would--one of my favorites was WJR in Detroit [Michigan], which is still on the air--760 on the A--AM dial.  I would listen to WJR, and I would listen to stations around the country.  I liked the idea of being able to draw in a station, you know, from, from far away, maybe a 50,000 watt--W-- KMOX in St. Louis [Missouri] and WLW Cincinnati [Ohio], WWL in New Orleans [Louisiana], WBBM in Chicago [Illinois], [W]NYC in New York [New York City, New York], [W]HAM Rochester, New York.  I'd go around the--on the dial.  I knew where they were.  And I would listen to these announcers, these baritone voiced announcers, and they would just draw me in.  I says "God, I would love to do that."  I would love the way they did commercials, or they just talked.  I just loved that.  And that's all in here too; that's all part of this going toward journalism, and going toward televisions.  That's all in there; it's all part of it.  It makes all sense to me, 'cause all up in there I can--I can still hear their voices.
Story_ID: 96018
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite announcer of all the pe--people you heard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I think I, I liked--as I got older, I like the guys up, up in Detroit [Michigan] on WJR.  There was a guy by the name of J.P. Morgan [sic, J.P. McCarthy].  And J.P. Morgan was--he was a host, and that he would just--he would just--and they play-it was a kind a variety show in the mornings.  And he would just tell stories, and, and I liked him.  As I got into college, I like Sid McCoy, and I think Sid was out of your town of Chicago [Illinois] I believe.  Sid McCoy--that was a jazz station.  And Sid McCoy would, would, would introduce jazz music, which I loved, (unclear)--began--fell in love with when I was seventeen years old.  And he would--he would advertise it.  And it was brought to you by Budweiser beer.  And he'd put that tall beer glass, assumed, by the microphone, and pour in Budweiser beer.  And you could hear the froth on that, and you could hear those bubbles, right.  And he says--and he was talking about jazz music--he says "Tonight's jazz is brought to you by Budweiser beer."  He says "good drinking Bud."  That--and you, you fall in love with a voice; you fall in love with the idea of radio, and very intimate thing is radio.  And, and so I've always--one of the things I wanna do before I leave, I, I, I--this world--and I've filled in a couple of times on the radio stations--I would love to be a late night jazz host, and play some of my favorite music and lay--and just kind of whisper into that microphone.  I would love to do that.  That to me is--that, that to me is the most intimate of, of, of, of, of all the--of all the media, radio, how you use, and when you use, and what you can do to, to the listener's ear.  And, and I never saw what Sid McCoy looked like; I never saw what he looked like.  J.P. Morgan, Morgan up in--up, up in Detroit, I saw--J.P. McCarthy rather, J.P. McCarthy--I, I saw what he looked like years later on a photograph.  And when he died, he died around 1995, 1996, and he was a big name in Detroit.  And they went--they took the, the radio equipment to his funeral.  I had been listening to him for years, and they did--they covered the funeral.  And that Saturday, I--I was working.  And I took about and a half off in between shows and I drove out to Lake Erie, Cleveland lakefront, turned on the radio, and I went to the funeral of J.P. McCarthy, just to pay, pay my respects.  He didn't know me from Adam, but I just wanted to be there and pay respects, and, and listen to what others had to say about this man.  All of these people impacted my life.  They, they weren't black.  They were white, but they impacted my life, and I learned from them, and I said I wanna do that too.
Speaker 1: Just like an author whose book you read or, or you know, people respect the voices they hear on the radio and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --personalities on television.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They feel like they know them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, even though they--
Speaker 2: I get that all the time in my business.  People, people--I was in a--in, in a doctor's this morning, and a woman says "Oh, Mr. Bibb, I love watching you; Mr. Bibb, thank you, thank you for what you do."  I get that all the time.  When I walked in the bank the other day--people see me for ten seconds--"Oh, Leon Bibb, how are you?  Thank you for what you do."  And, and so--and I have kids who tell me, or adults tell me, "You came and spoke at my school when I was in the 6th grade, and I remember your speech," and they quote my speech.  That's very satisfying.  So, I hope I've had the--left an impression on people, a good impression on people.
Story_ID: 96019
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio], did, did--how did you choose Bowling Green State instead Kent State [University in Kent, Ohio], or Ohio State [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio], or some other school?
Speaker 2: I applied to Bowling Green; Ohio University down in Athens, Ohio; and Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio].  And Bowling Green answered my letter first.  So because of those bad grades, I says "I better jump in on this while I can," and, and so I went to Bowling Green.  And, and there was a girl down the street, my, my best friend's sister.  Carl Crew [ph.] was my best friend growing up--one of my best friends; I had a bunch of 'em, but he was one of 'em.  And his sister went to Bowling Green.  She was about a year and a half--two years in front of me, and she always talked about.  So I said "Well, I'll go to Bowling Green," and I can study journalism.  They, they had what I needed, and so that's how I got to Bowling Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bowling Green, right off of I-75 South of Toledo.
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: So what was Bowling Green like in 1962 when you arrived?
Speaker 2: Flat lands, as it still is flat.  The wind just whistles across that flat land.  It was a brand new world.  My mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] and father [Leon Bibb] dropped me off and took me there.  My mother was making my bed and hanging my clothes up.  And dad was looking at his watch saying "Okay, we, we gotta get back to Cleveland now."  It's two and half hour each way.  My mother was hanging around.  And I was kind of saying it's time for them to go 'cause I got to get on with this thing called college.  It was eye opener for me.  I grew to love it, and still do; later became member of the board of trustees appointed by the governor, but that's years later.  It was an opportunity for me to see a whole different world, and to learn what I wanted to learn, and to be around other students who wanted to do what I wanted to do.  There were about nine or ten thousand kids on the campus in those days, '62' [1962].  A hundred and twenty-five of us were black out of the whole student population.  So I wanted to go there and learn, and, and it's where I met my wife [Marguerite Bibb].  And we studied together for four years, and got married, you know, the year we graduated, in 1966--Marguerite Bryant Bibb from Toledo.  I asked her for a date to go see the movie on Friday night.  It was a free movie.  All you had to do was show your student ID, and of which we both had, student IDs.  And I asked her to--if we could go out for a date.  We'd been talking beforehand.  And she says "I study on Friday nights."  She says "but I'll be in the browsing room."  This was a room where it's kind of set aside for quite study.  They had a little symphony music playing on a recorded instrument over in the corner.  And the people would come in there as just kind of a, a nice place to study, the plants, and nice lighting, and a little music going on.  And she says "I study on Friday nights."  She says "Why don't you bring your books and meet me in the browsing room at 7:00?  And we can study for three hours, and if there's time then we can catch the 10:00 movie," which is what I did.  And I think she was holding to her standards, and I think--as we talk about this all the time--I think she was looking at what I was made of, to see what he's about, see if he'll come study.  "You wanna be with me, bring your books," which--so that was our freshman year.  I, I struggled a little bit in the first semester of the freshman year; I really was struggling.  And, and she kind of helped me to learn to study better, and I was able to stay in and not flunk out, got my grades up to an acceptable area, yeah, at the end of the first year.
Story_ID: 96020
Speaker 1: But, but by the second year, I was off and running and, and never had any more--any more problems scholastically.  But, but I was able to--I didn't fail anything, but, but got through.  One day a bunch of--as we were studying journalism, I had all these white kids from all over Ohio and other places too.  They were in class.  In the back of my mind I'm thinking: "Am I as smart as they are?"  Now I'm not vocalizing that.  I'm not even telling anybody that, but in the back of my mind there's self-doubt--black, Cleveland--I don't know.  All of a sudden a couple of the kids--white kids--my age, freshman students--sophomores--came up to me and said "Leon."  I says "Yeah?"  They said, "could you help us with this?"  I says, "Me?"  He says "Yeah, could you help us kind of write this better?"  I said, "You want me to help you?"  They said, "Yeah.  Everybody knows you're the writer in this class."  Click--change of focus.  Click--something happened to me.  I never looked back.  I knew that God had given me what I need; God did not shortchange me; and that I was as good as anybody else; and that I had a gift, and I'm in that gift.  And that's how I wanna work for the rest of my working life, is in that gift as a journalist.  That's what Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] did for me.
Speaker 2: So, so did you major in journalism at Bowling Green?
Speaker 1: I majored in journalism in, in undergraduate school.  And when I went back in graduate school after graduation, two and a half years later--[U.S.] Army in the middle, between undergrad and graduate school--when I went back to graduate school, I majored in radio, television, film--
Story_ID: 96021
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers at Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] that were mentors or role models for you?
Speaker 2: Dr. Jeff Clark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, he and Robert Taylor are my favorite teachers--two of my three favorite teachers.  And Dr. Jeff Clark, who later left Bowling Green and went to the University of Georgia in Athens [Georgia], and he is now deceased.  But Jeff Clark kind of embraced me and taught me.  He saw what I wanted--Hard?  Yes.  My God, if you wrote for Jeff Clark, you would--we would have to write stories.  I'd give you facts, and then you'd have to put them together in a sensible story written for a newspaper.  And if you misspelled a word, "F" just like that, automatic.  And we said "Wow, that's tough."  He says "You are going to be writing for newspapers and magazines, and nothing worse than misspellings in publications that are for the masses.  Make a correction on there, and I will re-grade the paper, but that F will carry five percent.  So now, the best you can do is ninety-five percent when I re-grade it."  So this will teach you to get dictionary, and if you got a doubt about a word, doubt, D-O-U-B-T--if you got a doubt about a word, look it up, spell it, learn how to spell it, and put it right the first place, and you'll be fine.  And I grew to love him for that.  I was good at spelling, and, and he helped me be a better speller.  So, So I, I, I sing his praises as well.  And, and he encouraged me along the way too.  He was so vital to me that when Marguerite and I got married in 1966, we invited him to the--to the wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now--so you're (unclear)-- Bowling Green until '68 [1968] I guess, right, from '62 [1962] to '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] to sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay.
Speaker 2: Then '69 [1969] to '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, so '60--so you get your degree in '66 [1966]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your bachelor's degree in journalism.
Story_ID: 96022
Speaker 1: Did you do any internship in, in any--
Speaker 2: I interned in my junior year, 1965, with the Cleveland Call and Post.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the black pape--paper?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the owner of which I interviewed today, Don King, the boxing promoted.  He was in our studio.  I interviewed him live.  That--that's a hoot to interview Don King, 'cause you don't interview Don.  He just talks, and he is as he is. But, but, but at the time he did not own the Call and Post.  But I interned at the Call and Post, and I--
Speaker 1: At that time, it was W.O. Taylor, right?
Speaker 2: W--W.O. Walker.
Speaker 1: Walker, all right, [William Otis] W.O. Walker, right.  All right, what was he like?  Now he's--several people have mentioned him and--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a--he was a kingmaker. A strong man in Ohio, strong Republican, Republican black man, publisher of the--of the Call and Post.  And he gave me a shot when, when, when I needed an internship, and, and nobody else would give me an internship.  And becau--one of 'em--in fact, I, I lost one--I got one internship in Toledo [Ohio], and lost that internship within thirty seconds, once they found out I was black, and told me "we don't hire black people" just like that.  Well, what am I supposed to do?  I've been sitting in Dr. Ray Durer's [ph.] office at Bowling Green State University, and Dr. Durer gets on the phone, and he calls somebody that he knows.  All students--journala--journalism had to have an internship in order to graduate for the one summer.  He calls, and I'm, I'm a junior, getting ready to go into my summer season between junior and senior.  And he calls, and he's talking to this man on the phone, this company, a public relations job of some sort.  And he says "I got this young fella.  He's from Cleveland; he's dynamic; he's good--Leon Bibb; and he's very good."  I can only hear one end of the conversation, 'cause I'm sitting across the table from Dr. Durer.  And they talk for a while--"Oh, Leon will be glad to hear that.  Yes, he--yes, he'll have a place to stay.  He can--he--he'll find housing.  He'll--oh, that'll just be wonderful."  And he said, "And by the way, he's black."  And then the blood left Dr. Durer's face.  I'm sitting across the table looking at him like you're looking at me.  And I could hear him say "but, but, but listen, he's good.  But, la--but, but listen, he's ga--it's gonna be okay.  This, this will be fine.  I mean this--I wouldn't send him if I didn't think he could--couldn't do it.  He's at--wa, wa--oh--okay, all--all right, thank you."  And he hung up, and he looked at me and he says "Leon, it--it wouldn't work.  They don't hire black people."  And I said "Dr. Durer, I'm twenty years old."  There's no--there are no black professors; there's no black student union at that time; there's nobody to go to; no counseling--125 black kids, 10,000 students total.  "Dr. Durer, what am I supposed to do?"  He says, "Leon, I don't know," and he began--a tear came down his cheek.  And I remember I just got up and left, and says "Well, I guess it's all on me now-" twenty years old, nobody to talk to, no counselor--he's my counselor--no counselor to talk to, nobody else to--my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] and father [Leon Bibb] are in Cleveland [Ohio].  What--they can't do anything for me.  They don't know journalism.  They don't know who to call.  So I started writing letters, and I write letters to every radio and TV station and newspaper in, in Ohio--northeast Ohio at least--Cleveland.  Very few answered back.  And one day I just walked into the Call and Post.  I'd written them, and they said well, "We'll see you when you come here; let's talk."  So I went to W. O. Walker, and W. O. Walker says well, "Yeah, I can use you, young man; we pay $50 a week."  And I said "Okay," and he said and, "and if you got a car, it will help 'cause we don't have cars."  I didn't have a car.  I said well, I'll do somethin'.  I borrowed my father's car.  But W. O. Walker gave me a shot.  And when I joined the staff as an intern, one day they sent me out to cover--I covered stories, and they would put me as a photographer with a woman who wrote this society thing.  And I found out later she says: "I was worried about this kid, twenty years old from Bowling Green.  I didn't want him to mess up my pictures.  I got a whole column; I got a whole page, and when I looked at that kid's pictures, his pictures are fine."  And that made me feel good.  So then they started sending me out by myself.  Sometimes I'd work with an older foot--reporter, and we would work together, and, and they, they would kind of show me the ropes.
Story_ID: 96023
Speaker 1: And then one day they said you think you can cover the Jim Brown trial--Jim Brown the football player for the Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 2: Jim--not--okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The first assault case, where he was charged with roughing up a young woman--a young woman, eighteen years old or there about--
Speaker 2: I think they said that he, he tossed her from a balcony or something--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: That's what they said--
Speaker 1: Room 620 or 520 of the Howard Johnson's Motor Lodge in University Circle.  Well, I covered the story.  Now, I'm twenty years old.  I'd never been in a--never been in a courtroom let alone cover a courtroom (unclear).  So I go in, and I'm just kind of looking at the other--reporters are there from The Plain Dealer and the Cleveland Press.  And, and I sit next to Doris O'Donnell.  She is the longtime reporter with The Plain Dealer--and I've told this story to her--and whenever she'd take a note on what was going on in that trial, I'd take a note; if she wrote it down, I'd look over there, I'd write it down.  Then when it came time to take pictures, whatever the newspapers guys were doing for the daily newspapers, I did the same thing for my weekly paper.  And I took pictures and prayed that they were okay, that the aperture was right, and enough light was coming in and all of that in the hallway, and a couple even in the courtroom when we would break for adjournment--for a recess.  When I got back and they looked at those pictures, Al Sweeney, the editor, said "Man, these are great pictures; these are great pictures here.  And what you've written, Leon, is a first person reporter on what Jim Brown was doing, and what his attorney was doing."  And I says I was taking pictures of everybody, whatever they took, I took.  I didn't even know some of these people I was photographing like--you know, I knew--I knew--I knew the defense attorney--didn't know him, but I knew he was the defense attorney, and I took his picture.  And they really enjoyed it, and from that point on I knew.  They said "We're glad to have you, Leon."  And W. O. Walker told me: "You know, son, you can stay here at the Call and Post.  If you don't wanna go back to Bowling Green, you got a job here.  I says well, no, I've come this far, let me get the degree; let me get the degree, and we'll see what happens then."  He says "Well, when you get the degree you come on back here if you want."  And when I got the degree, The Plain Dealer called me, the largest paper in the State of Ohio, and I went to The Plain Dealer.  And they said they were watching my stuff; they were reading my stuff in the Call and Post.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Funny how things happen.
Speaker 2: It's a side note here that--what did you think about the tri--Jim Brown was exonerated--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the trial.
Speaker 1: Found not guilty.
Speaker 2: But did, did you have any thoughts about the trial?
Speaker 1: He had a hell of an attorney, I know that.  And they kind of--the, the deal was to, to rough up the woman who brought, brought the charge, you know.  They kind of roughed her up and background and all of that.  And Jim Brown was a superhero in Cleveland [Ohio].  I mean I'd seen him around, you know, not only playing football, but you know I'd, I'd seen him you know around town driving his, his Cadillac convertible--JB32 license play number, Jim Brown number 32.  And so, they found him not guilty, and, and we went with that.  I, I really didn't draw any conclusions other than I didn't know what he did or what he didn't do.  I thought it was pretty damaging what the young woman was saying, but his attorney was damn good.  Norman Minor was his attorney.
Speaker 2: Was, was, was he African American?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I got all of that stuff.  In fact I, I should have brought that too.  I, I got all my clippings that I wrote in 1965.  That's when I photographed [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] for the very first time too.
Speaker 2: This is 1965, the Jim Brown trial (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], all right.
Speaker 1: The first trial.  I think he's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --had a bunch of 'em, but that was the first one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were, were the others in Cleveland too about (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I don't know if they were in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't recall.
Speaker 2: I know he had a trial--
Speaker 1: I don't think so.
Speaker 2: --in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a similar charge--
Speaker 1: Yeah, a similar charge.
Speaker 2: You know, back in the--
Speaker 1: I la--
Speaker 2: --I think it was in the--
Speaker 1: --I later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --nineties [1990s]--in the early '90s [1990s] I think it was.
Speaker 1: I later met him at the Football Hall of Fame.  I didn't bring up the trial though.  I didn't say--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --anything---that I was there.  I didn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's written a book, you know, where he covers the tra--you know, "Out of Bounds," I think that the name of this--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --book when he, he covered the trial.  He talked about it.  He said--you know, he said he reminded people he was exonerated--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He is still revered in this town.  And the Cleveland Browns ought to put up a statue of Jim Brown at Cleveland Brown Stadium [now FirstEnergy Stadium]; that's what they ought to do.
Speaker 2: They haven't done that.
Speaker 1: Haven't done that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Need a statue of Jim Brown.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would be the football equivalent of a Michael Jordon.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's definitely true.
Story_ID: 96024
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, now, okay, so [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to town too.  You, you took the first--
Speaker 2: I took photographs of him.  He came to the intersection of East 40th Street and, and Scovill [Avenue], which is now called I think Community College Drive; but there's a little strip mall there.  And he came to speak one day.  And they [the Call and Post] sent me down there to, to interview him--not to interview him--to take pictures and to kind of write a story.  I did not get an interview.  And when I got there, I got there late and the crowd had already--'cause a lot of times I was gone on the bus to cover stories.  That's how much I wanted journalism, I was on the bus covering stories.  But on that day I think I drove, and I think I had a flat tire in my father's [Leo Bibb] car and, and dealing with that.  But, but I got there late, and the crowd had already got up around the flatbed truck from where Dr. King would speak through a sound system.  And he had not come out of the store yet, or the holding area, to, to speak to the crowd, but they were waiting.  And I'm in the back, all the way in the back, and I gotta get up front with my camera.  I'm a brand new journalist, and, and I, I tell people "I've gotta get up front."  And they say "we all wanna be up front, young man.  We've been standing here all day long, and you just show up and now you wanna go up front.  No, you have to stay back here 'cause we all back here.  The people up front are the ones who got here."  And so I kind of said well, dog, I'm, I'm dead in the water.  I don't know how to get up there.  Finally it dawned on me.  "I'm from the Call and Post; I'm a newsman; I got a camera here."  And they said "Oh, let him through.  Let the Call and Post man through."  And I--it was like the sea parted, like the sea parted and I walked right up to the front.  And when Dr. King came out I snapped his photograph, snapped his photograph as he was going up the steps.  It was the first time I'd seen him live, first time I'd seen--I'd seen pictures of him, I'd seen him on television, but I'd never seen him in living color right there, as close as you are to me.   And I snapped his picture, and that picture went on the front page of the Cleveland Call and Post that, that week, by Leon D. Bibb.
Story_ID: 96025
Speaker 1: Okay, we were just talking about Jim Brown off camera.  This--say, say what you were saying again.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In those days the ballplayers were accessible.  I mean you'd see them.  [William] Bill Willis, who had, had played for the Cleveland Browns and was retired--
Speaker 1: He was the first black player in the NFL [National Football League].
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--yeah.
Speaker 2: And he lived around the corner from us.  And it would be a kick to just to throw the ball to Bill, and he'd throw it back to you.  But he lived in the neighborhood, and, and Jim Brown lived in another neighborhood, but I knew the house.  He lived on East 147th Street.  I think about it every time I drive by that--by that house--every--often I drive by.  He's long gone now of course.  But, but the ballplayers were accessible.  You, you--you'd, you'd see them--you'd see them out and, and they were in our community.
Speaker 1: Now is it different today?
Speaker 2: I, I think so.  I, I, I don't run into ballplayers now.  Maybe they go to different places than I go to, but, but I, I don't--I don't see them.  They certainly make a lot more money.  In those days the, the ballplayer didn't make that much money that--that's why they had jobs in the off-season working--selling insurance or working in shoe stores.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he worked for Pepsi-Cola in the offseason.  I remember that he, he worked for Joan Crawford when she owned Pep--Pepsi Cola.  She gave him a--
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: --office job.  Yeah, it was Sport magazine when I was a kid I--
Speaker 2: Oh God.
Speaker 1: Yep, yep.
Story_ID: 96026
Speaker 1: Any rate, so Dr.--do, do you remember what [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] spoke about when you--when you shot his picture?
Speaker 2: Well, the--you know, civil rights.  I do remember that the headline over it was "An Ailing Dr. King Comes to Cleveland" because he had a bad summer cold, and, and he really wasn't feeling that well.  But, but he talked about, you know, things that, that we as a people had to do, and Cleveland economic situation, and civil rights.  And he was with [HM Reverend] Fred Shuttlesworth and Ralph Abernathy were with him.  And I was right up there.  It was the one time that I have--the one time that, that I met Dr. King--that I didn't meet him, but saw him.  I've met his wife [Coretta Scott King] and I've met his son, Martin Luther [King] the III, and other people in--involved.
Speaker 1: Now you were around when--now Cleveland [Ohio] was the center of a couple of activities--I mean it--in those days.  I mean a lot of--it was a lot of focus on Cleveland.  You know, people I don't think today realize the attention that Cleveland got in those days.  The Browns had just won the NFL Championship the year be--I mean in '64' [1964].  In '66' [1966] or so Jim Brown becomes a movie star.  You got a movie, "Uptight," is made about Cleveland during the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --racial tension after Dr. King was assassinated.  I think there'--gee--well, Car, [Cleveland Mayor] Carl Stokes, you know, came--this all comes--this is all--it--well, you know, '65' [1965] is heading towards all these things, you know, all these events.  So, so you were--you were that Call and Post just that summer before you graduated?
Speaker 2: Just the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you--then you went back to bo--Bowling Green [State University in Bowling Green, Ohio] and finished.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 96027
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you, you were saying in the last half hour we shot that you were called immediately by The Plain Dealer.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now were, were there any other black employees at Plain Dealer at this point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a [Robert] Bob McGruder, who might have been--he was in that first wave of black reports--Bob McGruder.  In fact I've received an award from Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] where he attended that's called the Bob McGruder Distinguished Journalist Award.  And he was there.  He must have been maybe two years in front of me or a year and a half in front of me, McGruder and there was a guy by the name of--Ken Banks [Kenneth Banks, Jr.] was there at The Plain Dealer, yeah.  I think he had been at the Call and Post as well.
Speaker 2: What, what role--now McGruder and Banks both were reporters?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and I was--I was brand new.  I was 21 years old, not yet 22, and I was working at The Plain Dealer.
Speaker 2: Okay, so how did your parents [Leon Bibb and Georgia Crowell Bibb] feel about this?
Speaker 1: Oh, they felt wonderful.  The--they, they knew I wanted to be a journalist, and they were proud.  I mean, you know--especially proud once I started working for the Call and Post.  You know, my, my father would ride the bus home from work sometimes, and somebody would be reading the Call and Post next to him, and he'd kind of say "That's my son's byline right there;" he'd always let 'em know.  And they were very proud.  They were very proud and very proud that I'd come back to Cleveland--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and proud I'd graduated from college and--
Speaker 2: So, all right, so 1966, The Plain Dealer--who--who's the editor there?
Speaker 1: Russell Reeves was the managing editor.  Was it Ted Princiato?  He was there--can't recall if he was the city editor, or John Reese [ph.] may have been the city editor in those days.  And it was owned by--you've asked me too quickly.  I can't remember the, the publisher's name.
Speaker 2: What--were there any--I know McGruder had been a professor at Kent, right?  He'd, he'd gone to Kent, but he--well, he subsequently became a professor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: I think so.  At some point.
Speaker 1: No, he stayed in journalism--
Speaker 2: Did he stay--
Speaker 1: --and it's--I mean as a--in, in all capacities.  I mean his whole life was journalism.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think he might have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right, so he didn't go back.  I thought he went back to teaching.  But was there any person there that was a mentor to you at, at--
Speaker 1: McGruder, McGruder, Ken Banks.  We kind of--we kind of looked out--they, they looked out for me 'cause I was brand new and I was green as grass.  I mean it's, it's something to come right out of college and start at the thirteenth largest newspaper as staff--as staff reporter.  Now I understood that there was some EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] things happening, and there was some-- equal opportunity, and there was some--I forget the phrase--but, but, but they were looking for black folks.  And I was pretty green.  Now normally you don't start at The Plain Dealer.  But I was pretty green, but I was also pretty black and educated and with a degree in journalism and could write, so they were going to bring me along.  And I remember as I was on the police beat--I did the police beat early in my career there, and I was working with somebody, one of the veteran reporters. And then one day one of the--one of the editors called me aside--says "Leon, like to talk with you."  He said, "There seems to be maybe the beginnings of a riot, little insurrection taking place," 'cause they were happening all the time.  "And it's over in the Glenville area, and we'd like for you, if you don't mind-" I mean he kind of sneaked up on it-" if you don't mind, if you could kind of go over there with one of our photographers and just kind of snoop around, see what's going on.  And--I know you're brand new, I know you just got here, and I know you're green," he said in so many words, "but if you would do this, we'd appreciate it.  If you feel uncomfortable about going into that neighborhood, you can just say so and you know, we'll get somebody else to do it."  I says, "I don't feel uncomfortable about going to Glenville.  I live in Glenville (laughter), so I'm going there anyway.  I'm going there tonight anyway."  And so that's how I started.  And, and you know, I did later--early on I was doing obituaries until somebody new came after me, and they would write the obituaries, and then I moved to general assignment.  It, it all worked out.
Story_ID: 96028
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--so things were going--now you got married [to Marguerite Bibb] in '66 [1966] as well, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was in the military by then.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, so how long did--were, were you at The Plain Dealer before you were drafted?
Speaker 2: From June until November.  I got drafted in November.  I had to report November the 6th, 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I reported to the [U.S.] Army, drafted and--'cause of the war in Vietnam.  And that's how I got out The Plain Dealer.  It was not my idea to leave, but you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in school or anything like that or you--
Speaker 2: I did not.
Speaker 1: So were you, you brought in as a private?
Speaker 2: Went in as a private.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They wanted me to go to OCS, Officer Candidate School, and become a 90-day wonder, or 90-day lieutenant, but I didn't wanna do that.  In retrospect, I think about it a lot--not a lot, but sometimes.  In retrospect, maybe I should have; maybe I could have.  I mean I was educated, and they kept saying "You're educated, you got a college degree, I mean you could be an officer."  But I had a pretty good job, and, and worked out okay.  And I, I did not want the additional time.  It would have taken another year--that I would have had to sign up for another year.  As opposed to being drafted for two years, I would have had to do three years--a little more than three years.  And I was just trying to do what they asked me to do 'cause I wanna come home, and I knew I was going to Vietnam.  So I just said "I'm okay."  They talked to me pretty, pretty--they did--they, they pushed a little bit, but not too hard.  So then they decided that they would use me as a--once I got to Vietnam, they, they used me as a, a kind of a specialty guy.  I was the only man in the Fourth Infantry Division who was an enlisted man, a non-officer with a degree in journalism.  So I--they kind of made a job for me, although I had to still do some things I could not get out of.  I could not get out of patrol; I could not get out of guard duty on the perimeter during the war of, of our base camp, but, but they kind of made a job for me.  And, and to this--when I left there were--I was replaced by either three or four men.  And when I left they still hadn't gotten the job down, but I said "I got to go; I'm, I'm done; good luck.  I brought you as far as I can bring you here.  I taught you as much as I can teach you about what I do here."
Speaker 1: So what were your thoughts about Vietnam before you went (simultaneous)?  Did you--Vietnam was a--of course a controversial--
Speaker 2: It was very controversial.
Speaker 1: --war.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't that controversial when I got drafted.  It was while I was in that it kind of turned where the nation kind of turned against it.  I still wondered why we were there, and people would write and ask me "How's the war going?"  I says "Well, I don't know.  I can tell you what I'm doing here in a five-mile area.  As far as the overall picture, I have no idea.  I mean I'm, I'm low on the--on the totem pole here, and I, I really don't know, you know, about the politics of it all other than what I--what I would read in the newspapers or magazines."  So I, I really just kind of--was just got caught up in it, and, and, and, and when I got drafted, I mean I had a choice.  I didn't have to go.  I, I guess I could have gone to prison.  I said "Well, if I gotta do time, why don't I just go to the Army."  So I, I just said I would--I would go, but, but I didn't fully understand what was going on.  As the war droned on and on and on, we began to mumble in Vietnam.  Like, none of us really knew--many of the people I talked to really didn't know.  I was very careful who I talked to about it.  I talked to a couple of officers, and they said they didn't know what--why we were there.  So I kind of took my cue from that, and then I--then it got to the point I say let me keep my head down; let me save my own life; let me get the hell out of here; and let me just go home.  And surely, surely this war is not gonna just keep on going and going and going and going--surely 1967 and 1968--surely this war is gonna end.  Well, the war kept on going until the nineteen--mid 1970s.
Story_ID: 96029
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're drafted in '60--
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're there in '67 [1967] and what, the beginning of '68 [1968]?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went--I went there September to September, '67 [1967] to '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'd gather you were there during the Tet Offensive.  Was that in--was (unclear) '68 [1968], right?
Speaker 2: That was in early--
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: --sixty-eight [1968], I think around March of '60--'68 [1968]--yeah, around, around March, April, right in that time period.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what--well, what, what are--what are your memories from that?  I mean were you in a lot of danger at that, that point or?
Speaker 2: Well, we were under attack.  I remember getting hit maybe eight, eight times.  Our unit--our, our base camp.  I was at Camp Enari, E-N-A-R-I--Camp Enari--in the Central Highlands of Vietnam near a city called Pleiku.  And I was in the Central Highlands and we got hit many times.  In fact, I was on guard duty one night when we did get hit.  And we saw the enemy out there, and you know, running around, and we fired at the enemy. I remember--I remember firing at the enemy.  We fired flares up at nighttime.
Story_ID: 96030
Speaker 1: But a friend of mine named Randall Lee Williams, who was twenty-one or twenty from Sioux Falls, South Dakota was killed.  And a rocket or a mortar came in, and he was doing--he was a surveyor--artillery surveyor.  And he was doing something in the field regarding measuring the distance from here to there so that the big guns could fire on targets they could not see.  And he got hit by rocket fire, or mortar fire, and he died.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sioux Falls, South Dakota.  And I, I think of him all the time.  When I go to the wall in Vietnam I always touch his hand, Randall Lee Williams.  And I've gone to the virtual wall on, on, on the computer, and I have left tributes to him, how I remember him.  And I've got his photograph somewhere in my desk, which I've since gotten in the last few years.  And I, I think of him often, and, and when I talk to other Vietnam guys that I served with, we always talk about Randy.  And he was just a--just a kid.  We were all just kids.  I mean he was my age--well, a couple of years younger.  And we were all just kids and he didn't come home.  And I've written a piece of poetry called "57," and I've performed this piece of poetry.  Sometimes I--when I do it, I'll do it in a military uniform.  I'll take my old military jacket on it--put it on, and I'll do a whole section of theater and poetry in military uniform.  And this is called "57," because that's how many days he had to go before he was to have ended his tour of service in Vietnam, and come home to be married.  And I wrote that "there is a fiance who waits in a faded wedding dress, holding now dried flowers, waiting at the church steps for her soldier to come home, but her soldier has been delayed and cannot make it.  He had only 57 days to go, but Randall Lee Williams cannot make his wedding."  And when I do that I've had my daughter put on her old wedding veil and stand in the shadows with a little bouquet of flowers.  And she steps out of the shadows into the light when I'm saying she waits for her soldier who cannot make it.  And then she disappears back into the darkness.  It's a very, very poetic thing, but it brings tears to the people's eyes.  And at the end of it I talk about war and what it does, what it did to me, what it did to men I know, what it's always done to men and women who go off to war.  And I say "When we have wars we have to realize that men and women are gonna die, so let's make damn sure that this war is important, that this war has to be fought because men and women are gonna die like Randall Lee Williams."  I don't make a judgment as to whether Vietnam was right or wrong.  I leave that up to the--to those who listen to my poetry and those who listen to the reports as to whether he died in vain or not.  I don't think he died in vain.  I think he did what his country asked him to do.
Story_ID: 96031
Speaker 1: I did what my country asked me to do.  That's why I wear that--that's the Bronze Star Medal there that represents the Bronze Star Medal, which hangs on my wall at home.  They pinned that on me in Vietnam.  And this was the lapel pin that signifies the medal.  It's always there.  I always have it, and--when I wear a jacket.  It's a reminder of war, and it's a reminder of what we did, and it's also a reminder to America of what I did, that I was here for this nation when this nation wanted me here for it, that I fought and died and killed for this nation, and was wounded for this nation--men like me.  And when I come home--I come home, I want all my rights, 'cause I'm an American, and I bled for America; that's why I wear it.
Speaker 2: Okay, now the Bronze Star is for service, right?
Speaker 1: You can get it for sa--for meritorious service.  It was awarded to me for meritorious service or for heroic action.  I was awarded the Bronze Star for meritorious service for they said "Going above and beyond what was expected of me to perform my duty."  I do remember men in my--in my rank oftentimes did not get the Bronze Star, unless it was for heroic action.  And I remember that when, when, when, when, when the colonel for whom I worked, when the Army Commendation Medal came across his desk, the, the suggestion that, that specialist Bibb be presented the Army Commendation Medal, he said--I remember he said "No, no, no, no, no, we go higher than that for Bibb; he goes to Bronze Star."  And so I remember hearing that.  He didn't know I heard it, but I heard it.  And so they, they pinned the Bronze Star on me at a special ceremony.  I've got a photograph of that.  I, I didn't bring that either.  It hangs on my wall.
Story_ID: 96032
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so when you, you came back, now you went on to Bowling Green [State University in Bowling Green, Ohio] to study TV and film.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I got out of--out of the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you go back to The Plain Dealer and resume your life as a reporter?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back to The Plain Dealer for, for a hot minute.  But I had applied for graduate school while I was in Vietnam, and the acceptance came back to the jungles of Vietnam.  And all I had to do was, was survive the war and then I was gonna go to graduate school.  So I, I wrote home.  Marguerite [Bibb] and I are married by now because we got married in '66' [1966], while I was in uniform before I went to Vietnam.  And we said that, that we would go back to Bowling Green.  She would quit her job as a school teacher in East Cleveland [Ohio] school system.  That's a suburb to the east of Cleveland--the suburban East Cleveland school system.  She would quit her job and we would try and find work back at, at Bowling Green.  I would go back to school on the G.I Bill.  'Cause I was in the Army, they said you're in the hours for twenty-four months, and somehow another they figured I had thirty-six months of education coming.  So I says I can't--I can't let that slip out of my hands.  This is the time to do it.  We have no children.  We're still young, so we went back to Bowling Green.  Now only a few years had passed.  People who were freshman at Bowling Green when I graduated were now seniors.  So, so we, we, we went back and we put a little deposit down on an apartment off campus.  Marguerite quit her job.  When we got back to Bowling Green, they remembered Marguerite Bryant, and they remembered Leon Bibb because we were known on campus, and we were involved in campus activities, and we were involved in the--interfraternity council, and we were involved in the Women's Pan-Hellenic Council of Sororities, and we were involved in all kinds of things.  The president--well, I didn't know the president, but I knew the deans.  They knew me on face and by, by name.  We got back there and they said "Marguerite, you and Leon are coming back.  Tell you what, how'd you like to be a hall director?"  He's telling Marguerite this.  She says "Well, that'd be fine."  She says you can live in the women's residence hall for freshman women.  And because you're married, Leon can live with you of course."  So I was the only man in the women's freshman residence hall.  We lost that little apartment.  We didn't get the security deposit back, but it wasn't that much anyway.  So she became the resident hall director for Treadway Hall inside the Founder's Quadrangle.  She got a paycheck; they gave her two free classes a quarter to work toward her master's; they gave us both a meal ticket to eat with the freshman girls in the dining hall three times a day, seven days a week.  We did not pay rent, and we didn't pay utilities, and we had our own apartment inside the residence hall.  Uncle Sam paid for my education, and the TV station called me and says "How'd you like to work for the TV station and produce a half-hour newscast everyday using students, teaching them how to be better writers?"  And we only owned $36 a month car payment on a Volkswagen that we had.  That was our only debt, $36 a month.  I made money in graduate school.  And we talked about how God blesses us.  Had we not gone to Bowling Green that would not have happened.  We went to Bowling Green totally prepared to pay our way.  And once we stepped out on faith, God was there and says let me give you these blessings.  And for the next two years that's how we lived.
Story_ID: 96033
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you actually were--it says here you served as news director and news anchor on Bowling Green State University's [Bowling Green, Ohio] WBGU-TV.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I produced--and I produced that half-hour show.  And I'd have sophomore kids come in who were journalism kids like I had been just a handful years before, and I would kind of overlook their writing, and we put a newscast together using whatever film and pictures that we could get.  And, and I would work maybe four hours a day, that's about it to put this little newscast together.  And I began to hone my craft.  I'd been on the radio as an undergrad.  I'd worked on WBGU radio for three years doing the news every, every evening.  I, I--so I just transferred it over to television.  And I remember telling Dr. Duane Tucker, who, who offered me the job, or he ran the TV station, I said "Dr. Tucker, I've never written for television."  And he said "Anybody who's written for the Cleveland Plain Dealer certainly can write for our little television station here in Bowling Green."  So I took it and we did quite well until, you know, our daughter--our daughter was conceived in, in graduate school, our first daughter.  And she was born while I was doing the, the news on WBGU television.  And I left before getting the degree, the master's degree because we had to move out of the residence hall 'cause we had the baby then and all, all of that.  Everything began to change, and that's when the, the, the Toledo [Ohio] television station found me and says "How'd you like to go into--work in television and, and right now?"  So I'd, I'd done all the coursework.  I just hadn't finished the thesis.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so could they see your broadcast in Toledo?
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a low-powered--it wasn't that strong a--yeah, they did because they came to Bowling Green.  They came down to Bowling Green and they saw me.  And then once again, looking for black people in journalism, there I was.  I guess I was the only guy who on--in fact in undergrad school there were only two blacks studying journalism at Bowling Green, Horace Coleman and me; and Horace was a year in front of me, and Horace had gone--graduated.  He was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  He also went to Vietnam by the way.  And, and so we, we picked up and, and moved twenty-five miles north to Toledo.
Story_ID: 96034
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were on Toledo 11 [WTOL-TV].
Speaker 2: Yeah, for CBS.
Speaker 1: Right, CBS affiliate.  And so you were there from '70 [1970]--was that '70 [1970] or '71 [1971] to--
Speaker 2: I was there from March of '71 [1971] to February of '72 [1972], about 10 months or so--10 and a half months.  Shortest job I ever had, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --full time.
Speaker 1: Anything memorable take place in Toledo?
Speaker 2: Picked up a hitchhiker who told me about a job opportunity in Columbus [Ohio].  And three weeks later I was on the air in Columbus.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A hitchhiker that I passed and felt guilty about, and went back and got him.
Speaker 1: So--okay, so, that's quite a story.  Now look,  now what was it like working at the Toledo station?  Were you the only African American or were there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I think I was the only reporter.  There was a lab technician who processed the film, Jim Proctor, who later became a reporter after I left.  And there was a secretary, and there was the public affairs director--community relations director, Nelson Grace, and there was one person on the--floor director, Bob Payne [ph.].   And that, that, that, that was--that was about it as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I might have been the--I might have been the first reporter--first black reporter.  I might have been the second black reporter.  There was a man by the name of Art Edgerton, quite a--quite a man.  He was blind and he, he reported sometimes, kind of part time.  They used him on special stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is all around the same area as Bowling Green.  This was close--in the same vicinity as Bowling Green, To--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Toledo is.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five miles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. All right.
Story_ID: 96035
Speaker 1: So, so the hitchhiker you pick up on the road (laughter)--tells you about the job.  Now what was the hitchhiker's role in referring you to the job?
Speaker 2: I was driving down the street in a WTOL News car unmarked.  It was just a regular looking Ford.  And I see this guy hitchhiking on West Bancroft Street, and I recognize him.  I don't know his name, but I recognized his face.  I'd seen him socially at parties, or he just like somebody you see, but you don't know him but you recognize him.  And I drove on 'cause I'm in a company car.  And a voice starts telling me in my brain "Go back and pick him up.  It's a cold day; go back and pick him up."  I kept on going, and I denied the voice.  And it just kept saying "Go pick him up."  So I make a u-turn on a cold day, a series of one-way streets.  I get back to where he was; fortunately he's still standing there.  I says, "you need a ride."  He jumps in.  He looks at me.  He looks in the back seat.  He sees a camera, a television camera, a film camera.  And he looks at me and he says "Toledo 11, right?  Aren't you Leon?"  I says "Yeah, I am."  He says, "Yeah, I saw, saw the camera in the back."  I says, "Who are you?"  He says, "I'm so and so so and so."  He says "My mother--my girlfriend's mother"--he was going to the University of Toledo [Ohio], and I was giving him a ride--"my girlfriend's mother mentioned you and wondered what ever happened to you.  Because while you were in school you had applied with her station, but there was nothing shaking for you--to hire you."  I says, "Yeah."  He says "Why don't you give her a call and tell her where you are, 'cause she mentioned you, wondering what you were doing.  She was impressed by you."  It wasn't that many black folks doing television in the nation.  So I called her that night.  "Hello," "Anne [ph.] Walker please.  Hi Ms. Walker, this is Leon Bibb.  You don't know me, but I work at a TV station in Toledo, Ohio."  She's in Columbus at the NBC station as public affairs director.  She says, "What's your name?"  I says, "I'm Leon."  She says, "I know exactly who you are."  This is how quickly the conversation is going.  "Are you looking?"  I says "Yes, ma'am."  "You got a contract?"  I said "No, I don't have a contract.  I just--you just work here.  I didn't sign anything. You just work."  She says, "funny you should call.  There is a job opening here.  You interested?"  I says, "Yes, ma'am."  She says, "I want you to call Hugh DeMoss.  He's the news director, but I don't want you to call him for a half hour 'cause I need to get to him first to tell him you're going to call."  So I waited a half hour.  I called Hugh DeMoss.  "Yeah, Anne Walker tells me about you, that you're up in Toledo.  And how you doing up there?"  I'm said, "I'm doing okay."  He says, "So you're interested in maybe coming to Columbus to work NBC?"  I says, "Yes, sir, I am."  He said, "Why don't we set up an interview then?"  So we set up an interview; it's like a week later.  The day of the interview, my Volkswagen Bug is dead, the battery, 'cause it's like ten below zero all over Ohio.  I go back and I call Hugh DeMoss.  "Mr. DeMoss, I'm sorry, but I got a dead battery on my Volkswagen."  He says, "I understand, I understand."  He says "So, you wanna set up on another date then?"  I says, "Could we do it today?"  He said, "but you got a dead battery."  I says, "I've called ahead to Greyhound, and they can put me there.  I'll just be six hours later than we planned, but I can get a bus."  He says, "You're willing to take a bus in 10 below zero weather for an interview?"  I says, "yes, sir, I am."  He says, "I'll see you when you get here then."  And when I got there that evening he said "Kid, you got courage, you got character.  I like that."  He says, "but can you read?"  I said yeah, "I, I can read" He says "Well, here is my script from the newscast."  He was also the anchorman and the news director.  "Here's my script.  Why don't you take ten minutes, take a look at it, and let's see what you got."  And he pushed it into my stomach just like that, and I grabbed it.  "Let's see what you got.  Take ten minutes; look it over.  That's all you're gonna get anyway when you do this business if you get in--if you get here."  I read it, he went up in the control room, they put me on videotape, he came down, and he says "Kid, I like you.  You're going back to Toledo tonight?"  I says, "Yes, sir."  He says, "I'll call you tomorrow."  He called me the next day and says, "I'm prepared to offer you a job."  And he says, "When can you start?"  And I said, "I can start in three weeks."  He says, "Can you make it two?"  I says, "I'll be there."  And three weeks from the day of the hitchhiker I was on the air.
Story_ID: 96036
Speaker 1: When I got to Columbus [Ohio], he [Hugh DeMoss] said we got a system here where--and this was for a $162 a week by the way--and I asked for a $170 'cause I was making a $130.  He says "Well, I'll pay you a $162, but if you can wait six months, I'll give you a $169.  That's close to your $170."  'Cause they had a union contract there, and I became a member of the union.  But he says "We got a--we got a system here where I need a--I need a co-anchor on my 11:00 news during the week, and I need a co-anchor on my 11:00 news on Saturdays and Sundays.  Now you won't be the primary guy, but you'll sit on the set.  And, and I'll be the primary guy during the week, and on the weekends another guy will be the primary guy, but you'll be like his assistant.  So you'll be on the news four days a week at 11:00 as an anchor, but I want you to cover stories be--before the 11:00 news.  So you--you're gonna be on the street all the time, but four nights of the week you're anchoring the 11:00 news."  And I jumped at that, and I says, "Thank you."  And I went on the air February 1972, and I've not missed a week since then, other than when I transfer stations, leave stations, and go to another station the time period off.  But I've had a--I've had a newscast assigned to me ever since then, with the exception of maybe two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Hitchhiker.  And I, I call that story "angel at the curbside," 'cause that hitchhiker was an angel--haven't seen him since.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what was going on in cla--cla--Columbus?  What was the nature of that station [WCMH-TV]?  And were there--once again, were you--in those days, you, you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'm sure you weren't the only black at the station.
Speaker 1: No, Felix Hoover was there.  He was a reporter.  He was the only other black reporter.  We had a couple of technicians and we might have had a photographer, or a photographer joined us shortly thereafter.  But it, it opened up my eyes.  It was a bigger market, and, and I got a chance to cover bigger news, and cover the Ohio Statehouse, and the, the governor--interviewed the governor, stuff like that.  So it, it really was an opportunity, and, and Columbus was very good for Marguerite [Bibb] and me.  Our second child was born in Columbus.  I was there for--from '72 [1972] to almost '79 [1979]--just about early '79 [1979], yeah, early '79 [1979].  And it, it took a lot to get me out of Columbus.  We really liked it.  We, we weren't making that much money.  I mean we--I got pay raises along the way and signed contracts, and things got better, but I mean--and we stayed longer enough to, to buy a little house, a start--we built a house.  We built a house for less than $30,000.  What was that--29 something--built a house, one-car garage, three bedrooms--
Speaker 2: Where--
Speaker 1: --tri-level.
Speaker 2: Where did you live in Columbus?
Speaker 1: We lived on the northeast side--northeast side in a development called Framingham.  It was a new development and--of Ryan Homes.  Marguerite and I went out with a--with a friend of ours, and she was looking at Ryan Homes.  And she says why don't you come along with us?  And so we went along with them, and we found something that, that, that we liked and that we could build, and moved out of the little apartment that we had.
Story_ID: 96037
Speaker 1: Okay, well, one of the highlights I guess we'd have to say of your stay in Columbus [Ohio] was an interview in Brushy Mountain State Penitentiary in [Morgan County] Tennessee of James Earl Ray.  Now how did that come about?
Speaker 2: It be--it came because of a pornographer by the name of Larry Flint.  Larry Flint ran Hustler magazine.  And Larry Flint's Hustler magazine came out of Columbus, although he stayed in trouble with Cincinnati [Ohio] all the time over porno--pornographic issues.  But, but he lived in Columbus, and we knew Larry.  He was at the TV station all the time because he was interviewing me.  You didn't even have to go to him.  He'd come to the TV station to be interviewed about any controversy that was going on.  He came to me one day and says, "How'd you like to interview James Earl Ray?"  I says "Me?"  He says, "Yeah, yeah, I, I don't trust the network boys.  But, but I know that you Columbus guys--I, I can get you in."  I says "You can get me in?"  He says, "I'm trying to get him a new trial 'cause I don't think he killed Dr. King, and I'm trying to get him a new--a new trial."  I says, "Okay," so I flew--so I run it by the TV station management.  I says, "I can fly down with James--with, with, with Larry Flint.  It's not gonna cost the station anything."  They loved that.  "It's not gonna cost you anything 'cause we'll go in his private plane.  I'll do a piece on him, about how he's trying to get James Earl Ray a new trial.  And we're gonna come back the same so I don't need a hotel."  Okay, so a photographer and I go down with, with Larry Flint.  Now this is two weeks before Larry Flint--three weeks before Larry Flint is shot in an assassination attempt, and paralyzed for the rest of his life.  But he's walking around at this time.  So 1978, we fly down, go to Brushy at--we, we land in, in, in Larry's private plane, a plush stretch, almost airlen--airliner style, airliner-length airplane, landed in Knoxville, Tennessee.  He's got a limousine waitin' for us, so we get in the limousine.  And I'm photographing him.  And Bruce Johansson [ph.] is my cameraman, and we're photographing Larry as we drive the ninety miles or whatever to the prison--get to the prison.  They know we're coming.  We sign in.  We go in a little holding area where they do such things, a room about the size of this--maybe not even this size.  The next thing I know, James Earl Ray walks into the room, under guard of course.  I don't think he's shackled or anything--don't think so, but I know he had on a blue shirt and blue jeans.  He walks, in; he says, "You the man gonna interview me?"  He's looking at me.  I says "Hi, yeah, I am."  He says, "Hi, I'm James Earl Ray," puts his hand out.  Well, when a man puts his hand out, I shook his hand.  It was just automatic.  I mean I, I didn't think about it until I grabbed his hand.  I said that's the hand that killed [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], who I photographed in 1965 in Cleveland [Ohio] and who I loved.  I didn't think about it 'til we held hands.  And then I says well, if I hadn't of shaken his hand, he might have said well, okay, then don't worry about the interview then, and go back into his cell.  He did not have to do an interview.  So we sat down and we talked about life here and there, what's going on in prison a little bit.  I mean I'm, I'm--he knows where I'm going, but I'm just in no hurry to ask the $64,000 question, which I finally asked.  And Bruce behind me has got the camera whirring.  I hear that click-click, click-click, click-click.  We're, we're, we're rolling on camera.  "Did you kill Dr. Martin Luther King?"  "Oh, no, no, no, no, I didn't kill him."  "Do you know who did?"  "No, I, I, I, I, I wouldn't know who killed him."  "But you were convicted of killing him."  "That's true, but I didn't do it."  And then he goes on and talks about he was running guns for a man by the name of Raul.  This is the new information that had not come out before, to my knowledge--a man named Raul.  That's why he was in I guess Memphis [Tennessee] at the time.  But he didn't kill Dr. King he said.  And we talked a little bit further and went on and on and on.  And I--there, there was nothing new other than that that came out.  He denied it, denied it, denied it.  And fifteen, twenty minutes later it was over with and ended.
Story_ID: 96038
Speaker 1: On the way back to the airport, James--I mean Larry Flint is saying "I think we can get him [James Earl Ray] a new trial, Leon.  I think an injustice was done, and I, I think we get him a new trial."  I got a camera inside the limousine rolling on Larry Flint.  "Yeah, I says well, Larry, you seem to be involved in a lot of different things here.  You've got this case; you're working with Mark Lane, who is James Earl Ray's attorney; and you're, you're trying to get him a new trial; you told me that you can get the United States and the Soviet Union together."  "Yeah, I think I can get them together.  I'd like to get--I think if I could get the two sides together, I think we could compromise on some things.  And, and, and, and really I, I need to go over to Israel.  I can (unclear) solve this Israeli-Arab conflict.  I, I think I--" and he's talking like I can do all these things.  Now I'm a journalist.  I got James Earl Ray in the can already.  I mean in the--in the video can.  He's already been shot; I've got that.  And I'm doing Larry Flint, and I'm gonna marry these stories together, about the relationship between these two men.  That's what I do.  And he's talking about "I think I can help 'em and ha--I think I'm the answer to a, a lot of the world's problems."  All of a sudden it's autumn and the sun is setting, and there are no leaves on the trees.  Larry had red hair, and the sun is right behind him, almost like a--those movies we talked about.  I could see these scenes.  And it's flaring out from be--around his red hair haloing him almost, almost angelic like, the lighting on him.  And something told me to say "Larry, you think you're the guy who can fix the world's problems?"  "Yeah."  And I said "Larry, are you the Messiah?"  Long pause.  "Sometimes I think I am, Leon.  Sometimes I think I am" (laughter).  Hell of a story.  Now you got these--you got these two guys.  When I got back to Columbus, I put it together.  We did a half-hour special on it--Larry Flint, James Earl Ray, the relationship between the two men.  Larry Flint saying he's the Messiah; James Earl Ray saying no, I didn't kill Dr. King; how they got together; the airplane--it just fell into my lap.  And that's how I met James Earl Ray.  I've been with Martin Luther King, met James Earl Ray, been with Coretta Scott King, been with Martin Luther King, III, and I talked to former Congressman [HM] Louis Stokes, who's a friend of mine here in Cleveland, who led the reinvestigation on the House Assassination's Committee on Martin Luther King and [President] John F. Kennedy.  He did this in 1977.  He, too, interviewed James Earl Ray.  And he and I compared notes about what we learned by talking to James Earl Ray and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So all this was on the news, these, these, these conversations and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and, and Louis Stokes and I have talked about it.  And Louis--Congressman Stokes--former Congressman Stokes says "Oh, he was a liar, Leon.  He would lie at the drop of a hat.  And, and you know, you go down this road and he'd lie, then you go down that road and he'd lie."  That's, that's, that's--that was what he determined from his reinvestigation of the--of the King assassination interviewing James Earl Ray wherever they interviewed him.  It, it might--I don't know where it was.  But I, I did the--I did the--and, and my interview.  So we get together and we talk about--you know.
Story_ID: 96039
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember--this is a story that had a lot of legs is on net--network news covered the--did, did, did they include the footage of you interviewing him [James Earl Ray]?
Speaker 2: No, I never saw that.  I think later on Ray did talk to network people when Dexter King, I think, went to prison to, to talk to Ray.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I remember they had the--
Speaker 2: And I thought they--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --kind of said they kind of agreed--I thought somebody was--don't quote me on that.  I, I don't wanna go down that road.  I'm uncertain of what they--what they determined.  But, but, but the books I've read about the assassination and about Ray, tracks Ray tracking [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] across the country, and, and they were there.  They question is who else was involved because Ray is--ran for thirty days and was found in Great Britain.  This was a guy with no money, but he got to Great Britain.  By the way, there is a Pentecostal minister in Cleveland, Bishop J. Delano Ellis, whom I know very well.  East 105th and, and Chester Avenue is his church.  He was a cabdriver in Memphis [Tennessee] who was called to take Dr. King and [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson and the entourage, [Ralph] Abernathy and whoever else, to dinner that night, the cabdriver.  He was moonlighting as a cabdriver, a young minister then, older clergyman now of course.  And he showed up at the Lorraine Motel.  And as he's out cleaning his windshield, knowing I'm gonna take Dr. King to dinner, and I gotta have the cab lookin' good.  And Dr. King is up on the banister, on that balcony.  He sees him up there, then he hears a gunshot.  He looks to where the gunshot came from, and then he looks back.  And he sees Dr. King sprawled out on the balcony.  He witnessed the assassination.  I talked to him about the assassination too.  So I got all these tentacles on all these different parts of that story, you know.  And, and I got a little of this and a little of that, and a little of this and a little of that in my interviews.  King, King--inter--seeing King and interviewing James Earl Ray, interviewing Bishop Ellis about being the cabdriver when Dr. King was killed and witnessing the assassination, [HM] Louis Stokes, who did the reinvestigation of it, Coretta Scott King-Dexter King--all, all of--I mean Martin Luther King, III--all of these con--these lines converge.  And that I have found just a riveting story, but I can shed no more light on it than the light that's been shed.  I only can tell what I heard and what I saw.
Story_ID: 96040
Speaker 1: Now, now what I--I want--now, no parts of this story was picked up by the network after you, you shot it?  It was just, just, just done locally on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I--I don't think--I have since used--when James Earl Ray died [1998], I went into my files and pulled that out for my Channel 4 [WCMH-TV] Columbus [Ohio] interview.  And we aired part of that interview of James Earl Ray on Channel 5 [WEWS-TV] here in Cleveland [Ohio] years later, 'cause I've kept--I've kept a copy of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Phil Donahue had a--had a story about it, that at sa--a certain would--did you have anything to do with that or--
Speaker 2: No, no, I--
Speaker 1: I know it--the story did have some legs.  I remember the Raul--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thing and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --first time he mentioned Raul was with you (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And later in Playboy magazine there was a story, and I saw the name Raul when it--when it came to James--James Earl Ray.  But [HM] Louis Stokes--Congressman Stokes and I, we talk about it whenever we get together often, and just kind of comparing notes trying to see--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the Southern writer that wrote the book about Ray that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a--what was his name?  I can't think--well any rate, but the--someone, you know, wrote a book (unclear) James Earl Ray's reworking of this story, yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I read one of the books.  I forget the name of, of one of the books I read about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --James Earl Ray and tracking Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: Oh, William Bradford Huie, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, that's the--that's the writer.  Any rate, but--okay.
Story_ID: 96041
Speaker 1: So this was a crazy time po--politically in the country and a lot of--so, so you were only there 'til just about 1979?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I came to Channel 3 [WKYC-TV] in Cleveland [Ohio], the NBC station, in January--January 19th, 1979.
Speaker 1: So, so what did they--how, how did that come about now?  This is--these job changing stories are pretty good, so what--(laughter)--what happened this time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I, I, I got a phone call from, from a guy that I'd worked opposite of in Columbus.  And we worked together for a while in Columbus.  And he later came to Cleveland to the NBC station in Cleveland.  And he called me and he says would "You be willing to, to leave Columbus and come to Cleveland, your hometown?"  And I said "Yeah.  Let's talk about it."  So I came up here one day and, and sat down and talked.  And, and, and they said "We'd love to get you here, but you're under contract."  I says, "Yeah, I am.  They said well, we don't wanna disturb that and get involved for, you know, break--trying you--get you to break your contract."  So they called the station down there, and the station said "No, he's under contract."  And so we let it go.  And I, I, I was going through turmoil.  I, I wanted to go and I didn't wanna go.  And then when they said you can't go, it kind of solidified everything.  I'm staying in Columbus 'cause I, I, I got a year or so to--a year and a half to go on a contract.  A few months later, Channel 3, Cleveland, calls me again in Columbus and says, "We'd still like for you to come up here.  We, we got a weekend anchor job."  And I was jumping from Monday through Friday to weekends here, but that's a bigger market so you jump up and take, take the weekend job.  And I says, "Well, they're not gonna let me go."  And he says "Oh, yes they were.  We've been talking to 'em."  And they wouldn't say anymore than that but "If you want it, it's here.  They'll let you out of the contract because they're making some other changes there."  I was not part of those changes, but they're making some changes.  But I guess they figured well, we won't be able to keep him anyway.  He's gonna be gone when the contract ends.  I'm assuming.  I don't know.  They--Channel 4 [WCMH-TV] in Columbus didn't say why they were letting me out.  They just said--Channel 3 just said "It's guaranteed; your--you can get out."  Now I don't know if they paid it out.  I don't what they did, but all of a sudden Channel 4 said "Well, we understand that we can't hold you.  It's a lucrative job for you."  Wasn't that lucrative, but it was a better job.  And so I left and I came up here.  That's, that's how I got up here.  It was--it was a job that I--that--I didn't think it was gonna happen so I quit worrying about it.  And then I had to worry about it again 'cause now I gotta make a decision.  Do I walk out of all of this?  And when I told my dad [Leon Bibb]--I says dad, I'm, I'm coming to Cleveland.  And dad says, "Something's wrong with that station, son.  Television--Channel 3, they, they can't keep anybody.  Something's wrong, and maybe you need to stay in Columbus.  You got a good job-"very conservative-"you got a good job.  Just stay there."  I says, "Dad, all television stations operate this way.  People always come and, and going.  There's nothing more wrong with Channel 3 than anywhere else.  But it's an opportunity for me."
Story_ID: 96042
Speaker 1: Now were you familiar with WKYC?  Is this a station that you watched growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was familiar with it.
Speaker 1: And did--well, how did you--I, I guess you felt okay with it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I felt okay with it.  I felt okay with it.  The, the, the news director flew down to Columbus from Channel--Channel 3.  He flew to Columbus when we were--we had talked about contracts and basically hammered out the money over the phone.  And then he says--one day I got a, a call from, from the switchboard: "Leon, you have a guest up here."  So I went to the switchboard to Channel 4 in Columbus, and it was Bill Peterson, the news director from Channel 3.  "Oh, Bill, what brings you to Columbus."  He says, "Just you."  I said "Just me?"  He says, "Yeah, I talked to your boss, your general manager, they'll let us use the conference room.  I thought we'd sit down and get your signature."  I said, "You flying to me to sign me?"  He says, "Yeah."  I felt good about that.  So we went upstairs to the conference room.  And he has his briefcase, and he says "So I brought this contract."  And he reaches out, he says "I got a three-year deal here.  Is that okay?" I says "Well, I was thinking maybe a little less, maybe like a two-year deal."  Because in those days, I'm thinking two years in Cleveland, I'm gone.  I'm going to the network.  He says "Well, I thought that might be the case.  I also have a two-year contract as well."  He pulled that out.  Now, you know I ended--I've been in Cleveland for more than thirty years now.  I didn't get to the network.  I decided to--this was my life, and I'm glad I stayed it, doing what I do locally.  So I signed it, and we shook hands, and everything was okay.  And I said, "Bill, I'm, I'm  im--really impressed.  You're not here to do anything else?"  He says "Nope, catching a plane back."  There was a little airline that flew from Port Columbus Airport right to downtown Cleveland, to the downtown Cleveland Burke Lakefront Airport.  He says nope, going back; I got work to do this afternoon, this evening.  So I just came here for you.  And I was impressed.  I said, "Who else was in the running for this?  He said nobody, just you.  If you--if we didn't get you we weren't gonna do anything."  That's what he said.  I believed him.  I said doggone, I mean, I come a long way since sitting in that professor's office when they wouldn't even talk to me 'cause I was black to now they're bringing me a contract, getting my signature 'cause they wanna get me signed up.  So they make sure I get there.  So--that--that's how I got to Channel, Channel, Channel 3.
Story_ID: 96043
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were there any other--well, I know Al Roker was there [WKYC-TV in Cleveland, Ohio] right, as a weatherman--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Al and I came about the same time.  Al and I were on the air together.  Al got there maybe two months before me.  And he was doing the weather, and I was a reporter three days of the week.  And I was the anchor at six and eleven--co-anchor, six and eleven on Saturdays and Sundays.  So three days of the week--Al lived in Shaker Heights [Ohio], where, where I still live.  And we would take what's call the rapid transit.  That--that's the rail system.  That's like the, the Chicago [Illinois] L, or the Boston [Massachusetts] T or the New York [City] subway.  We would take the rapid transit in to work 'cause we lived right near the line.  And, and we would get off in downtown Cleveland and walk about--oh, about a five-minute walk to the television station.  Well, Al and I were known in town; we were on television.  And I played straight man to Al on the rapid transit, on the train.  We, we had a little act that we'd do.  And he was as he is now, still.  And I'd play straight man to Al, Al Roker.  And we would ride the rails in, come into work at 3:30, same people were on it when you go home eight hours later.  At midnight same people; they'd be on again, so we'd all ride together.  We got to know people.  You know, it's like--
Speaker 1: So, so what--
Speaker 2: --a party.
Speaker 1: --what was this routine?  What was this routine?
Speaker 2: Well, we would just joke.  Al Roker would just talk like he is.  He talks about the weather and "Oh my God, it's gonna be snowing, and I gotta get in, I gotta do this."  And he would just, just crack, crack the kinds of jokes you see on the "Today Show"--same kind of--same kind of bubbly personality.  He was not as big in those days, but the same bubbly personality.  And, and I enjoyed working with Al Roker.  And--but, but I knew he wasn't long in Cleveland.  His hometown was New York, and I knew he wanted to get back there, and, and he did.  But, but, but we worked together.  And, and those were probably the golden days of television--my golden days of television.  We were young.  Money was pretty good.  We were covering the news.  We, we just had--we just had a lot of fun with it doing what we do and doing what we were paid to do.
Story_ID: 96044
Speaker 1: So, so what were the news stories here in Cleveland [Ohio] when you got back?
Speaker 2: The city had just finished going into default.  That was under the administration of Mayor Dennis Kucinich.  Now the city owed $15 million dollars in outstanding loans from city banks.  Word was the banks and the downtown business community really did not like Mayor Dennis Kucinich.  He was a youngster, later became congressman.
Speaker 1: They, they called him "the boy mayor of Cleveland."
Speaker 2: The boy mayor--34 years old [sic, 31 years old], had a staff, had safety directors who were like 31 years old.  And they were in charge of police and fire, that, that kind of thing.  So it was a whole lot going on.  And, and one day they called in those loans, and the city couldn't pay.  Now it wasn't a whole lot of money, but the city went in de--to default.  And when--that means we were in, in trouble financially, and they called in the loans.  And what they were doing was really cutting the legs out from underneath the mayor I believe.  That was before I got here.  When I got here, the city had already--was already in default, and they were trying to dig their way out.  And, and a new mayor was soon to be seated on the horizon, George Voinovich, who is credited with helping turn the city around in those days.  That would have been in the--in the early '80s [1980s].  But, but that, that was going on; school de--desegregation was going on; busing--forced busing to, to desegregate the schools was going on; the crime was always going on, as it is going on today.  And Cleveland was looking to get its footing.  This is before the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.  This is before--I believe before the city was a hub for Continental Airlines.  We're losing our hub status by the way now with United [Airlines].  We're losing that.  This was when, when, when--it was bleak on the lakefront.  It was just a lot of things were not taking places as the--as they should have taken place.  The heyday of Cleveland seemingly had come and gone.  The Cleveland of the 1900s, when we had a population of 900,000 people, the Cleveland of the--of the 1950s, when I came along, perhaps with 800,000 people, when so many people lived in the city.  And the suburbs had not yet caught a big foothold.  I mean there were suburbs, but they didn't have the footprint that they have now.  The, the city was working so well in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], although there was racial segregation.  Then the riots came along in the '60s [1960s], in the early '70s [1970s], and things began to change, white flight, black flight, all of that.  So when I came to Cleveland, this is the way--this is the way the city was.  But it was beginning to turn itself under George Voinovich, who, who later was elected mayor.  George Voinovich, the, the Republican mayor, who worked with nothing but Democrats because he was the only Republican in city hall.
Story_ID: 96058
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talk--talking about some of the storylines.  Now, now in those days, as I recall, the [Cleveland] Cavaliers and the [Cleveland] Browns were playing great ball, even though they didn't win a championship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were.
Speaker 1: They--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and the Browns were playing--I mean certainly the Browns were playing great ball.  The "Kardiac Kids."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean every game came down to the last two minutes, and we'd squeak it out.  Some way or another we'd squeak it out under Brian Sipe as, as quarterback.  And Art Modell was the then owner before, before he moved the team to Baltimore [Maryland].  So, there, there, there was--there was hope on the horizon.  And, and the Indians were doing their, their usual swan dive--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in summer.
Speaker 1: --foreign team for the Yankees--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, un--until the mid '90s [1990s], when new owners took over and they built a new stadium, and really then in '9- [1990]--'94 [1994], '95 [1995], '96 [1996], '97 [1997].  And we were contenders, and got to the--got to the big show, got to the World Series.  In fact in '97 [1997] the Indians were one strike away from winning the series, not one out, one strike, and lost the series.  But that's the way it goes in Cleveland.
Story_ID: 96059
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your--the most memorable story that, that--now you, you been here [Cleveland, Ohio]--you, you been--
Speaker 2: Since '79 [1979].  What's that, thir--
Speaker 1: When you were in--you were at WKYC, right?
Speaker 2: Sixteen years [1979 until 1995].
Speaker 1: Sixteen years, okay.
Speaker 2: And since '95' [1995] I've been here at Channel 5 [WEWS-TV].
Speaker 1: Okay.  On it--and the [W]KYC days what was the biggest story you covered?  Or what's the most memorable thing that happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I guess there was school desegregation.  Those were the heavy stories.  School desegregation took place.  Personally, maybe I had an opportunity to fly with the Air Force Thunderbirds.  I--and that was a--that was a kick for me, a personal kick for me 'cause I love aviation.  It was a personal kick for me.  But everyday was a, a story.  In fact, I saw [HM] George Forbes today.  He's the former city council president in Cleveland, controversial character.  And he's now retired, and then later became NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] president, but he's since retired from that.  But I saw him today.  He came in with Don King, the boxing promoter, who's in Cleveland.  I interviewed him live today at noon.  And I told George--George Forbes--I says "When I covered you at city--at city hall on Monday nights, your, your city council meetings where you had fire going against Mayor [Dennis] Kucinich, and he had fire going against you."  I says, "we called it the Monday night fights.  That's what city council was called.  We would just show up with a camera, and there was always gonna be a fight."  And so I, I think a lot of that went on.  I, I guess the most significant story, though, to come out of those times was after Kucinich--when Republican [Mayor George] Voinovich came in, a kid from--he grew up in the Collinwood area, Democratic stronghold, but he became a Republican.  I was told when he was twenty years old he--as a Democrat he went to Democratic Party and says, "I'm George Voinovich, and I'd run for office" at some lower level office.  They said, "George, you're kind of young.  Why don't you come back in a few years."  He left the Democratic Party, walked around the corner and went to the Republican Party.  And they said, "George, come on in; let's talk."  That's how he became a Republican.  But at any rate, he knew he could not run the city with Republicans 'cause it's just not enough Republicans to go around.  There were none on the city council.  They had thirty-three members in those days on the city council.  Everyone of them was a Democrat.  George Voinovich was the only Republican there.  So you had George Voinovich and you had George Forbes, and they made the city work, good cop, bad cop, same cop though.  And they made this city work.  One did this, one did that, but it was all for the benefit of the city.  And they really were working together.  They made this city work.  And they began the effort of turning this city around.  And Forbes ran for mayor, but, but could never get there.  And [Michael R.] Mike White, who was one of his lieutenants, one of the council members, ran for, for mayor against Forbes, and, and Mike White won, and continued what had been started by Voinovich and Forbes.  By then Forbes is stepping away from city council.  And, and--but Mike White continued that effort.  And I think we're still somewhat on a roll now with that.
Story_ID: 96060
Speaker 1: You mentioned the, the building of Jacobs Field [now Progressive Field in Cleveland, Ohio] and the ascendancy of the, the [Cleveland] Indians.  But it was more--I mean the--Jacobs Field, from what I understand from just watching sports shows--sports magazine shows-- was the prototype ballpark.  And I think Camden Yards [Oriole Park at Camden Yards] in Baltimore [Maryland] came along around the same time.  But they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like prototype new baseball stadiums--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that were much better than the old stadiums that were being built.  In fact they had to tear down a lot of the ones built in the '70s [1970s] to try to make one like Jacobs Field--
Speaker 2: Exactly, you got--
Speaker 1: --which is--all of 'em seemed to be modeled after Jacobs Field or Camden Yards now.  So somebody, you know, knew what they were doing in terms of planning it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Jacobs--Dick Jacobs--the Jacobs brothers [Richard Jacobs and David Jacobs] own--owned the Cleveland Indians in those days.  And they poured a lot of money into it, poured money into players.  In '95 [1995], when we won the American League Pennant and went to the World Series, this was the year after there'd been a strike in baseball in na--1994.  ABC came to Cleveland to do a piece on how the Cleveland Indians were doing.  At one point, we were like twenty games in front of--in first place.  Second place was like twenty games away, something like that.  And I remember [David] Marash--I forget his first name.  He was the--he was the reporter, and he a line in there.  He says "baseball is suffering all across this country because of the strike, but not in Cleveland."  That's when the city began rebuilding.  And they loved sports here when they've got a winner.  Four hundred fifty-five straight sellouts, forty-three thousand people, four hundred and fifty-five straight games.  That covers a series of years, and that showed what, what, what the Indians were doing.  And they played well.  Of the starting nine batters, which would be the designated hitter and, and the other position players--of the starting nine, I would say seven or eight were batting three hundred.  And maybe the one guy who might not have been was the shortstop, Omar Vizquel [Gonzalez], who was probably hitting 275.  You could not pitch around anybody.  Everybody was hitting, and everybody knew we were gonna win the game no matter--no matter where it was.  That helped this city get a better image of itself and, and began to turn things around.  The downtown business restaurants started doing business--big business--because so many people were coming to Cleveland.  So--
Speaker 1: I think it was--
Speaker 2: --I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --impressed.
Speaker 1: --for, for Jacobs Field included the downtown businesses and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and--I mean a, a sense of revitalization of the inner city.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you, you, you take Jacobs Field over here.  You take the sports complex.  Jacobs Field and the--and the--and, and, and what--and Quicken Loans Arena, The Q, the basketball arena, they're over there.  You got the lakefront [Lake Erie] over there with the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the [Great Lakes] Science Center right on the lakefront.  And then you got Playhouse Square over here, which has the largest number of theater seats in one complex outside of New York City, four theaters that almost were torn down.  I'll tell you about that in a minute.  And when you got these--it's like home plate, first place, second base, third base.  When you got that going, the goal is for the growth--to grow up on the baselines all between these four spots.  And that's what's--and Cleveland State [University in Cleveland, Ohio] is all meshed in there with it.  And some other things are--Public Square.  All of that is in there.  Now we got the casino.  And that's the goal, is to make all of this work.  Sometimes we fall short because we get through a recession or something.  But sometimes something falls apart.  But the city has been able to rebuild itself.  And I guess I'm an optimist that we will do it again, and that we're in the process of doing it.
Story_ID: 96061
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977], before I came back to Cleveland [Ohio], Playhouse Square, the State [Theatre], the Palace [Palace Theatre, now the Connor Palace], the Ohio Theatre, and the Allen Theatre, they're all there, almost were torn down.  They had become decrepit; it was raining in them.  Nothing was happening.  These were theaters that I'd gone to as a child to see, you known, first run movies with my parents in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  All of a sudden, when the money left Cleveland, they fell in disrepair.  And it's--and, and I know this to be true: they were gonna tear them down and build a parking garage, horror of horrors.  The wrecking ball was on Euclid Avenue with the balls--big round ball--ready to start swinging--boom, boom--to knock these down.  And somebody said "We can't let this happen.  How do we stop this wrecking ball today, 'cause it's gonna start today."  And somebody says "It takes $25,000 dollars to stop that wrecking ball today, at least today."  And they put it on a credit card and says this will give us breathing room.  We have got to do something to save it.  And a man by the name of [Raymond] Ray Shepardson, who I later interviewed when I came to Cleveland in '79 [1979], and the theaters were beginning that slow process of coming back to the--to the spectacular view and look that they are today, Ray Shepardson and a whole bunch of other folks got together and says "We cannot lose these theaters, we just can't."  And they began to work on it.  And I covered that for years and finally they had brought--come back.  And now you can go see "Porgy and Bess" tonight right down there.  My wife and I wanna go see "Porgy and Bess."  You can go to see "Porgy and Bess" and "Les Miserables" and, and, and, and, and, and, and many of those--"The Lion King."  All of that is down there at Playhouse Square.  Now, that's--and that kept that part of the city alive with theaters, and they built a hotel across the street.  What Cleveland has to do is do more of that.  We have got to find a way to do that to get back to the prominence that we were when I was a kid.  When you look at the photographs of downtown Cleveland, you, you, you can't even see the sidewalk.  There are so many people shoulder to shoulder.  We'd shop downtown, you know.  You, you just--you just--we've just got to do it.  And I'm thinking--I'm thinking that we can.  It's--but it's gonna take strong leadership, determined leadership, and it's gonna take the will of the people, and it's gonna take a new way of looking at, at government, what government does, and, and, and regionalism, and all of that.  I, I, I don't know all the--how it all fits together perfectly, but that's just an overall viewpoint.  And that's from being out here as a reporter for thirty-five years looking at where we've gone, and the mistakes we've made, and the successes we've made.
Story_ID: 96062
Speaker 1: Well, looking at--again, at this--I mean Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [and Museum in Cleveland, Ohio], this, this occurs in the na--when does the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame--is it around the same time that Jacobs Field is being developed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It came online in 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was there for the groundbreaking of that and there for the opening of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.  There was a big, big push by USA--USA Today newspaper.  Where should the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame be located?  Write in and vote, or phone in and vote, or however it was.  I know there wasn't big cell phone opportunities in those days, if any.  And, and Cleveland overwhelming won, won this competition.  So that made 'em start lookin' at Cleveland.  And because of the history of Cleveland and, and the phrase "Rock and Roll," though it was not invented in Cleveland, it was popularized in Cleveland by a disc jockey by the name of Alan Freed.  You probably heard of him.
Speaker 1: Alan Freed now--yeah.  Now did--I was gonna ask you about him.  When you were a youth, did, did you listen to him?  I mean he--he was--he's like iconic in the--
Speaker 2: Icon--
Speaker 1: --radio world as--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My, my, my aunts and uncles--my parents didn't listen to it so much, but they knew about him.  But my aunts and uncles next door, they were all ways talking about the Moondog show.  It was Alan "Alan Freed's Moondog Show," where they--where he played a lot of what was called "race music" in those days, black music, black rock 'n' roll.  And Alan Freed took that old phrase of rock 'n' roll, which was a sexual connotation, which you can imagine we're rocking and rolling tonight.  Well, he took that and, and, and popularized it.  He didn't invent it.  He popularized it.  It was a black term, and he popularized it 'cause he had that microphone with those 50,000 radio watts.  And, and that--that's what--so they, they kind of built being the capital of rock 'n' roll on, on, on the "Moondog Coronation Ball."
Story_ID: 96063
Speaker 1: All right, so now your--now from '88 [1988] to '91 [1991], you did the 6:00 and 11:00 news, right, for WKYC [in Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I would think so--'88 [1988] to '91 [1991], maybe, maybe even '92 [1992]--part--into '92 [1992] I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Six o'clock and eleven or six--or six o'clock or eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you even covered the Persian Gulf War in '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Did, did you go to the Persian Gulf?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I went with a U.S. Coast Guard unit out of Cleveland, so it was a local story.  And we were embedded with that unit.  And when they went--when they were called up to go to, to the Persian Gulf, I went over there with them for about a--for about a week, stayed with them, and ate with them, and traveled with them.
Speaker 1: Now how close were you to the action there in the Persian Gulf?
Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't a whole lot of action taking place in, in, in Bahrain, where we were located.  The war was--we were still in Desert Shield, which came before Desert Storm.  And--but there was tension in the air.  And because they were a Coast Guard unit, they were assigned to port security so they would be around the city of Manama, which is the capital of Bahrain.  And we were assigned with them just as they were going through some last minute training here in the United States, here at--here in Ohio, and then when they went over and took their boats with them, because they would be working with the U.S. Navy on the waterways.  And it, it, it--I didn't hear any gunfire or anything like that.  But, but, but the threat of terrorism hung heavy, and we just had to be very careful about where we were and what we said.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so you were--how long did you stay in the Persian Gulf.
Speaker 2: About a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about, about one week.
Story_ID: 96064
Speaker 1: All right, now sometime in the early '90s [1990s] the station changed ownership, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --WKYC [in Cleveland, Ohio]?  Was that--was this good or bad--
Speaker 2: Bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We went from owned by NBC to owned by a company called Multimedia [Broadcasting, Inc.].  And when they came in, they, decided they, they wanted to make changes.  And they took me off the, the anchor desk and caught some flack for it, a lot of flack from the community, especially the black community, but all so some of the white community.  And they caught a lot of flack for that.  And they didn't wanna fire me, so I, I stayed in there.  I mean I didn't have any place to go at that time.  So I signed another contract for three years 'cause I didn't have any--anything to go to.  So I signed another contract for three years, and I was on the street as a reporter.  On occasion, they would put me back on on the weekend show, asking me if I would be willing to fill in for the weekend show when somebody was away or until the new weekend guy had not gotten in.  Well, when I'd do the weekend show, the phones would jump off the hook again, and people say "Leave him there, leave him there."  And so it was a lot of that going on.  And it, it really--it really rocked me.  It really rocked me pretty hard because nobody could give me a reason as to--as to why they were taking me off the news.  And I certain was not the problem.  And we began to, to slip in ratings.  I mean certainly the black community walked away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] actually officially, you know--you know, criticized--
Speaker 2: Criticized--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous), yeah.
Speaker 2: There were rallies to get me back on the air that were held in, in large churches here.  I did not go to those rallies.  Of course, it wouldn't be good for me to go there.  And, and I never badmouthed my, my company at all.  But I just let it take the role that let the people speak for me, and, and they spoke loud.  And there was places where there was no place to sit down.  And the meeting was about "What are we gonna do about what they did to Leon."  And so that bolstered me and kept me--kept me going.  But I showed up for work every day.  And I--and I did--as a reporter I did a lot of quality work.  I did a lot of quality work during that time period until I decided that it was time to leave at the end of a contract.
Story_ID: 96065
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did leave [WKYC-TV in Cleveland, Ohio] in 1995, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now this is an interesting year.  Now you, you went to da--WEWS, right, where we are today?
Speaker 2: Where we are right now.  Yes--
Speaker 1: Right I know.
Speaker 2: --I came here.
Speaker 1: This is in 1995.  Is there a story about how that--this transition took place?
Speaker 2: Let's see, how did that--how did that happen?  Well, my agent and I, we'd gotten together and, and, and, and I said if I--if I leave--if I'm any good, somebody's gonna call me to say come work for us.  So when it hit the newspapers that I was leaving, because I never said goodbye at Channel 3--they, they wouldn't let me on the air so I never got on the air to say goodbye when I left in '95 [1995], two three years after, you know, they had taken me off as the anchor, but I was a reporter.  So they had a party for me at, at, at Channel 3.  People stood in line to hug me.  The staff didn't want me to go, but high-level management had made a decision.  I don't know where that decision came from, but they had made the decision.  So when I left, I says "If I'm any good I'm going home."  And Channel 3 says, "What are you going to do for a living if you go home?  I mean you--you'll be without a paycheck."  And I said, "Well, you've never asked that before in my life.  Nobody's ever asked me how I was gonna feed my family before.  And now you're wondering-" I said, "I'll just do the best I can, but I'm going home."  They said, "What are you going to do?"  And I said, "Well, I'll probably cut the lawn, work a flower garden, something like that."  So I, I left.  And when it hit the newspapers that my last day had come and gone, television stations started calling me.  They got my number and they called me at home, and I took phone calls at my kitchen table.
Story_ID: 96066
Speaker 1: And I talked to Channel 5. Channel 5 knew what was going on.  We had talked to 5 earlier, and they, they knew that, that I was gonna be out there, and they, they--I had dinner with the general manager at the time here and, and the news director, Gary Robertson--Gary Robinson--and the news director, Paul Stueber.  We had dinner and they said, "We got an idea, and we would like for you to come do a show that doesn't exist now; nobody's ever done it before; and it's called the 'Weekend Exchange,' where you would be on the air from eight until 9:30 on Saturday and Sunday mornings, hour and a half each day.  Come do that show."  They had--the way they described it was something I'd always wanted to do, something like "CBS Sunday Morning," if you ever looked at that.  It had that feel to it.  And I did that show.  And I had a--we had a staff of about four or five people who worked on that show, not counting the photographers who worked--reporters.  And I said go long on our stories.  If you need four minutes for a story, take the four minutes.  Just take--make sure you use it wisely.  And we put that live show on the air on Saturdays and Sunday mornings.  And I did that for eighteen months or thereabouts and until--
Speaker 2: So this a, a show that's--that consists of mostly in--interviews, right, that, that you were conducting with people?
Speaker 1: We do in-studio interviews like we're doing right now.  We'd shoot videotape of a story and hold it for the weekend.  We--it was tape, it was live, it was--it was whatever it needed to be.  The day Princess Diana died in England [sic, Paris, France on August 31, 1997], I got a phone call at, at 2:00 in the morning, or 1:00 in the morning, something like that--3:00 in the morning--"Leon, the Princess has died.  Listen, we're, we're reworking the whole Saturday morning show.  Get in here as soon as you can 'cause we're reworking the whole thing, and we'll be going live to London."  I mean I did--and I did talkback interviews with people in London, England on the BBC about what was going on.  We went live to Paris, France, where the--where, where Princess Diana died in the automobile crash with Dodi al-Fayed [sic, Dodi Fayed].  It--we took whatever we--whatever format it needed to take.  We were not in a hurry to come on and say who got shot last night unless it was a major, major event.  We would come on and I--and, and I, I would--we would have a live picture.  And I would say "You're looking at a live television picture right now of, of, of the sun kind of rising up behind the--Jacobs Field [now Progressive Field], the baseball stadium.  You'll see it right on the rim of the--of, of the stadium.  The sun began its ascent from the eastern horizon at 6:42 this morning.  It is now 8:01.  It is now 8:01 or 8:30, whatever it was.  And I says so the sun is still climbing to its zenith."  And we would start it that way.  We were not--and I says wa, wa--"So I'll be giving you the news headlines in just a moment, but let's check on the weather situation."  We'll check with the weatherperson.  And then we would say, say now these are some, some of the headlines of which took place.  It was done that way.  And then we would have a long format story, and we would have live interviews.  People would come, and it was just a different kind of a--of a Channel 5 News--Channel 5 production, which I really, thoroughly loved--probably my favorite show of all the shows I've ever done in my life.  And, and it kept me going, kept my face up there in television, got me back in television, and I did that for eighteen months, until they eventually killed the show and then say well, we want you to go to weekends now, the regular weekend 6:00 and 11:00 news as the co-anchor.  And I was paired with, with a co-anchor woman there, or a co-anchor man.  And, and we, we did the show at six and eleven until I got promoted to Monday through Friday here at Channel 5.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I mean was, wa--was it a, a ratings issues or, or what, for Morning Exchange?
Speaker 1: For, for the "Weekend Exchange?"
Speaker 2: Or "Weekend Exchange."
Speaker 1: I would guess.  I don't think it ever received a huge, huge rating number.  I don't know may--I don't--it might have been financial.  You know, we had a crew.  We had people working that, that show.  We had live reports and all of that.  It, it might have been that.  I'm, I'm not quite certain what it was, but, but it was quality.  It, it, it was quality work, as, as I've often said.  You know, I live and die by ratings, but if nobody's watching and I know we're doing a fine job--if, if you've got a bar with, with, with, with, with, with dancing women over here on this corner and a church preaching the gospel over there, there may be more people in the bar than in the church, but that does not mean that the church is doing the right thing.  It's doing what it's supposed to do.  And so I always thought we were doing what we were supposed to do.  So I was--I, I was kind of worried when, when, when, when the show died, but I didn't have to get up at 4:00 in the morning anymore either so.  I was back to more traditional hours, working 3:00 to 11:30 doing the news on Saturdays and Sundays at six and eleven.
Story_ID: 96067
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about--now I have a note here about another public affairs program called "Kaleidoscope."  Now what--was that similar to--
Speaker 2: "Kaleidoscope" is, is a public affairs director.  You met Maureen Bailey just a little bit ago.  She's the one who helped you with the coffee.  Maureen is a public affairs director, and she--public--yeah, public--community affairs director, and, and she, she produces "Kaleidoscope."  This is a half-hour talk show where we bring in nonprofit organizations or newsmakers, and, and we talk about what's going on in their world.  The Urban League will come in and sit down and talk with us.  The Red Cross says they need a blood drive they've got going, or there'd be other nonprofits that come in.  And it gives them an opportunity to talk about what they wanna do.  We do three interviews in, in, in, in, in a half hour.  And it's about what's going on.  They've got a fundraiser.  They're trying to sell tickets to the fundraiser for the public library system or whatever.  They will come in and they'll talk.  So I do "Kaleidoscope," and that show--that little show has legs.  It airs on Sunday mornings at 10:00.  And that show runs.  I mean people see that show.  And it's just a little thing that Maureen and I put together, but it addresses a need where if I can't get you on the news to talk about what you've got going in your community, I can get you on "Kaleidoscope."  And we can do a longer format interview.  The interviews run about six, seven minutes each.  So I've been doing that for I think about thirteen years now.
Story_ID: 96078
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995] also, I think, was the year that the football team that had the largest attendance of the National Football League, the Cleveland Browns, 80,000 fans every game--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know packed, sold out, you know, was--left town, went to Baltimore [Maryland].  Art Modell, the owner, who is now reviled in Cleveland [Ohio] by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --popular ascent, though he's gone--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --moved the team and--but there are some remarkable things that happened civically to keep the--you know try to keep the team, though it--yeah.  So what--tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I was the first--I did the first television interview with Art Modell on the "Weekend Exchange," that show we were talking about earlier--called him.  He answered the phone--called him at home--he answered the phone, told him who I was, told him we were taping and if it was okay to tape this, you know, interview 'cause it was over the telephone.  He says "Yeah."  And I said, "Cleveland is saying how can you move our team?"  And he says, "Leon, that's where you got it wrong.  It's not your team; it's my team."  That's when I understood the big business.  Well, I guess it is your team.  So he moved the team.  It just hurt this town.  Oh, it, it just rocked Cleveland.  We, we, we couldn't believe it.  And so [Michael R. White] Mike White was the mayor.  And, and Art Modell said city hall did not do enough for the old stadium that they played in where they would have 70 to 75,000, whatever, people there every, every Sunday.  He con--Modell contended that city hall did not do enough to fix the stadium and to keep the Browns here.  The city said "You fill up the stadium every Sunday, and you can't make a profit?"  So, there are all kinds of stories about there--about how deep somebody's pockets are, or what they should have been, or could have been, or would have been.  But, but the upshot of it is he left and moved the team, and they were gonna be the Baltimore Browns.  Mike White, infuriated, and, and the city administration, and the city--the downtown city leader, and some--and the fans just raised enough hell, they went to the NFL and they cut a deal.  They cannot be the Baltimore Browns.  We can't keep 'em here, but they gotta be the Baltimore something else. So they became the Baltimore Ravens.  We got cut a deal with the NFL where the Browns would be Cleveland, and that Cleveland would be the first city on an expansion.  And if you get a new stadium built, the Cleveland Browns--you will get a team which you can name the Cleveland Browns, keep the Cleveland Browns' colors, and keep the Cleveland Browns' history.  It may not be the same bloodline, but it's, all intents and purposes, I guess the same team, although it's a different bloodline from the Modell years, but it's the same history.  So Cleveland tried to buy up a lot of parcels of land caddy-corner to Jacobs Field--Progressive Park [Progressive Field] now as it's called, the baseball stadium at the corner of East 9th Street and, and, and, and, and Carnegie--try to buy up a bunch of land over there, but not enough time to buy up the land.  The only land that we got is Cleveland Stadium [now FirstEnergy Stadium].  So they decided, tear down Cleveland Stadium and build a new stadium on land we already got.  That way we're--we can fast track this thing.  Four years later the Browns are back, 1999.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was devastating.  And now we're going through--we got--we got a--we had a new owner.  [Alfred] Al Lerner was the new owner of the Browns who took over after Modell moved to Baltimore.  And then he, he died, and his son [Randolph] Randy Lerner took over, didn't do very well with it by, by--most sports guys will, will tell.  They know way better than I.  He didn't do very well, didn't not--not have enough hands on.  And he sold out to Jimmy Haslam from--of Tennessee--Knoxville, Tennessee.  And Jimmy Haslam owns the Cleveland Browns at, at this point.  And we are trying to get back to the style of football to which we had become accustomed, winning.  And it's been an uphill battle since 1999.  We have not done very well, but hope is things will turn around in, in, in 2014, in the--in the--in the future.  But, but that--that's, that's what happened.  But we are the only town to ever go to the NFL and raise enough hell to get our team back, our colors back, and our history back.  And, and we'll build a new stadium.  We'll do what we gotta do, but we need a town--we need a team in this town.  And that's what happened.
Story_ID: 96079
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is remarkable.  Some--in, in terms of the African American community, Michael [R.] White being the mayor [of Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do you think that Art Modell thought it was easy to throw him under the bus on this one and say that the city didn't do enough.
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know.  I, I don't--I've heard people say that, that Art--maybe he was not the billionaire that football team owners have become.  He, he did not have pockets that deep.  And, and maybe he could not make enough money to, to satisfy the needs of pro football.  I, I, I don't know.  But I can't tell you this, and it's hanging up in my closet--I've yet to wear it--when the Browns left, Browns' merchandise, like jackets, it was cheap; they were giving it away.  And I went to a store, and I saw this lined jacket, brand new, and it was--I forget what it was, but it was like giveaway price.  And I went to Mike White, the mayor then.  I says, "Mike, are you certain you can get this team back?"  He says, "Leon, we're gonna get the team back."  I says, "Mike, I can buy a Cleveland Browns' jacket for almost next to nothing that I really like, but I'm not gonna buy it if we don't have no team."  Mike said, "Buy the jacket.  You'll have a team."  And I went and bought the jacket.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It means so much around here.  I, I mean it's demonstrated by the people's turnout for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was a--it, it--this team has had the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --greatest turnout of any team in the--
Speaker 2: The 2013--
Speaker 1: --league.
Speaker 2: --season--all these years later since 1999 when they came back, the 2013 season we were four and twelve, and they filled up the stadium every game.  And I'm certain they'll fill it up going into the new season as long--if this team wins.  Now if things get shaky--'m hearing people saying that they're getting--they're getting shaky if this team does not win.  This team has always been competitive from its very beginnings in late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] when it started.  This is the home of Jim Brown and I'm her--and I--and I talked to somebody in the know the other day that Jim Brown has had a conversation with Jimmy Haslam about the changes that were made, making recommendations on some changes, and that Jimmy Haslam is taking the advice of Jim Brown and some other people too.  But I don't know that to be true I mean, but I got that from somebody I know who says he's in the know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I hope he's in the know.
Speaker 1: I think The Plain Dealer reported that John Wooten actually was informing the new general manager of the Browns'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Ray, [Harvey] Ray Farmer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--and so (unclear)--comin' together.
Story_ID: 96080
Speaker 1: But--so here at WEWS [Cleveland, Ohio]--so you've been here since 1995.  And, and you're, you're currently--are you--are you anchoring and reporting?
Speaker 2: I'm anchoring and reporting.  I've, I've got the noon show; the noon is mine now.  I anchored it at least.  And it's an hour long show.  I'm there Monday through Friday at noon after doing "Kaleidoscope" that airs on Sunday at 10:00.  And I've got a series that's called "My Ohio with Leon Bibb."  And it's kind of like--I have a producer by the name of Ann Geyser with whom I work.  And Ann and I kind of set up stories of whatever we want to do.  And I was told "Cover what you wanna cover; go tell whatever story you wanna tell."  And these are kind of feature stories about interesting people, places, things, just interesting stuff, kind of like Charles Kuralt--"On the Road with Charles Kuralt" for those old enough to remember the old CBS--
Speaker 1: Right, right now, now, now do you focus mostly on northeast Ohio, or do you go--
Speaker 2: Well, we do.  Mostly on northeast Ohio because it's easy to--easy to get to, although earlier this week we were in Columbus [Ohio] doing a story.  And we've been as far to the east as Ashtabula County; that's northeast Ohio, but right up against the Pennsylvania line.  And we've been down to Mansfield [Ohio] getting down into central Ohio.  And we've been over to Port Clinton [Ohio], moving toward northwest Ohio.  So--but, but generally most of our stuff has been in northeast Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So today your guest was Don King--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and--so this is--I mean you, you have guests--
Speaker 2: Every day we have a guest--
Speaker 1: --come, come or--
Speaker 2: --coming and talking about something.  Yesterday somebody was coming in talking about a winter festival that's taking place on the weekend.  We've had people coming in talking about their events which are taking place, or, or something that's going on--a fundraiser that's going on.  And today we had Don King.  Don King called--his people called, and he wanted to come in and talk about a boxing match he's promoting in a few days and here in Cleveland.  And Don King is from Cleveland.  And I brought up a subject that nobody else has ever in the history of Don King brought up.  And it, it, it rocked him.  I mean it didn't make him angry, but it rocked him like how do you know that--that kind of thing.  And, and it was a--it was just a wonderful moment on live television.
Speaker 1: What was it?  What--
Speaker 2: I figured you'd ask what was it (laughter).  I knew a man by the name of Clarence Kasmier [ph.], who is gone now.  He died at the--about the age of ninety.  And Clarence Kasmier, who, who--I went to school with, with, with some of his kids.  Clarence for forty-nine years was the maitre d', or he worked at a country club, Oak--Oakwood Country Club in suburban Cleveland.  And he eventually was the maitre d'.  He worked for 49 years, and by the way, never missed a day of work he said in 49 years.  He hired Don King in Don King's first job.  He made him a busboy at the age of 16.  And when I mentioned it do Don King, he just gave this big belly laugh--"Oh, Kasmier!  How did you know that, Leon?  How did you know about me being a busboy at the Oakwood Country Club."  I had it all right.  I says, "I just been--that's been in the back of my pocket."  I says, "I would mention it when I got you--got you in an interview just to let you know that I know a little bit more about you than you think I know."  And we had a big laugh about that.  It, it was all a very, very friendly interview, a very friendly interview.  And of course when you interview Don King, you really don't have to say anything.  As soon as the camera comes on, he's off and running.  He, he must have given twenty names, name dropping, before I even got a chance to ask a question.  "Yeah, I was with so and so, so and so, so and so, so and so; and this is what I believe; and I believe Jim Brown and the Cleveland Browns; and I'm here; Cleveland is, is my home.  It's where I was raised, where I went to jail.  He even says that--where I went to jail; where I was--had my first job."  And he's just off and running, talking about what he does for a living, and "I love America.  I love America," waving the American flag, and wearing a jacket that's got American decals all over it.
Story_ID: 96081
Speaker 1: Now you, you are attached to words--I mean--I mean you don't have a script in front of you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --doing this interview.  I mean you, you are really in love of words.  And I mean I, I, I can tell that.  Do, do you have--what is your--do, do you have a philosophy as a--as an anchorperson or as a journalist that you adhere to?  I mean what's your, your M.O. [modus operandi]?
Speaker 2: I think it's "tell the story, and tell the story in an interesting way."  I get a lot of stories that other folks wouldn't take.  I get a story that, that, that maybe nobody else wants to do.  But I love a story like that, a story that I can--I can wax poetic on.  I'll, I'll bring whatever I need.  I, I did one on ice fishing the other day.  We went out on this lake in the Cleveland Metro Parks area.  The part of the lake we were on is about the size of, oh, maybe three or four football fields.  And I'm edging out onto the lake.  I'm with the natural resources aquatic expert.  And I says, "Are you certain this ice is thick enough to walk on," 'cause it's about twenty-one feet of water underneath us.  He says, "Yeah, this is fine.  As long as it's four and a half to five inches you're okay, and this is about four and half or five inches.  We're okay."  So people are out there fishing.  They got-- dug holes in the ice, and dropped their line down, a cold day.  We didn't see one fish caught.  But never mind, 'cause the story really isn't about ice fishing.  It's about the camaraderie that ice fisherman have on the ice.  That's really what it's about.  It doesn't matter, and they don't care if they don't catch any fish 'cause they're together.  And they're talking, and periodically they'll yell across the ice: "How you doing?"  "Oh, I'm okay."  "What kind of lure you using?"  "Well, I'm using this, I'm using that."  And they drop their lure down there.  And if they catch something, good.  And if they don't, that's okay too.  Well, I'm looking for the story behind the obvious story.  And this is about friendship, and it's about camaraderie, and it's about being on the ice, and it's about what you think about.  And I asked people, "What do you think about when you're on the ice?"  A guy says "Oh, I just--I'm just out here.  I just--Leon, I just love being out here.  I just like the wind in my face, and it's peaceful and quiet, and, and, and I'm, I'm doing what I love."  I talked to a fisherman once.  This was not ice fishing, but he had a line in the water in the summertime in, in Lake Erie.  And I saw this guy walking down Lorraine--through Loraine, Ohio.  He's walking just like that, had, had a fishing pole in his hand.  He was just walking like that.  I said that's a story there, 'cause we're doing a story called "Gone Fishing" for my series "My Ohio" ["My Ohio with Leon Bibb"].  Nothing's set up.  We're just gonna go to the--to Lake Erie and find fisherman.  And I says, "Why do you go out here?  What's, what's going on out here?"  He gives you the sound bite of sound bites.  "When me and my old lady fall out and my mind's all messed up, I tell her, 'Hell, I'm gone fishing'" (laughter).  Now that's Hollywood.  That's Hollywood.  Larry, that's Hollywood.  That, that tells so much about getting in his mind.  And I just asked the question once.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: That's--and that's what came out.  So--
Story_ID: 96082
Speaker 1: What would you do if you didn't have to earn a living, and you had enough funds to do whatever you wanted to do?  I mean what, what would do?  Do you have a dream thing that you'd like to do?
Speaker 2: This is one of 'em.  I mean write, be an award-winning novelist--you noticed I saw award-winning novelist--and they're buying my book for Hollywood--that, that I would--I would--I would love to do.  I would love.  But I love to do, you know, character sketches.  I mean--you know I'm intrigued by you, by you ask your question and--just a helluva listener.  You just listen.  And you and I were talking when we had a break.  You, you just listen.  It's my story you're after, and you're letting me talk.  And you know if I talk long enough, if you let me, I'll tell it all.  You know that, 'cause I know that, 'cause that's what I do when I'm asking the question.  So I think I'm probably doing the dream job.  And it--and, and I would like to act--do a little acting, make movies, and be a Brad Pitt or a Sidney Poitier like that, and kind of a renaissance man.  I think I'd like to be a novelist and, and just kind of travel, and speak, and help people, and do what I do.  Somebody--I've, I've been asked to speak at a church.  I'm going to be speaking at a church in the next couple of weeks.  And, and they say "We just want you to come and tell your story."  Well, I--we'll be there eighteen hours.  Well, well, I'm not gonna go tell my story.  I'll tell bits and pieces of my story, but there will be a faith undergirding.  It's all gonna be about faith, and I'm going to deliver the sermon.  I, I know what I'm going to talk about.  And I'm gonna deliver the sermon, but it's gonna be about faith and some of the things that you and I've talked about over the last couple of hours or so.  That's gonna be there.  I, I, I liked to--I'd liked to do that too, because I think that--people tell me that I'm able to take situations and explain them where you understand them and kind of paint a picture.  Well, gift of God; it's, it's not me.  It's a gift of God.  To God be the glory.  So that's the attitude I take.  So I, I would do what I'm--I guess I would do what I'm doing right now if money wasn't the issue because I'm not making that much money.  I'm not making the money other folks have made, but I'm happy doing what I do.  And it's hard to just walk away and give it up.
Story_ID: 96083
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today in Cleveland [Ohio] and beyond Cleve--Cleveland?
Speaker 2: In a ten-day period I knew of the parents--one parent I know in one case.  The other parents I knew of them fairly, fairly well.  They lost their sons by violence, two young men, one 21, his 21st birthday, another one 30 years old.  Well, they were just shot and robbed.  And he police told me they were shot and robbed because some of the bums out here with guns don't even wanna sell drugs.  They don't wanna work that hard.  They just wanna shoot you and take your wallet.  That's what they wanna do for a living.  I'm concerned about that, and I'm concerned about violence, and I'm concerned about where so many of us, certainly in the African American community, are, are, are killing ourselves.  As I said, I grew up in the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] neighborhood of the 1950s late '50s [1950s], and coming of puberty I guess in mid to late '50s [1950s], and high school in the earliest of '60s [1960s].  I grew up when I didn't hear any gunfire.  I didn't see any, any, any violence.  If two guys had a fight, they had a fistfight in the playground, and that's about it.  Nobody pulled a weapon.  When the police came by, we waived them into the schoolyard because we wanted the cops to umpire maybe a couple of innings of our softball game, and they would.  Black people living in harmony.  Eight guys--we called ourselves the Parkgate Eight.  Sounds like a bunch of guys in trouble.  But we were the Parkgate Eight.  And we kind of made a pact that we were gonna go to college, and we were gonna be the best that we could be.  My friend, Carl Crew, we knew he was gonna be a doctor.  I think his parents told him he was gonna be a doctor.  But in elementary school we knew he was gonna be a doctor.  Everybody knew Leon was gonna be a reporter.  "Leon's gonna be a journalist."  Everybody knows--everybody knew that.  I used to pretend to be on the air, you know, doing a baseball game.  I'd play third base and I'm calling the game.  "That's, that's a strike (unclear) away right now.  Second pitch--" and I would (laughter)--I would be doing that in a--just a little pickup baseball game we'd have in the playground.  Great day for baseball.  My cousin, Allen, became a jet pilot for a corporation.  His brother, Myron, became one of the highest paid union workers in the Shell pipeline business in, in sending oil through underground pipes around the United States.  Richard Baker became the--a police lieutenant with Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], if not a police captain, later became a bailiff with Cuyahoga Community College.  My friend, Otis, works for the county.  He's in charge of maintenance during the evening hours at the county's downtown buildings.  Virgil, like his father, became an attorney--black kids growing up in the neighborhood with a lot of dreams.  I wanna get back to that.  The question is how we get back to that.  Where do we--where do we go?  What, what must we do?  I know one thing that's key is family.  Building block of any people, building block of any nation, building block is the family however it's structured.  I know families change, but all those kids--(unclear) a couple of them were adopted, had foster parents, but they lived in the same house for years and years and years and years.  Of all those kids I named, I can go down the street and point to every house that they lived in and I lived in at the time.  And I can tell you who lived in that house and where his father worked.  That's key, and we've got to get back to that, got to get back to family.  Not that it's the only answer, but it is vital, it's key.  And, and I think--I would--I would want to work on that.  That, that--I am troubled by what we see.  I am troubled by gunfire.  I am troubled by looking over my shoulder when I come out the drugstore or come--or come out the--we called them drugstores--come out the pharmacy, or come out the grocery store, walk along the street, stand at the bus stop.  I'm troubled by the violence.  I turn on television, and I deal with it every night.  Who got shot last night?  Name a city-Cleveland [Ohio], Chicago [Illinois], St. Louis [Missouri], Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Boston [Massachusetts], Schenectady [New York], same thing.  We gotta fix it.  Not just in black America, all of America.  I mean how many thousands of people have been killed since the shooting in Newtown, Connecticut [Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting]?  The, the number was astounding--by guns.  People walking around angry.  I go in a movie theater now--and you know I told you two hours ago how I love movie theaters.  I go in a movie theater now, "Where's the exit, where's the--where's the exit sign 'cause I gotta--I gotta find that in the dark?  I gotta run out of here if I--if somebody goes crazy."  I didn't see anybody shooting when I was coming up in, in, in movie theaters.  There's nobody shooting down the street or, or from car to car on the interstate.  There's nobody shooting that I recall.  Here and there those things happened.  But now, it's just pervasive.
Story_ID: 96084
Speaker 1: That worries me.  And I know that we know the answer, Mr. Crowe, on how to do this.  We know the answer, Sir.  It's here; it's in us.  I think the answers to so many problems are in us.  And all we need to do is stop and think about where we are and what's really, really important.  You know, my, my kids when they were growing up, and I'd say, you know, "Put those technological things down.  Turn off that television.  We, we need to sit and talk."  My folks--I grew up--I know families have changed.  I, I, I understand that.  But we grew up at a time when I didn't have a lot of money.  Our parents didn't have a lot of money.  But they had enough of the money to pay the mortgage, or the rent, and to buy a used car, and to put shoes on my feet.  And sometimes they were used shoes from the Salvation Army, and used clothes on my back sometimes, and sometimes they were new every now and then.  And when I'd come down to, to dinner that my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] had prepared, and if I didn't like it--the pot roast or the beef roast, or whatever it was, if I didn't like it my dad [Leon Bibb] would say this ain't no restaurant.  This is the only menu in town.  You either eat here, or you don't eat.  They'll be no going out buying a pizza.  We're not gonna do that.  And if you don't want this, I'll see you at breakfast.  That's our next meal.  I'll see you then.  But when we ate, we prayed over it, and we talked.  And my mother would say, "When you gonna show your daddy your, your report card?"  And I'd say, "I'll get it to him."  And the meal--during the meal I'd say uh, "Dad, I got the report card."  "Has your mother seen it?"  "Yeah, she's seen it."  "Okay, I'll take a look," and he'd finish eating.  And then as the table was being cleared and mother was listening as she was helping clear the table, he'd push back from the table, says--cross his legs and say "Well, let's take a look at it."  And I'd kind of hand it to him.  He'd say ah, "Had a little trouble with this one, huh?  You got a C there, huh?  You can do better than that.  You got a D here.  But you know what, son, what bothers me is?  The teacher's comment: 'Leon talks too much.'  Worried about that, son.  You think you more than the teacher in the classroom?"  We would talk like that.  I mean it would be philosophical.  You think this is along inter--I'd be there sometimes for an hour and half with dad.  We would be talking, and he'd be giving his opinion.  He'd be talking about what life was about, and how he grew up, and what I need to be thinking about, and, and how they were spending money to, to do what we needed to do, and how they were willing to sacrifice for me to go to college.  And "You need to get it together, son.  You need to get it together."  So, that's how it was.
Story_ID: 96094
Speaker 1: Yeah, now let me ask you about your, your children.  You told us how you met your wife [Marguerite Bibb].  And tell us about your family today.
Speaker 2: Our first daughter, Jennifer, is, is 40--43, married to Bill Clawson, C-L-A-W-S-O-N, Jennifer and Bill.  And they've got two children and--Will--William--William III, really--well, we call him will--and Alexa.  And Jennifer and Bill met at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when they were freshman students.  When they got married, 1996--90--yeah, '96' [1996]--when they got married, I said at the reception, I says, "I met Bill before Jennifer did," which is true, and he's from Connecticut.  As we were moving Jennifer into the residence hall there at the University of Pennsylvania, and I'm standing there with boxes, she and her mother, Marguerite, are upstairs in the room doing whatever they do up there, spreading out the bed spread I suppose.  I'm bringing the heavy--I'm doing the heavy lifting coming up on the elevator.  While we're waiting on the elevator, another black kid there and his father, and we just kind of chat.  "I'm Leon from Cleveland."  I said well--his father says, "I'm Bill.  We're from Bridgeport, Connecticut.  This is my son, Will.  I said hi--William rather, Bill."  I said, "Hey, Bill."  We shake hands and we talk and chat.  When I get upstairs I said, "I met the nicest kid downstairs.  I hope you get a chance to meet him.  He's from Bridgeport, Connecticut.  I just talked to his father.  We even had about a five-minute conversation--nice, they're just nice, you know.  And you black kids gotta, you know, get to know each other, and--but if you get a chance, just tell him I enjoyed talking with him."  I guess she did.  She met him maybe three weeks later, and they started dating a few months after that, and now they're married--long time married and two children.  Our second daughter, Alison [Bibb-Carson], is--Alison is 36 now.  And she married Ron, Ron Carson.  So I got the Clawsons over here and the Carsons over there.  And, and Jenner and Bill live here in Shaker Heights, suburban Cleveland [Ohio].  Allison and Ron right now live in suburban Washington, D.C.  And, and Ron is in the admini--in the [HM President Barack] Obama Administration, and he works for the Secretary of Energy, and does a lot of traveling.  So they're doing well, and they've got two children, one almost five, Rory, and one who is nine months or ten months by now perhaps, Jackson, Jackson Carson.  So those are our two children and our four grandchildren, and they are doing quite well.  And each girl when she got married, as I walked each girl down the aisle with tears in my eyes certainly, watching your daughters go off with the men of their dreams, as I got down to the preacher and the waiting groom, as I released her and put my daughter in the hand of the man she is to marry, each man I shook hands with.  And I whispered something in each one's ear.  And of course the church always wanted to know "What did you whisper, Leon?" at the reception, "What did you whisper?  Did you say--did you tell him you better not mess up?"  I said "No, I didn't say that.  I told each man years apart, I says this marriage takes place with the blessings of me and my wife, Marguerite.  We want this union to take place, and we bless it."  Now that's my way of saying "Okay, we want this to work," 'cause that's basically what was said to me.  It wasn't said in those--quite those terms, but when, when Marguerite and I got married, her father he wanted to make sure.  He says: "you love her, don't you?"  I had to tell him "yes."  And he kind of intimated--what if I were to say no, because I asked for her hand.  And each man asked for my daughter's hand by the way, old fashion stuff.  He said, what if I were to say no?  He didn't say it that way, but that was the upshot of it.  I'd say I love her enough to marry her anyway.  Right answer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right answer.
Story_ID: 96095
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Professionally, I suppose being one of the first African Americans, black men, black persons to sit in the anchor chair.  My--a woman who did a thesis on me, on my life, said that I was the ninth anchorman in the country when I was promoted to Monday through Friday at least in, in 1977 in Columbus.  And I certainly was the first in the State of Ohio.  I would guess that we tried to open up some doors.  Maybe it wasn't on my mind every day, but in the back of my mind it was there.  I felt like Jackie Robinson playing baseball because they wanted to try something.  For whatever reason, pressure or whatever, they wanted to try something.  And I knew that if I messed up, it might have an effect on whoever followed me.  And I knew that I would have to be clean, do my job, be reliable.  Like Jackie, I had to deal with a whole lot of--not a whole lot, but people whispering things about how I got the job, and maybe I shouldn't have the job, and people who didn't want to see me.  There were--and on some of those--but I had to still play the game, and I still had to play baseball.  I had to hit the ball; I had to run the bases; I had to catch the ball; I had to stay out of trouble; and do all those other things, you know, to satisfy my bosses.  So I felt like I was Jackie Robinson in television.  I've talked to other people who have--were doing the same thing I was doing in their fields.  In fact one guy I talk to all the time, he was coming into television at the same time, except he was behind the scenes and he was an artist, Al McQueen, my good friend, Al McQueen.  And we worked at two stations together.  And when he walked into Channel 3 [WKYC-TV in Cleveland, Ohio], he said you know, there were no black folks there at all, maybe four.  When I walked into Channel 4 [WCMH-TV] down in Columbus [Ohio] there might have been a similar number.  I don't know how many were at The Plain Dealer when I walked in, but it was mostly white.  But I said, "This is what I do; this is what I wanna do.  And I don't want somebody to not allow me to do it because of the color of my skin.  This is what I think God wants me to do, and this is what I want to do."  And so I, I, I just went about my work.  I am reliable here.  Since 1971, when I went to commercial television for the very first time, I've called in sick nineteen days, just nineteen.  I think I was off once for medical for a week.  And I've called in, you know, when funerals.  But I mean calling in sick where I can't make it today 'cause I got the flu.  Sometimes I, I was pretty sick, but I went in anyway.  And maybe I shouldn't have, but I went in anyway, tried to do what I could.  Maybe I stayed three quarters of the day and, and then went home early.  But nineteen days I called in sick.  I wanna be reliable, I wanna be the go-to guy, and I want somebody to say "There a guy who's a guy with integrity who tried to do his damndest in his profession, who tried to be honorable, who tried to treat people right, who tried to cover the story, and who tried to represent black people in a positive way, and represent the American people in a positive way."  That's what I want people to say.  And I want people to also say "He was a man of faith, he loved God, he loved his wife, his family, he loved his nation, and he cared about the things that are important in life, and he cared about other people."
Speaker 1: Okay, I thank you very much.
Story_ID: 96096
Speaker 1: Those are my grandparents, Henry Crowell and Katie Crowell.  They are my mother's father and mother.  And that probably was in the 1950s.
Speaker 2: This is at the anniversary celebration of my Aunt Mary and my Uncle Louis [ph.].  And that's Aunt Mary second from the left in the middle seated and Louis standing right behind her in the short-sleeved shirt--Louis Patton--Mary and Louis Patton.  That's my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb] and father [Leon Bibb] on the far left.  And, and on the far right in the white t-shirt is my aunt, Ruby Moreland, her husband, Howard--Howard, Howard, Howard--was it Jeffries, Jefferson, Jennings--Jennings--Ruby Moreland Jennings and Howard Jennings, husband and wife.  And the woman in the far right up front is my aunt, Lolita Sharpley [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your parents' names?
Speaker 2: My parents' names are Leon Bibb and Georgia Bibb.  That's them on the far left.
Speaker 1: Part, part of my father's unit.  That's my father in the second row, back second from the right over there, the military right down there.  Right there.
Speaker 2: This is wife, Marguerite, M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E.  And this was taken in Honolulu [Hawaii] in 2007.  We like to go to Hawaii.  And we mostly go to Maui, but that was in Honolulu.  And I, I took that picture because in 1968 I took a similar picture that same location in Honolulu.
Speaker 1: That's me on patrol in Vietnam.  That would be in 1968.
Speaker 2: I was on the board of trustees of Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio].  That's me on the left.  In the middle is President Sidney Ribeau, R-I-B-E-A-U.  And on the far right from Dayton, Ohio, John Moore, Colonel John Moore.  We, we--you know John Moore--and, and with John E. Moore, Jr.  We lived on a--he lived on Kimberly Circle when we were growing up.  And, and we were fraternity brothers together at Bowling Green.  And we ended up on the board of trustees at the same time.
Speaker 1: And Ribeau ended up at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Howard. No, he just left Howard. They left him.
Speaker 1: This is a picture I'm told of my great-grandfather on my mother's side.  And I cannot remember the first name, but that's him there in the hat I think.  And my great-grandmother is one of the women there, and I don't know which one.  But that shows the, the ancestry.  And Lord only knows the date of that photograph.  I wish I could tell you.
Speaker 2: This was taken just in 2014, just, just the other day.  That's me second from the right there.  And this was at the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio] as a--as a group of people are being honored.  Among them, reading left to right, holding the--holding the citations: [HM] George Forbes, former City Council President in Cleveland; [HM] Congressman Louis Stokes, former re--now retired; [HM] Reverend [Dr.] Otis Moss [Jr.], formerly a, a lieutenant with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], who is now retired from the Olivet Institutional Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio].  I think that's George Forbes's wife, Mary [Fleming Forbes], next to him.  And next to him, reading left to right, is [HM Robert P.] Bob Madison, longtime architect in Cleveland, who is in his eighties and still working.
Speaker 1: One of my favorite photographs.  It's a family gathering.  You can say that's probably 1947 looking at my age.  It looks like I'm about three years old.  I'm the little kid being held in dad's arms.  Family members are there.  Among them there's my mother on the far right.  I'm in my father's arms on the left there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE BY MALE):  Your mother's actually on the far left, right?
Speaker 1: Far, far--over there.  No, no, no, she--that's mother, yeah.  That's my uncle, Morris Bibb; his wife, Aunt Irene; my Aunt, Ruby; her husband, John Moreland; my great uncle, John Bibb; Jim Bibb, great uncle.  These were the brother-half-brothers of my granddad, Lee Bibb, who is not there.  This is Pearl Annie Owens; she married the brother of Jesse Owens and; and the Grigsbys [ph.] back there, friends of my grandfather.  And that's my mother on the far right.
Speaker 2: Jesse Owens is from Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jesse Owens was from Cleveland.
Speaker 2: My wife, Marguerite, flanked by Alison [Bibb-Carson] on the left and Jennifer [Clawson] on the right.  Jennifer is the older--is the older and Alison's the younger.  Those are our girls.
Speaker 1: That's my father, Leon Bibb, right in the middle wearing the three-piece suit.  I don't know any of the other people.  But that's high school that I know.  And that would be--that probably is--well that's mid '30s [1930s].  He graduated high school in 1935, so I don't know exactly.
Speaker 2: And that's my father on the far left, graduation from choc--from Morgan County Training School.  And on the far right is Mr. Fred, his principal.  I don't know any of the other people in that picture.  But it, it was a small graduation class, 1935, Hartsell, Alabama.
Speaker 1: This is Atlanta [Georgia].  I covered the, the Cleveland Indians against the Atlanta Braves in the World Series.  We lost the game that night and lost the World Series.  That's game six, 1995.
Speaker 2: That's me at the--at the White House [Washington, D.C.] in the early 1990s.  I covered a--that was the [President] George H. W. Bush White House.  I went there.  I'd love to have that one of, of [HM President Barack] Obama around here too.  I'd love to get that one out.
Speaker 1: My dad in World War II on the far right, two of his buddies whose names I don't know.
Speaker 2: A publicity shot from not too long ago.
Speaker 1: Three years old.  God I'd love to do that Obama thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a newspaper article I wrote for The Plain Dealer about a family journey.  And mother and father are in there, my sister's in there, and my wife on the left.  And I think one of the things I wrote in that article was mother was pregnant with me, and my dad was in World War II.  So she got on the train and went back to Alabama to be with her mother [Katie Crowell] and father [Henry Crowell] to deliver me.  And I said in the article that before I was born, I was on a railroad.  In fact, I had 800 miles of, of railroad track beneath my belt when I was delivered.
Speaker 1: Henry Crowell, my mother's father as a young man.  He lived to be 94.  Henry Crowell, C-R-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 2: Another publicity shot.  That's probably from the early '90s [1990s]--mid '90s [1990s], hard to tell.
Speaker 1: Lee Bibb, my granddad.  I don't know who the woman is nor the child.  But that's my granddad, Lee Bibb.
Speaker 2: El Presidente--Mr. President [HM President Barack Obama].  This was done at the White complex.  This is actually in the Executive Office Building.  And, and when the President came in, and we did about a 10-minute interview, I was the only one from Ohio to do the interview that day.  The first thing he said was "So, you're from Cleveland, right?"  I said "Yes, sir, I am, Mr. President."  He says, "are you guys over LeBron James yet?"  I said, "We're working on it, Mr. President."
Speaker 1: This was the day I filed reports from the White House.  And that's among some of the white--some of the equipment there as I--as I was preparing to go live from the White House lawn, just getting my thoughts together.  I was gonna be on the satellite.
Speaker 2: And that's in the little news conference room that the president uses.  We hung out in there for a while until we--until the president was ready to see us.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a long time ago.  This is from the 1970s. This is at WCMH television, Channel 4, Columbus, Ohio.  That's about 9--that's in the mid '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Look at the hairstyle.  That's when I got a--when I joined WLWC.  It later became WCMH.  We had our two call letters, WLWC.  New owners came in-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION):
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's from the, the BG [Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio] News.  And that--I was--they had a photograph of me from, from when I was on the board of trustees and one earlier from--that's my, my college graduation picture, 1966.  And it was about the kid who came back and became chairman of the board of the board of trustees.
Speaker 1: Marguerite and Leon at an Alpha Phi Alpha [Fraternity] affair.  I'm a member of Alpha (unclear).  Yeah, it was shot similar.  It was--it was just a different angle, but same thing.
Speaker 2: In there, reading left to right, is, is Marguerite, my wife; my father, Leon Bibb; our daughter, Alison; my sister, Shirley [Blackwell]; her daughter, Cheryl; my mother [Georgia Crowell Bibb]; my sister's son, David; and my sister's husband, Eugene Blackwell--Shirley, David, and Eugene Blackwell.  Eugene died a year ago.
Speaker 1: Mom and dad in our backyard.  Oh, that's 1980s.
Speaker 2: Picking 'em up and putting 'em down.  Running in a road race, that's my co-anchor for Channel 3 [WKYC-TV in Cleveland, Ohio] at the time.  I loved working with her.  She was my favorite co-anchor of all the ones I've ever worked with, Cheryl Brown.  And we would go and run road races wearing the Channel 3 shirts, and just doing a little advertising for ourselves.  And we--and we both loved to run.  And they would take pictures of us, and they'd take video of it.  And when we do the weekend newscast, we'd put ourselves on the air talking about this is what we were doing.
Speaker 1: This was the co-anchor team that I worked with.  Kevin Coakley, C-O-A-K-L-E-Y in the front.  Oh, and what was Paul's last name--Paul something in the back, and John Hank, H-A-N-K, on the right.  He did sports.  So that was a--that was a, a weekend weather team--weekend team.
Speaker 2: And here we are again.  That's when Cheryl Brown worked with me.  We'd end each newscast with--at 11:00 we'd say--I'd say, "Goodnight, Cheryl."  She'd say, "Goodnight, Leon."  And we'd both say "and goodnight from all of us at Channel 3;" great stuff.
