Story_ID: 159111
Speaker 1: So, my name is Robert Henry Butler, Jr.  R-O-B-E-R-T, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Butler, B-U-T-L-E-R, and then, of course, Jr.
Speaker 2: Alright, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: June 5, 1953, at the Naval Hospital in Chelsea, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 1: I'm a news reporter.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  And our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is November 6, 2013.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are in my home in Antioch, California, and that's A-N-T-I-O-C-H, which is in the East Bay of San--the San Francisco Bay area.
Story_ID: 159112
Speaker 1: Alright, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: There're quite a few of them, but if I had one thing that I was gonna eat, I would probably say gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Brazil.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hard work, low pay or in my case, no pay.
Story_ID: 159113
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but separately.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So first of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Leola Evelyn Moore--that's her maiden name--and that's L-E-O-L-A, E-V-E-L-Y-N, M-O-O-R-E, and then of course, she became Leola Butler after she was married.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That would have been December 20--December 20th, 1932 in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about what they were doing in history?
Speaker 2: You know, I know that my grandfather, his mother, I'm told was part Native American and part Haitian.  We don't know for sure--
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, alright.  So your great-grandmother was part Indian and part Indian and part Haitian?
Speaker 2: That's my understanding.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know her name?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about her?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't really have any stories about my great-grandmother.  My grandmother on my mother's side was Maxine Moore.  My grandfather on my mother's side was--what was grandpa's name?  Charles Moore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in 1899.  I do not know where.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as far as you know, you don't, I mean there's not a--so is Cambridge, Mass [Massachusetts] the furthest loc--you know, location back in history that you can trace your family to?
Speaker 2: From my, yeah, and I, you know, I actually have done a lot of research on my father's side of the family, but not my mother's side of the family.  And that's, I'm sure when my wife [Lois Butler] hears this, we'll be work--my, my family hears this, we'll be going on that side too.  But, yeah, my grandfather was one of the first black, I think it's one of the first black porters on the MBTA [Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority], the Massachusetts subway system.  He, I don't know when he started doing that.  I remember my grandmother worked at a glass factory across the street from our house, you know, till she retired.  My grandfather became very prominent in Boston [Massachusetts].  He was an advocate for the aging, and I remember talking to my aunts and having--I have photos of him, you know, with meetings, with--he was honored by the governor of Massachusetts for his work.  My grandfather was an avid railroad buff and had a huge toy railroad set in the basement, to the point where, I mean he had towns, he had bridges, he had crossings, and he had dirt that was made out of coffee grounds.  So the trains would go by and they would actually stop, and they would load coffee grounds into the train car.  And they would carry it around, and they'd go to another spot and dump it.  I mean it was really a fantastic set.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a chance to see it when you were--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and operate it too.  You know, I mean this was when we were, you know, we were young.  But, you know, it was always good to go to grandpa's house to see the train set down in the basement.  Of course, I was, I cared about that.  My sisters didn't care about it, but I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so your mother grew up in Cambridge?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Alright, and, okay, so do you know if he worked for A--if he worked with AARP [formerly the American Association of Retired People] or--
Speaker 2: I don't know which organization he worked for, but it was some organization in Massachusetts that was like the commission for the aging.
Speaker 1: And was he a volunteer for them or--
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure he was a volunteer, but I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, he was on the board of this organization.
Story_ID: 159114
Speaker 1: Alright, now, what did your mother [Leola Moore Butler] say about growing up in Cambridge [Massachusetts]?  Now, Cambridge is an interesting place 'cause it's the home of Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --Radcliffe [University, later Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and--
Speaker 2: You know, mom went to Cambridge High and Latin [School, later Cambridge Rindge Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I think it's called.  That was the high school she went to.  And she talked a lot about, you know, growing up and, you know, how her father [Charles Moore] would, you know, was very protective of them and that if they had company, that he would put a alarm clock on the steps, and when the alarm went off, then, you know, it was time for the boy to leave.  And (laughter) she recalled that.  And, you know, she had three sisters and--four sisters.  Let me see, one, two, three sisters and one brother.  Mom was the second oldest.  We had my Aunt Eileen [ph.], then my mom, then my Aunt Naomi [ph.], my Uncle Charles and then Aunt Sandra [ph.].  And then Aunt Wendy [ph.], so she had Wendy--she had four sisters, yeah, six kids total.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, so your mother was able to--she finished high school.  Now, did she have an--did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, didn't go to college, met my dad [Robert Butler, Sr.] at eighteen and got married.  And then not, shortly after that my sister, older sister was born, and then I was born, and this both, this, these--this both took place--actually, the first three children were born in Cambridge.
Story_ID: 159115
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for it for us?
Speaker 2: My father is Robert Henry Butler, Sr.  His father was William Tecumseh Butler, and his father, my great-grandfather was William Butler, and his father, as far as I can tell, was William Butter, and looking at census records, I believe I found him being born like in, somewhere in the 1850s on a plantation in Greenville, South Carolina.  And I did some research because I went to Greenville one year to do some volunteer work for a radio barn raising with the Prometheus Radio Project.  So before I went down there, I was sort of reaching out to people and started calling people named Butler to see if there's any connection with the family.  But my grandfather, my great-grandfather, I found him in the census records and my grandfather and my great-aunts in Greenville in the 18--I think it was the 1880s cen--no, it had to have been the 1900 census because the 1890 census got burned up in a fire, and they lost all the records.  But I did find them in Greenville, South Carolina.  And I found them again, I believe it was in 1910, in Cincinnati [Ohio] because they moved from South Carolina to Cincinnati somewhere around the turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Into Cincinnati?  Okay, and are there any stories of, you know, your grandfather's named after William Tecumseh Sherman, I guess?
Speaker 2: That's the thinking, yeah.  And talking with my dad about his father-- his father worked for the post office, and he drove, you know, he drove the big postal truck, and, you know, he--I guess back then, you actually could bring it, you know, drive it home 'cause he, my dad recalled, you know, being outside playing and then seeing that postal truck come around the corner and knew that his dad was home.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: No, this was in Cincinnati (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: In Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So your father actually was born in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in Cincinnati, in what year?
Speaker 2: 1930.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: September 26th [1930].
Speaker 1: Okay, '30 [1930], alright.
Story_ID: 159116
Speaker 1: --So they start in Greenville [South Carolina], then to Cincinnati [Ohio], then, and your father [Robert Butler, Sr.] and mother [Leola Moore Butler] got together in Cambridge [Massachusetts], though, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, and that would have been about 1950.  He joined the [U.S.] Navy in 1948.  He was eighteen and shipped out.  And I guess he got stationed on a ship in Boston [Massachusetts] and met my mom, I think they said at a dance.  My mom says my dad gave her the once over, and they started talking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So didn't--all this happened pretty fast, you know, I guess.  He's in the Navy, and he's--he wasn't stationed there for a long, long time, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, once you get out of boot camp, I mean that may have been have been his first duty station.  I forget.  But he was stationed aboard a ship there, and then they met, and they started dating, and they got married in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my sister was born in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: And then the family traveled with your father as he--
Speaker 2: We didn't really, I don't, I don't think we moved.  I remem--my earliest memories, actually my earliest memory is jumping out of the crib and landing on the floor.  Either I remember that or my mother told me I did that.  But that's something that's pretty well taken as gospel.  And then my sister, I remember them saying she fell out of the bunk bed and broke her collarbone.  But I remember we moved from Cambridge--I must have been about three.  We moved to Long Beach [California]. My dad got transferred to Long Beach.  And we were in Long Beach, and I started kindergarten in Long Beach, and from there moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And in Pittsburgh, I attended first and second grade.  And it was interesting because we lived in Groton, Connecticut--I'm sorry.  We lived, in Pittsburgh, I first, yeah.  So we lived on the North, North Side of Pittsburgh.  And we had to walk to school.  And, of course, Pittsburgh, being that it was the wintertime, you know, we had to walk during, when it was snowing and all that.  But it was, must have been fairly close because we obviously were able to walk.  And that was like first and second grade.  And then we moved from Pittsburgh to Groton, Connecticut, and there I went to third, fourth and half of fifth grade.  And it was interesting being in Groton because in third grade, I went to a St. Joseph's Elementary School in Norwich, Connecticut.  And I was the only black person in the entire school.  And I didn't know that that was unusual.  And then in, half way through fifth grade, actually, I guess it was in fourth grade, I remember being in class, and I went to Catholic school.  And the nuns were crying.  This was in November of '63 [1963].  And I remember Sister Lucretia [ph.] coming in and telling us that the President [John F. Kennedy] had been killed, speaking of JFK.  And then the following year, we moved from Pittsburgh to San Diego [California].  And in San Diego, I finished fifth grade, sixth grade and seventh grade, and then dad got transferred again to the Naval Air Station in Alameda [California], and I did eighth grade, while we lived there on the base and ninth grade living on the base in Alameda.  And then we moved out--he retired in '68 [1968] after putting in his twenty years.  We moved out to Hayward [California], which is about fifteen miles south of Oakland [California], and I'd enrolled in a high school in Alameda.  And we were given the option of staying in that school or going to a school out in Hayward.  And because we had been traveling, you know, we never--you know, the thing about when you travel a lot, around a lot as a kid, you know, you don't really develop any real friends, any close friendships because when people who live in the same place year after year after year, they develop really close friendships.  And, you know, I remember, never forget, in San Diego, kids were talking about what they did in like second or third grade.  And that was like two or three schools ago for me.  So I never did really develop any close friendships by doing all that moving around.  But we got to Hayward, and we had the option of going to Stewart [ph.] or St. Joe's [St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, Alameda, California], and I wanted to finish the school I started in.  So getting up at 5:30 in the morning--this is before the subway was built, the BART [Bay Area Rapid Transit] system was built and taking, getting on a bus at 6:20 and transferring at downtown Hayward to catch another bus to take us down into Oakland and then take another bus to get to school.  So it was pretty interesting getting up that early in the morning for so long.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, you were dedicated to staying at that school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 159117
Speaker 1: --Now when you think about your parents' [Leola Moore Butler and Robert Butler, Sr.] personalities, their sense of humor, the way they walk, talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably more like my dad, I think.  And mom had a sense of humor 'cause my mom had that New England accent.  And she never lost it.  And so we've always give them a hard time.  You know, my aunts, who are still--they live in the [Washington] D.C. area, they all sound alike, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What do they sound like?
Speaker 2: (Accent) Park the car, you know.  It's like this, the New England accent.  It's always been the case.  My mother was a diehard Red--anything Boston [Massachusetts], Red Sox, Celtics, [New England] Patriots.  She was a diehard fan.  I'll never forget, so when I began working at the radio station--this is kind of going into the future a little bit. Mom was an avid basketball fan.  And so when [Donald] Don Nelson became the coach of the [Golden State] Warriors, this is the guy that she had watched playing, you know, growing up all those years when they were very good.  And so I got her a pass to come to a game one day, and they were--she was able to meet him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a big thrill.
Speaker 2: That was a big thrill for her to meet Don Nelson.  And, you know, of course, this is before you had cell phones, I mean didn't get a photo or anything like that, but she got a chance to meet him.  And then, when she was--she died of cancer in '89 [1989].  Right before she died, I talked to Nelly [Donald "Don" Nelson], and, "Today, you know, you met my mom.  You know, she's from Cambridge [Massachusetts], and she's in the hospital not doing well."  She was at the Naval Hospital [Chelsea, Massachusetts], and gave him the number, and he called.  He didn't reach her 'cause she was asleep, but all the nurses on the ward told my mom, "Yeah, Don Nelson--Coach Nelson called for you," and, you know, she became a big celebrity.
Story_ID: 159118
Speaker 1: Now, your brothers and sisters.  Now, tell us about them like in their, the order of their birth and kind of tell us what they're doing now?
Speaker 2: So my oldest sister, Maxine (ph.), she's a year older than me.  She, I think is retired.  We don't talk that much, but she lives in Oakland [California], very religious, has a fantastic singing voice.  In fact, at my wedding she sang the Lord's Prayer, and even I had to give her a standing ovation because she knocked it out the park.  Maxine was always the smart one in the family.  She was also the one that would squeal on us, when we found the Christmas gifts, you know, 'cause she was the goody two shoes of the family, you know.  She's, but, you know, when she comes out, and we have our annual barbeques, and then she's, she's, she's something else, you know.  She'll come out, and she always wants us to sing and stuff like that.  I'm, I don't feel like doing all that.  You know, we come out and sometimes we'll have Christmas carols, and, of course, she's gonna lead that because she's all about singing.  I mean she's got, when I say a fantastic voice, I mean she does, you know, she sings in church.  She sings opera, you know, it's--she's fantastic.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who's next?
Speaker 2: So, then there's me, and then I have a younger sister.  She's a couple of years younger, Alicia [ph.].  She's, actually lives here [Antioch, California].  Alicia, my enduring memory of Alicia is she always accused me of being mean to them, which is not true.  I mean this is a younger sister who just thinks that because she couldn't get her way all the time that I was being mean.  And a lot, I mean Saturday morning we watched, you know, the cartoons and the cowboy shows.  And that's the way it was.  She felt like I was always imposing my will on her.  That would never happen.  But Alicia in high school, she had a daughter before she graduated and I'll never forget talking with her--you know, I was in the [U.S.] Navy.  And I found out, and came home, and she had just had the baby.  And they were gonna put her up for adoption.  And we talked, and I said, "What you wanna do?"  She goes, "You know, I want my baby." I said, "Well, let's go get her."  Went and picked up her daughter.  And her daughter now is living in New York.  She's an accountant, and it's great.  We're probably, of all the siblings, we're probably the closest, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Otherwise, she wouldn't be living here (laughter).  But, no, she's, she went to high school, didn't go to college, but got a job working at Kaiser [Permanente] in the medical records department, then became a legal secretary, did that for a number of years, and, you know, during the bad economy, you know, things got rough.  And so she moved in here, I guess last year, or moved into the other house last year.  And she's now working a retail job, and, you know, she's happy.  She has her TV to watch her sports, and, you know, we get along very well.  She helps out a lot around here, so she's alright.  She does really well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have a brother, Mark.  Mark was born in, let's see so Mark--when I was a senior, he was a freshman, so he's like three years behind me and Alicia's two years behind me.  So Mark, he's the brain of the family.  My earliest recollection of him was him pushing the garbage can around the kitchen, like he was driving something.  But he became very interested in cars, and then after high school, he went to U.C Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California], got a degree in mechanical engineering, and went to work for Westinghouse [Electronic Systems], which was eventually, that division was eventually bought by Northrop Grumman [Corporation].  So he works for Northrop Grumman now.  He does something that he can't really tell me about, you know, something to do with submarines and antennas or some kind of stuff.  But he's very successful, lives outside of Baltimore [Maryland].  He's got two sons, and they both are heavily into cars.  One of them even has his own car detail business.  They both work for Lexus, you know, so.  You know, Mark, he married--his wife is a mechanic--chemical engineer, who worked for Chevron [Corporation] for a number of years, and now she sells Mary Kay.  But they, they have a house outside of Baltimore, and whenever I'm in [Washington] D.C. or every time--when I do get to D.C., you know, I have a standing invitation to stay at their hotel, you know.  And all I have to do is to cook some gumbo for 'em, and I'm good to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is that it?
Speaker 2: Then I have Melissa [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Melissa is the youngest.  She was born in 1967 when we lived in Alameda [California].  And my most enduring memory of Melissa growing up was she had this blanket, and she wouldn't go anywhere without that blanket.  She'd go--you know, it was always with her.  And then another time, I remember we lived on the base in Alameda, and she, I was coming home, and looking--walking up the steps, and then she saw me and began running towards me, right at the top of the steps.  And I had to shoot up the step to catch her before she, (laughter) I was afraid she was gonna fall.  She said she was alright, but you just never know.  And she was only like a couple of years old.  But she, upon graduation, joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps and was in the Marines for a couple of years.  And then she met a guy in the Marine Corp and she got out of the Marine Corp.  They got married out at Twentnine Palms [California] and then lived with us for a while, and then she moved back to North Carolina.  And now they're back.  He's at Camp Pendleton.  And he's a serg- he's a sergeant major.  He's an E9.  And he's, I mean he's been in for more than twenty years, so be probably getting out in the next, you know, two or three or four years.  And she has two sons.
Story_ID: 159119
Speaker 1: Did any grandparents live with you growing up or did you pretty much--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, so my, my the grandparents on my mother's [Leola Moore Butler] side both lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts], you know, in a house on Clarendon Avenue off of Mass [Massachusetts] Avenue, right down from Porter Square.  My grandfather passed [Charles Moore] away in 1994.  You know, I'll never forget that all the cousins but one came to the funeral, and it was, you know, the first time we'd all been together since we were kids.  And in Boston [Massachusetts], there's this tourist trap called Faneuil Hall.  And so we had the grand idea to go to Faneuil Hall.  So here we are, all of us and my--let's see, Linda [ph.] was the oldest.  Then it was Maxine [ph.], and then I was the oldest of the boys, so like, you know, in the pecking order, you know, it was Linda, Maxine, then me, and then I think it was Bruce--I mean so all of us were there, and we're all walking up Mass Avenue to Porter Square to get on the subway to go to Faneuil Hall.  It was middle to late November, and we were all in shirt sleeves.  It was warm, something that we'll never forget because normally, by that time in Boston, you're wearing jackets and sweaters and stuff.  But it was a very, it was a beautiful day.  And so it was a great service, you know, like, it's the first time we'd all been together.  It was wonderful.  My grandmother [Maxine Moore], my aunt and--now, my Uncle Charles, who I mentioned, my mother's younger brother, he joined the [U.S.] Air Force, and he did twenty years in the Air Force and then got out.  And he did security at Capper's [ph.] Hospital in Southeast [Washington] D.C., drove a Harley, or a motorcycle.  And he passed away, I wanna say a year or two after my grandfather.  And then a little longer, not long after he passed away, my grandmother passed away.  And, again, many, many of us flew in for the funeral.
Story_ID: 159120
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Jumping out of the crib.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the one.  That's the one, that's the one that I, and being chased by the dog, the family dog (laughter).  Yeah, that all happened in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What was the dog's name?
Speaker 2: Hell if I know.  I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have him long?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, he wasn't a memorable dog then?
Speaker 2: Well, don't forget, I was like two years old (laughter), so you know--
Story_ID: 159121
Speaker 1: You were in Cambridge [Massachusetts] until you were, I guess about six, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, we were in Cambridge until about three--
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: --And then moved to Long Beach [California].  In Long Beach--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started kindergarten there and went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so in Long Beach, four, five and six years old, start kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you're in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], you know, at age six.
Speaker 2: First and second grade, right.  Living on the north side.
Speaker 1: Yeah, moving so much, what were you interested in when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, that's funny.  I don't, I don't recall having--horses, I remember that--horses, 'cause watching the cowboys, the cowboy, you know, the Westerns on TV.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite TV show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Combat,' which was, you know, I mean I was a boy so it was--my [Robert Henry Butler, Sr.] father was in the [U.S.] Navy.  So it was all about the [U.S.] Military.  So cowboys and war movies.
Story_ID: 159122
Speaker 1: You're in kindergarten in Long Beach [California].  And for the record, you were born in 1953, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, June 5, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay, June the 5th, okay, alright.  Okay, so alright, so you go from Long Beach where you started kindergarten to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so big difference in the weather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but, you know, it's funny.  I've always recalled growing up with snow and you had to bundle up to go outside.  You know, I'll never forget.  It would, it would, in Pittsburgh, it would--we were living on the North Side.  It would snow, and so you couldn't go out to play that much, but when you could go out, you know, there'd be so much snow on the ground.  You know, you'd make the, you know, the snowballs and the snowmen and the snow forts and stuff like that.  Yeah, it would be cold.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, did you always live on the [naval] base when you lived in those cities or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, in--we lived with my grandparents [Maxine and Charles Moore] when I was in Cambridge [Massachusetts] or we a--actually, we lived around the corner on the next street.  In Long Beach, we lived on the base.  In Pittsburgh, there was not a base there.  There was a recruiting station.  So we lived out in the North Side and, you know, in a housing project which is a housing project now.  In Groton [Connecticut], we lived on the base in temporary housing, and then my parents [Leola Moore Butler and Robert Butler, Sr.] bought a house in Groton on Baker Avenue extension.  San Diego [California], same thing, we lived on the base in temporary housing until they, either bought or rented a house in National City [California], and then same thing in Alameda [California].  We lived on the base in temporary housing, and then we actually lived on the base in base housing, which is the only time I can remember, recall us ever actually living in base housing.  But from base housing, we moved out to--my dad retired and moved out to Hayward [California], and they had bought a house.
Story_ID: 159123
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, did you pay attention to the news very, very much?
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean I--not until like high school [at St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, Alameda, California] maybe, toward the end of high school.  And that was watching sports, you know, and I--but I do recall, there was this lady on TV doing the news.  I think it was Channel 5, you know, a black lady.
Speaker 1: In what town?
Speaker 2: In San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was like, you know, somebody that you didn't see that much.  We're talking about, you know, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  There wasn't great diversity in the news.  We didn't watch it very much, but, you know, that as a memory that I remember, that, seeing this lady on TV.  Her name is [HM] Belva Davis, who is my mentor and, you know, she's now retired from--she was on the air for like fifty years in television and just retired last year.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  Okay, so was that the first black person you'd ever seen on network--
Speaker 2: Well, on television news that I noticed.  Again, I didn't watch it that much.  I didn't really pay attention to the news, you know, a lot until after I got out of the [U.S.] Navy really.  You know, I began watching it because I decided that I wanted to be--I wanted to be a DJ, you know.  And the first chance I had, when I was at Chabot [College, Hayward, California] was to be, to be on the air was actually doing news.  And I began paying attention to the news then.  And that was, you know, 1977.
Speaker 1: Now, did your family listen to the radio a lot?  I mean, did they listen to the Top 40 stations in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, KDIA in Oakland [California] was the R & B station.  I listened to that or KSOL, 106.1 and, yeah.  So we didn't, you know, like a lot of people will say their parents listened to the news all the time and so that's why they got interested.  I can't say that, you know.
Story_ID: 159124
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was more interested in, you know, having fun and, you know, playing sports and doing just enough to get by.
Speaker 1: Okay, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, we went to church every Sunday.  You know, we're Roman Catholics.  We went to Catholic school for twelve years, had to go to church, you know.  And I was an altar boy, got suspended in the sixth grade for sipping on the altar wine, you know, stuff--that was in San Diego [California], stuff happens (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That's a typical offense in the Catholic school system sometimes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not many people get caught.  I got caught (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, were there any important teachers or mentors in grade school?
Speaker 2: Sister Lucretia [ph.] stands out.  I think she was my third grade teacher or fourth grade teacher.  I forget which one.  That was in Connecticut.  And then I don't recall any of the teachers in San Diego.
Story_ID: 159125
Speaker 1: In high school [at St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, Alameda, California], there were several.  There was our history teacher, Mr. Graven, who was also the track coach.  There was Mr. [Bob] Sickenger who was the dean of students, who was also the soccer coach.  So they were people that I spent, you know, that made an, had an impact on my life.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you played soccer and--
Speaker 1: Played soccer and ran track, yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --And ran track.  Okay, in high school.  Okay, and did that--did those activities keep you kind of committed to that high school?
Speaker 1: It kept me committed to the high school, and it kept me, you know, coming home late because you had to go to practice afterwards.  And, of course, small school.  We didn't have any facilities ourselves, you know, to practice soccer or practice track so we had to, you know, run to the soccer field to practice which was, you know, God, it's got to be two or three miles away.  So we got in shape running down to practice or walking down to practice and walking back.  Same thing with track.  We had to run to a, down to a junior high school track to get ready for that, so--
Speaker 2: Okay, so you ran, I know you ran the quarter, right, mile?
Speaker 1: Yes, I ran the quarter when I started out, freshman and sophomore year, you know, I would run the quarter mile.  And then I would be on like the quarter--the 4 x 1--well, back then it was called the 440 Relay and the Mile Relay.  And our sprinter graduated.  He was a senior when I was a junior, so I ran the sprints when I was, I ran the--I would do the one, the two and both relays when I was a senior.
Story_ID: 159126
Speaker 1: Had you thought about what you were gonna do when you, you know, got out of high school [St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, Alameda, California] when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I was thinking, gonna go to college, you know, on a scholarship, you know, and pop [Robert Butler, Sr.] said, "Well, you know, if you're gonna stay here, you gotta pay rent."  And I was gonna get a scholarship to go--I was offered a partial scholarship to a place called Central State [later, Central College] in Pella, Iowa, to play soccer.  But that would have required, you know, the family to come up with some money, and Pop said, "No, we ain't got it."  So I guess it was in May of '71 [1971], I was riding my bike, and I went by the [U.S.] Navy recruiting station, and I went in to "talk to them."  And they said, "Oh, well, you know"--I mean now don't figure, this is 1971 during the Vietnam War.  And they gave me, they said, "Why don't you take this test."  And it was some basic test they give people.  And, you know, I did so well that they said, "Based on your test scores, you can do anything you want."  And I'm like, okay.  And then I didn't, you know, I went back to see 'em a few times, and then, I think it was right before graduation.  I was sitting at dinner with the family, and I said, well, you know, "I joined the Navy today."  Daddy was like, "What?"  "Yeah, I signed up for the Navy.  So, you know, I don't have to go until after the summer," but--
Speaker 1: Do you think your father really wanted you to join the Navy?
Speaker 2: You know, it's hard to say.  But I couldn't go to college, so I wasn't gonna, you know, if I had to stay, if I was gonna stay home, I had to pay rent.  That meant, you know, trying to get a car and to be able to get around and pay for gas, pay for the car, pay rent.  It's like, man, that's a lot of money.  So the Navy seemed like the easy way out.
Speaker 1: Well, it seemed like he may have been funneling you down to, you know, into that direction, you know, in some ways, just listening to it, not having been around?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that he was intentionally doing that, but I mean, you know, I'm--I'll never forget being on the base in Alameda [California] and the gym was located near one of the runways on the naval air station, and I would go down there.  And I would sit there and watch the planes take off and land.  And there, to me, nothing gave me more of a sense of security than to see an [McDonnell Douglas] F-4 Phantom fly by and have that thing go screaming by.  And so I think, you know, early on, I was indoctrinated into the Navy, and, you know, I'd see the sailors marching around, saluting the officers, and I wanted to do that, you know.  So I wasn't surprised at all when I ended up in the Navy.
Story_ID: 159127
Speaker 1: Your father [Robert Butler, Sr.] was a career [U.S.] Navy man.
Speaker 2: He was. He did a career (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And then what was his highest rank when he--
Speaker 2: He was an E8, senior chief, which is the second highest rank you can be as an enlisted man.  And he got out in '68 [1968] as a senior.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the year--
Speaker 2: That was '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968], that was the year that you moved to Hayward [California], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he retired, we moved to Hayward.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's the year that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was killed.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: One of these pivotal years--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember my dad when Kennedy was killed, I remember him, you know, crying saying that, "This world's going to hell in a hand basket," you know, because, obviously, we'd had King killed in like, you know, April or May, and, you know, Bobby Kennedy shortly after that [June 1968].  And, you know, he was, that concerned him.
Speaker 1: Now, Hayward's is away from Oakland [California], but--
Speaker 2: It's fifteen miles south.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I mean, so you were aware--were there riots in Oakland?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, there weren't riots, but I remember when Dr. King was killed, we were at a track meet.  And I forget whether that was a Thursday, I forget what day of the week.  But I know there was a dance on Friday.  And I was looking forward to going to this dance, and they canceled the dance when Dr. King was killed.  We were so disappointed that we couldn't go to the dance, you know.  I didn't really pay much attention.  You know, it's ironic when we were in San Diego [California], the Watts [Los Angeles, California] riots took place.  That was in '63 [1963]--
Speaker 1: '6, '66 [1966] [sic, 1965].
Speaker 2: '66 [1966]?  Okay, '66 [1966].  So right before we moved up to--up to, we moved up to, it must have been '67 [1967] that we moved up to--maybe it was '66 [1966], I forget.  I think it was '66'[1966].  But I never will forget the riots were taking place, and we had went to eat dinner on board the ship with my dad.  And we're driving home and the sentry told my mom [Leola Moore Butler], you know, to be careful, to stay away from Logan Heights [San Diego, California] because Logan Heights is where, that was the hood and that there was unrest there because of what had happened, what was happening in Watts.  And never will forget Logan Heights was kind of on the way home, not really, but kind of on the way.  And we're driving and mom started freaking out because there was a car behind us.  And she's thinking that, there's somebody back there to get us.  And, you know, we get home, and we didn't have the automatic garage door openers.  So she jumps out of the car and opened the garage door and tells us all to come in.  And I'm like, "Mom, that's Mr. Such and Such, you know, lived around the corner."  So it was like, all this for no reason.  But I never will forget, you know, that she was very, very frightened about, from that, from the riots in Los Angeles [California] and whatever unrest there was in San Diego.
Speaker 1: Okay, it also kind of says that she was kind of detached from the black community in those--I mean she was used to being on the [naval] base or someplace else where she wasn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents, you know, my mom, far from militant, not at all.  In fact, parents basically said that, you know, "Don't make waves, you know, accept what you're given 'cause that's what you deserve.  And, you know, don't ask for too much," and, you know, and it's like had to, I had to come to grips with that.  It's like, you know, wait a minute, you know, you're saying just accept things the way they are, but things aren't very good.
Story_ID: 159128
Speaker 1: --I'll never forget in, in Groton [Connecticut], came home one day--and we were out playing.  You know, a bunch of, you know, on the temporary housing, a bunch of kids.  And, you know, most of 'em are white.  In fact, they were all white but me.  And we were all going to this one kid's house.  And, you know, we'd go over there and watch TV or whatever and kid's dad come to the door and tells me I can't come in 'cause I'm a dirty n-word.  And I didn't know what that meant, and so, you know, I went home and told mommy [Leola Moore Butler] I had to take a bath.  She says, "Why?"  "Well, you know, this guy said I'm dirty," you know, and she said, told me later that her heart broke when I told her that story, when I told her that.  'Cause I didn't know what that meant 'cause we had not been around, you know, we had not been around black people that much to hear that kind of stuff.  In fact, you know, growing up, we were kind of detached and away from the black community.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a very, I mean that's a pretty cold thing to say to a kid, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I figure that was Groton so I was in probably third, third grade, fourth grade.
Speaker 2: An eight year old--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --nine year old--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to be told that.  That's, yeah, so you were often in those days the only black student--
Speaker 1: Black person, yeah, yeah, grew up around white people mostly.  And, I'll never forget, also one time we were all playing and, you know, you had different, you know, groups--they'd be called gangs now, but these are different groups.  And in order to get in the group, you had to do certain things.  And so I would do these certain things, but I was never good enough to get into these groups.  And I never realized until later, it was not because I wasn't good enough.  It was because of the color of my skin.  So I faced discrimination at a very early age without even knowing it.
Speaker 2: How did that effect your world view or attitude, you know?  I mean did you--moving so much, did most of your self concept come from your family basically or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it comes from your family, and, you know, if you grow up and you're faced with discrimination your entire life, you know what it is.  We didn't know what it was.  We weren't faced with it, you know, living on the base, living away from the community.  I mean we--there were black people in the neighborhood, people that we knew, but we all kind of had the same experience.  And, you know, later on in life, I remember thinking, mom, dad [Robert Butler, Sr.], you're telling us to accept what, you know--and mom didn't really face it--
Story_ID: 159129
Speaker 1: My dad [Robert Butler, Sr.] faced it big time when he joined the [U.S.] Navy, and we actually--I actually interviewed him and sat down.  We talked for several hours about his life, so kind of what we're doing here.  And he talked about when he joined the Navy, it wasn't so bad, but there were certain people that, you know, gave him a really hard time, and it was only because of his skin color.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have heard that the Navy is far from the easiest branch of the service in terms of race relations.  And people say, when they say what they mean, they say it with a lot of color because they curse like sailors.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they really do.  I mean that's what I've heard from black people in the Navy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Things were said to them that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So I joined in '71 [1971], and again, my test scores were good.  You know, I was smart, you know.  And because of my basic battery tests that you take once you get in, you know, they were looking for people to go to OCS, Officer Candidate School, and I had the test scores to do that.  And so I had to go take some other tests and, you know, they disqualified me for going to OCS because I had a certain color blindness.  Gray and green, if you put grays and greens together, my, you know, I can't pick it out.  In fact, they told me that people with my kind of color vision were used as spotters aboard bombers in World War II [WWII] because when you look down through the camouflage netting, I couldn't see it because of my gray-green color blindness.  Where other people wouldn't see it, I could see right through the color blind--the netting, the camouflage netting, to see targets below, which was not much of a consolation when they told me I couldn't go to OCS.  They said I could have gone but I would have to have resigned from the Navy and joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps and gone to OCS to become a Marine Second Lieutenant.  Mind you, this was 1971, and Second Lieutenants in the Marine Corps would go from [Marine Corps Recruit Depot] Parris Island [Parris Island, South Carolina] or wherever--
Speaker 2: To--
Speaker 1: --Southeast Asia, and, you know, part of me looks at me as being a coward for not wanting to take that chance.  But then it's like, you know, wait a minute, you want me to join the Marine Corps and go get shot at?  No, I'll stay in the Navy.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But, you know, I believe that was, you know--I can't say that that was discrimination.  They, you know, but I also wanted to work, you know, I wanted to be in computers.  They said with my scores I can, my scores, I could do anything I wanted to.  And so I figured, well, data processing.  So when they ask you what you wanted to do, I had, you know, three or--you had five choices, and my last choice was storekeeper, which was in the supply department.  My dad was a storekeeper.  And for the most part, back in those days, if you were a person of color, then you went in the supply department, and you were either--if you were lucky, you became a storekeeper.  Otherwise, you became a steward or a ship serviceman or a cook.  And stewards, of course, are the people that take care of the officers.  You know, you become basically a house boy.  And if you're a cook, you're a cook.  You know, so a storekeeper, at least you have some dignity in that, you know, you were in charge of all the supplies.  And you became the most popular person aboard ship because you had the key to the supply closet.  If, if you're an engineer and you break something, and you gotta get replacement parts, you gotta find the storekeeper to get the parts.  You know, if you're going to the bathroom and you're out of paper, you gotta find the storekeeper 'cause he has, he had the key to get you, you know, to get you those supplies.  So in that respect, it was good, but it just showed how even back in 1971, we had not progressed that much where as a person like me who had the smarts that I had, couldn't do anything more than be, you know, either somebody's serviceman or a cook.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know the World War II vets tell me that all the black enlisted men were cooks.
Speaker 1: (Nods head) Well, yeah, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Or porters or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, a guy that I worked with at the radio station, you know, he joined the [U.S.] Air Force, and, you know, they told him the same thing, you can do anything you wanna do.  And he says, you're telling me that all--when he got into boot camp that my choices are to be somebody's butler or a cook?  And they said, yeah, essentially (laughter), and he got out.  He said, "Nah, no, you're gonna have to let me out.  I'm not gonna do this."  Things are better now, but it showed that, you know, I talked about the discrimination.  You know, black people, depending on where you lived, you face it early on or you just don't know what it is.  And people can tell you what it is and you know how to deal with it.  We, my family, we didn't have that.  So we had to learn on our own.  And it's, and you don't realize it, what it is until much--til much later, and then it's like, "Wow.  I wish y'all would have prepared me for this."
Speaker 2: Right, because as you hit it, you don't know what you're dealing with until you--
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --you know--
Story_ID: 159130
Speaker 1: Your family, you were saying didn't really discuss politics very much or what's going on in the country and as far--
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall us--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --as Civil Rights--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --sitting around having discussions about politics and race relations and things like that. No, don't recall it.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's typical of those days too where--
Speaker 2: Yep, you know, don't forget, my parents grew up, you know, they were born in the '30s [1930s].  You know, they're, when they're really, really conscious.  My dad [Robert Butler, Sr.] is twelve or eleven.  My mom [Leola Moore Butler] is, you know, nine, and we get bombed by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor.  So, you know, their formative years, we're at war [World War II, WWII].  And then, you know, once they become teenagers, the war is over, and, you know, there's that great era of prosperity, you know, within the country, you know, rebuilding from the war years, you know.  And then you get the Korean War, which was more like the Vietnam War, a little conflict.  So, you know, my parents really came of age during that, you know, great American, great American time, where, you know, you had, you know, you have a house and a car, you know, and a couple--and three or four kids, and that's the great American dream that you were able to do that.  So they grew up in an era where you didn't make waves.  That's what they learned.  You don't make waves, and so that's what they told, that's what they shared with us.
Story_ID: 159131
Speaker 1: So well, how did things go in the [U.S.] Navy?  Now, you--which one of those options did you--
Speaker 2: I ended up becoming a storekeeper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and my first duty station was down in Guantanamo Bay [Cuba], and, you know, I mean I worked at--the department I was in was port services.  And these are the folks that drive the boats, you know, the ferries, the tugs.  I was in that department.  And because I was in that department, you know, I mean I was the--we had two storekeepers.  There was the first class, and there was me.  So I'm the, I was what they call a striker, when you're an enlisted man, and you're going for a rate, until you reach a certain level, you are called a striker.  So I was striking to become a storekeeper, Seaman First Class, storekeeper.  And so I'm learning from, you know, the E6, the First Class storekeeper, and, you know, that's what you do, you know.  So my job was to issue spare parts and conduct inventories, and when I stood duty, I stood duty at the port patrol tower.  There's a picture of me actually standing up there at the tower, overlooking the [Guantanamo] Bay, you know, at Guantanamo Bay, and then, you know, my job--I was up there at the port control tower where they still use semaphore [ph.], I mean the signal lights.  And so the people that stood duty up there were signal men.  So I'm trying to learn Morse code and learn how to do--maybe I can do this instead of being a storekeeper, you know.  And then eventually, they, I was, I would go from standing duty up there and so they go to bed at midnight.  And I had to stay up all night, you know.  That was some hard stuff, especially with the stuff I was doing during the day (laughter).  But, you know, there are times when I would fall asleep, you know.  You're not supposed to fall asleep, but that's--it's hard to stay up all night long.  But I did that, and then I became a boat coxswain, you know, driving the small boats, you know.  And that was, that was kind of cool to be out there doing that.
Story_ID: 159132
Speaker 1: So you're, you're in Cuba, you know, at Guantanamo Bay [Naval Base].  This is--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --what they call Gitmo.
Speaker 2: Gitmo.
Speaker 1: And what were things like in '71 [1971] there, were there--I know there was always some tension between the Cubans and the American soldiers, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, we had a lot of Cubans who worked on the base.  That's one thing that did change.  I mean we talked about how, you know, the tensions were rough and all that, but you couldn't run the base without the local Cubans.  So they would show up every day, come to work, and then at night they'd go out the gate and go back home.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize this.  All these years, I've never really realized that, with all the rhetoric about Cuba, [Fidel] Castro, the communists and that sort of thing, that Cuban nationals actually worked on Guantanamo--
Speaker 2: On the [U.S.] Navy base, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Laughter) On the base at Guantanamo.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What kind of jobs did they perform?
Speaker 2: They did, you know, I mean clerical jobs.  There was, I mean they had the bars.  You know, there was a place called the Barrel Club, where, you know, people would go and drink and (laughter), I'll never forget.  I think I was, so I joined when I was, went to boot camp, I'm like eighteen years old and go to the Barrel Club.  And I want, you know, I'm thinking I want a drink, but you can't drink until you're twenty-one.  So I, you know, get up my courage and go up there and ask for a rum and coke.  Yeah, I want a rum and coke, like I know what I'm talking about.  And I'm thinking, they'll ask for my ID or I didn't, I don't have it with me.  He's like here.  It was no big deal.  So I'm like, really?  So then I go to the exchange and I buy a bottle of rum--bottle of rum.  Nobody asks any questions.  It's like you can, this is cool.  So I buy this 151 rum.  I take it back to my room in the barracks.  And this is like the first couple of days I'm there, and this guy from across the hall knocks on my door, "How you doing?"  You know, exchange names, you know, "If you need anything, let me know.  Oh, you got some rum, man.  Can I get a hit?"  "Yeah, sure."  He upends the bottle, takes a big ole swig of the 151.  And I can't be outdone in my own room.  So I take it and take a swig.  And then tried to breathe out (laughter).  I couldn't do it.  I thought I was gonna choke, you know, or suffocate 'cause I couldn't breathe out, I couldn't breathe in.  It was a rough one.  I learned my lesson there, man, you know, it was pretty funny (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that 151 doesn't play.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's tough.  So, okay, so, now, yeah, it's amazing to me, this is--with all the rhetoric about Cuba and all this, communist country and we need to go in and all this, and Cubans are working on the base (laughter).
Speaker 2: They're working on the base.  And I heard rumors that on payday that the tax collector would be outside the gate collecting taxes.  I don't know if that was true or not, but that's what I heard.
Story_ID: 159133
Speaker 1: Were you restricted in what part of the island [Cuba] you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you couldn't leave the base [Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, Cuba].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to stay on the base.  In fact, I'll never forget, working at the port control tower, I had a secret clearance.  And I had to go pick up a secret message, you know.  It was like, you know, big deal, go get this, you know, go get this message.  There's a secret message for us.  And it turned it out that a couple of sailors off one of the ships had gone past the line into Cuba.  And then the [U.S.] Marines, who were up, you know, trained their weapons on him and told him to come back.  And he didn't know that there was a line there.  So it was very innocent, but it was like that was a big deal.  You didn't go into Cuba because if the Cubans had been there and grabbed him, nothing you could do.  Then you'd have to, it becomes a big, international incident.  But, you know, you didn't go, you know--there was plenty of places on the base that you could stay.  But, yeah, you didn't go out, off the base.  We also had the base defense forces, called November Company.  I never will forget that, you know.  We, every now and then you go out there, and you do--you have drills.  And you have to practice like you're, you know, defending the island.  And so we are supposed to be practicing somebody coming at us, and all of a sudden we get word that we can't stay behind these bushes.  We have to get in front of the bushes so the people behind us couldn't see us.  I'm like, well, if we're supposed to be hiding from the enemy who's out there, why are we getting in front of the bushes?  It was, didn't make any sense, and so come to find out later, talking to the Marines, that November Company was known as a speed bump, that we were there to just delay the enemy enough for the Marines to get their act together.  So we were the sacrificial forces (laughter), what I found out later. Glad they never had an invasion (laughter).
Speaker 1: So it didn't make any sense on purpose.
Speaker 2: Probably, probably not.
Speaker 1: Gee whizz, I mean to find that out later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) it's pretty interesting.
Story_ID: 159134
Speaker 1: Were you interested in radio in the [U.S.] Navy at all?
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Did that manifest itself?
Speaker 2: No, I never got interested in broadcasting or anything until after the Navy.  But it, interestingly enough, how I got into this, I remember going to high school dances or going to house parties.  And, you know, back then, you had the record player and the 45's, and it wasn't like you had two.  You just had one.  So if you're gonna dance, you dance to whatever record's on.  And they would put it on repeat, and they used to have 'Hot Pants' by James Brown, playing ten times in a row.  And I'm thinking, well, wouldn't it be cool if we just like, you know, varied the music.  So, you know, I started being the guy to sit there at the record player and change the songs, you know.  And then when I got into the Navy and could afford to, I bought a turntable, and so we would have parties, and I'd play the music.  And then I--I said, wouldn't it be nice if you had two turntables.  So then I bought a little mixer.  It's a little Radio Shack mixer about yea, big, and that you could plug two things in.  And then you would actually have a mixer to mix the music back and forth.  So that's how I got involved in becoming a DJ.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wanted to be a disco DJ, and I wanted--then I wanted to be a DJ on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's just take this one bite at a time.  So you, did you start with the tube, with the mixer in the Navy?
Speaker 2: No, that was probably afterwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, I didn't really--I would spin records at parties and stuff, but we didn't, you know, in the Navy, you're in the barracks--in the barracks, so you didn't really take, pay that much attention.  But I would be the one that would change the records so you didn't have to have the same record playing over and over again.
Story_ID: 159135
Speaker 1: So you were in the [U.S.] Navy 'til 1974, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Is there anything notable about the Navy, other than, I mean what was--what's the most memorable thing about the Navy or what stuck with you about the Navy?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked the discipline.  I, I enjoyed serving my country, you know.  I mean, but, you know, back in those times, you know, we indulged in all kinds of extracurricular activities, you know.  And I think that one of the worst things that ever happened to me was being in Guantanamo Bay [Naval Base, Cuba] where you could start drinking 'cause I started drinking in high school.  We would, we would, we would steal bottles of wine, somehow or get a hold of bottles of wine and take 'em down on certain days of school, and we'd all be out there drinking, you know.  And that became fun.  And then to be in the Navy and not have any filters, and you could drink anything you wanted to drink.  I mean that was like really cool.  So a lot of people in the Navy have substance abuse problems, in the military, period.  Not so much now, but back then, a lot of people, I mean you're in Cuba.  What else is there to do but drink?  You know, you couldn't go off, you could go to the movies or whatever, but that was kind of it.  So I started drinking a lot.
Speaker 1: I think that's a--has a historical precedent, so many Navy shows--songs and sailor songs about getting drunk.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I started doing it then, and then, you know, if you--if somebody had some weed, you'd smoke some weed, and you know, I mean that, that's what you did.
Story_ID: 159136
Speaker 1: In 1974, when you're on your way out [of the U.S. Navy], now, you're--were you a full storekeeper by then or--
Speaker 2: I was, well, I had been a third class, an E3, and was about to become--I mean an E4 about to become an E5, but then I got in trouble, alcohol and dope, you know.  So then I got busted down and then it happened one more time and the old man on the ship wanted to put me out, wanted to make an example because you know, it was a problem, drugs and alcohol were a problem.  And if you had somebody who was a constant screw up, getting rid of them didn't go any good.  But I was a really good sailor.  I was like a 3.6, 3.8 sailor.  And so he wanted to make an example of me.  So he wanted me discharged.  And I got discharged, but, you know, I got an honorable discharge.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: I'd have stayed in had it not been for that.  And I may have stayed in for twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were following in the footsteps of your dad [Robert Butler, Sr.] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, pretty much.  Not intentionally, but yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so discharged out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and you move to Washington, D.C., is that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I got out in Philly, stayed there for about a year.  Because I was a storekeeper, I knew how to work in warehouses.  I got a job as a warehouseman at a shirt company. Did that for a while.  And then one day decided, wouldn't it be nice to move to [Washington] D.C.?  I moved to D.C. to stay with one of my Navy friends, and that, you know, didn't work out well, ended up moving to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to stay with another friend.  We were all, the three of us were really tight, and stayed with them for a while, him and his mother for a while.  And then, you know, moved in with some woman, and we had met, and, you know, she gave me a place to stay.  And I kind of became a father to her son, and, you know, then, you know, you're young and stupid and I said, "Well, you know, I can do better than this," and, you know--I've, we've talked a few times since then.  And it's like, you know, it was a stage in your life.  But I got a job at UPS [United Parcel Service], unloading trucks.  And I'll never forget, I was smoking at the time.  And you get in one of, the back of those trucks and start offloading those things, you're moving.  I mean it's like, you know, boom, boom, boom.  And I went out there, and, of course, I'm like, what, twenty--that was '74 [1974], I'm twenty-one, twenty-two years old.  So I'm in, you know, pretty good shape.  And during lunch went out there to have a cigarette, started coughing and quit smoking right then.  Bam.  But working in unloading those trucks, I didn't realize it until later, but I could grab a forty-pound box with one hand and just, bam, 'cause you get used to doing that.  And I had, I developed a really strong grip, and you have to, to a really strong wrist and everything else.  And later on, my son [Robert Butler, III], when he was playing football, he was a wide receiver, and his aunt wanted him to work at UPS.  And I said, "Only if you can unload trucks," which he didn't do.  But had he unloaded trucks, he'd a had some strong hands.  He'd have been able to catch the ball a lot better (laughter), but no, I did that.  And then I got a job with the phone company.  They called me and, you know, actually, they called me one morning.  I was working--you go to work at like six o'clock and get off at like midnight, one o'clock in the morning.  And the phone rings one morning around nine, you know, Susan's gone to work, and Robert's at school.  And, ironically, his son's name was Robert.  And I'm answering the phone.  I'm groggy, and, you know, I'm surly, and, "Who's this and what do you want?"  "Well, this is Bell Telephone [later AT&T]."  "Yeah."  "Well, you applied for a job here.  We want you to come in for an interview."  I said, "Oh, okay."  And I go down there, and I got the job, and so much for, for unloading trucks at UPS.  I mean this was a full-time job with benefits.  And so it was cool.
Story_ID: 159137
Speaker 1: Now, you were a directory assistance operator [at Bell Telephone Company, later AT&T].
Speaker 2: Four one-one, baby.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) yep.
Speaker 1: So if I called, and I wanna know a phone number, you'd ask me what city, and then whatever and--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: --hook me up, right?
Speaker 2: Now, back then, we didn't ask what city because then, you were--people were calling for Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], with the 412 area code.  So you would say, "Directory Assistance."  "How can I get the number for, you know, Larry Smith."  "Larry Smith?  Do you know what street he lives on?"  "Oh, well, I think he lives on such and such.  And if you found it"--"Well, I found one on such and such street."  "Yeah, that's him."  And give 'em the number and keep on moving, you know.  But you had, you know, we always have our stories.  The person that would call to get their, they want their brother's phone number, "And now what's his last name?"  "Oh, I don't remember," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Their brother?
Speaker 2: You know, it was some crazy stuff, you know, but, yeah.  But that was, you know, that was a good job.  You know, but after a while, you know, you get, you know, people call up and cuss you out, and you have to--you're taught how to deal with that.  But I knew it was time for me to go when somebody called at one time and wanted to get their mother's or their sister's to somebody's name and number, and they didn't know how to spell the last name, and they got surly with me, and I got surly with them, and I (sound), I clicked 'em which is, that's a no-no.  You don't click on people, you don't cut 'em off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew then it was time for me to get out of there.
Speaker 1: That was against the code of AT&T to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was against, oh, you--no, you didn't do that.  You can get fired for doing that.  If you intentionally do that.  Not if you, you know, you slipped, you know, well, you could always say that, but no, I just, I just knew it was time to go.
Story_ID: 159138
Speaker 1: While you're doing this [working at Bell Telephone Company, later AT&T], now, you're a disco DJ [disc jockey]?
Speaker 2: Yep, I'm spinning records at parties and clubs and stuff and renting my equipment and the guy I got my equipment from worked for this radio station called WAMO, known as WAMO.  And, you know, he was a DJ on the radio, and we're talking, and I say, "You know, I'd like to be able to do that."  He said, "Well, you have to get a lot of training, you know, or formal education"--a lot of experience or formal education.  And you can't get one without the other so, in the end, I opted to move back to California and go to school for being a DJ on the radio.  And that's why I ended up at Chabot [College, Hayward, California].
Speaker 1: Alright, were those the days when, had the days come around yet, I guess in the '70s [1970s]--well the days weren't there yet where the disc jockeys were actually--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: --Rocking the mic and all that sort of thing and talking?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were talking, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.  They were talking.
Speaker 1: Did you have a routine, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, you know, I'd--when you started working at clubs, you have a little spiel that you would do, and, you know, that was just something that you did, you know.  But it's funny, you know, the mixing part, like, you know, people that do all the mixing and the rapping, that--it was before that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no rapping, but that's what--
Speaker 2: No rapping.
Speaker 1: --Rapping and the kind of complicated mixing came from, that tradition of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That, yeah, you know, 'cause I'd be at a party, and I'd be playing one song, and then, you know, you try to find the beat.  And you'd go bam, right into the other one.  By that time, I had a better mixer, you know, one that you had to plug in that didn't run on batteries, it sounded much better.  In fact, I just sold it.  We had, when we moved out of the other house, it was still in the house.  And I just sold it.  I tried to get rid of as much stuff as I could during our garage sale.  But, yeah, you know, so I did that.  And I did that for, you know, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  When I moved home, I did it here in the [San Francisco] Bay area [California].  I even did it in clubs.  I mean I got a job at a place called the New Age Disco, which was like a brand new disco.  That was in 1978.  And it was located in downtown Oakland [California].  It was a converted bowling alley.
Story_ID: 159139
Speaker 1: Did you go back to school on the GI bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]?
Speaker 2: I went back on the GI bill, correct.
Speaker 1: What I, I had a note that someone actually told you when you were working for AT&T [formerly, Bell Telephone Company], that you had an impressive voice, basically--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm talking, I'm answering a phone, a call in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and "Directory Assistance," you know.  "I'd like to get the number for such and such."  "Well, the number is"--"Operator, you have a nice voice."  I said, "Well, thank you," said, "You ought to be a DJ [disc jockey]."  And then it actually did plant that seed that maybe I should try to be a DJ on the radio.  And so, you know, that's what eventually--I moved back, and I enrolled in a community college, Chabot College in Hayward [California].  And, you know, I didn't know--I looked under radio, didn't have anything under radio.  I looked under, you know, broadcasting, nothing under broadcasting.  It turns out their classes were under Mass Communications.  And so I enrolled in a program.  I started--that summer, summer of 1977, I started taking, I took two, there were two summer sessions.  And I took 7--history, seventeen A, B and C during the summer session, which was really kind of crazy.  But I also got a job with EOPS [Extended Opportunity Programs and Services] as a peer counselor because--and my job was to go--they had money to offer grants to disadvantaged students.  And, but you had to sign up for the program.  So my job was to go over to the registration and find people that I thought might be disadvantaged, i.e., people that looked like me, and see if they had applied for an EOPS grant.  And so I was, that was my job to, to sell EOPS, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 159140
Speaker 1: But when it came to taking the classes in mass communications [at Chabot College, Hayward, California], I wanted to get a DJ [disc jockey] shift, 'cause I mean I, you know, I was already a DJ.  You know, I was spinning records in clubs and, you know, I had the spiel down, I thought, and, you know, they said, no, that you have to take these classes before you can get a DJ shift.  And I was disappointed.  I said, "Wait a minute, man, come on, my name is Bob. Playing music is my job.  I'm better known as the Gentle Gemini, guaranteed to satisfy, especially, once I get high."  I needed to get a shift.  He said, "No."  And about a couple of days later, he came to me, the instructor came to me and said, "Do you still want to get on the air now?"  I said, "Well, yeah."  He said, "Well, I need somebody to do the news."  I said, "What do you mean?"  "Well, we need, you know, we wanna do a newscast every hour, but we need someone to record it.  You know, why don't you do that?"  I said, "What do I have to do?"  He said, "Well, go home and get the paper and write a newscast out of the paper, out of the stories you see in the paper, and then come in, in the morning and record it."  And so that's what I started doing.  And so they would play it every hour at the bottom of the hour.
Speaker 2: So that was as simple as that.  You'd get the newspaper, the morning paper?
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, the afternoon paper.
Speaker 2: Afternoon paper, okay.
Speaker 1: And then write my newscast, Monday afternoon, and it would air Tuesday morning.  So it really wasn't news by the time it got (laughter) on the air.  And then I realized they were playing it at 8:30 and 9:30 and 10:30 and 11:30, 12:30, 1:30, 2:30, it's like--
Speaker 2: The same recording.
Speaker 1: The same recorded newscast, so it really wasn't news by the time it got--especially, to the afternoon.  So I began doing one in the morning, and doing one in the afternoon.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I figured it fulfilled those FCC [Federal Communications Commission] requirements for the news and--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, and don't forget, we were a cable--we were a cable station.  We weren't monitored by the FCC.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was just cable.  You could only hear it on campus if you had a radio.
Speaker 2: Okay, I see.
Speaker 1: And it was, and I've got, one of the pictures I have over there of me, it's me grinning, it was called KCC.  And I've got the yellow KCC shirt.
Speaker 2: Alright, okay.
Speaker 1: So that's how I started doing it, and then I got little recorder and began doing interviews and using interview--the tape during my newscast, you know.  And I'll never forget, like the story that made the most, biggest impact on me, was the mayor's race in Hayward [California] in 1978 where the incumbent mayor, Ilene Weinreb was running against the former fire chief, Matt Jimenez.  And it was a very nasty race, and I was in the middle of it, interviewing both sides, and even went with Matt Jimenez when he was out there knocking on doors, and I learned that, wow, things--this is different because he goes up to a door and knocks on the door.  And the, and on Yolo Street [ph.], which was the Hispanic part of the town.  He'd say, "Hi, I'm Matt Jimenez (Spanish pronunciation)," you know.  "I thought your name was Matt Jimenez," (laughter).  So if you, depending on what part of town he was in, how he said his name.  But, you know, I learned about doing interviews and being fair, you know, using both sides of the story.  And that's how I kind of got involved in the news.  And then I began listening.  You know, when I was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, riding around on a Sunday night with an AM radio in my car, getting high, the black station played gospel music.  And I just didn't feel right, getting loaded listening to gospel music on Sunday.  So I'd listen to the all-news station, and the same thing happened when I got back to California.  I listened to the all-news station because I'm being informed on what's going on in the world.  And that also helped me in my newscast because, you know, if they did a story, well, maybe I should do this story.  And, you know, it was a learning experience for me.
Story_ID: 159141
Speaker 1: And so one thing I learned in class [at Chabot College, Hayward, California] is that, if you're going to work in news, and you work at a music station, when they begin having financial trouble, the first place they're gonna cut is the news department.  So you might wanna think about working at a news station if you wanna do news.  And so my first job after graduation was this place called Soul Beat Television.  It was a really, it was a precursor to BET [Black Entertainment Television] where we--
Speaker 2: Now, where was Soul Beat in--
Speaker 1: It was located in Oakland [California].
Speaker 2: Oh, Oakland, okay.
Speaker 1: And it played on the Oakland cable system, and basically, what you did, is you'd come in, and you played music videos.  And you'd play a music video and just like the old days with me, he started off with one machine, and then he got two machines with a mixer, and you'd play the one music video.  Then you'd start the other one and you'd flip it.  So you'd go from one music video to the next.  And then every now and then, you'd put in the reel for commercials, you know, played commercials, and so that was really kind of interesting doing that.  It was learning how, as I said, how not to do stuff 'cause it was a one-man operation, basically, and, you know, when we started talking, I did a shot at--I had to shoot, edit, produce a tape when I was in school.  And it was about the mass communications program at Chabot [College, Hayward, California] and how important it was.  And this was around the time of Prop 16, no Prop 13, when they wanted to cut property taxes all across the state, you know, thereby, you know, really cutting the funding for programs, you know, education, government, all that got all their funding slashed.  And so each department in the school had to explain why their program didn't need to be cut.  And so I interviewed the professor.  I interviewed some of the, you know, some of the other people, you know, some of the students about the importance of the program, and basically said, look, you know, we are the future storytellers, and we need to be able to train them here at Chabot.  At Chabot, we had a hands-on system where you actually went on the radio.  You actually did a television newscast.  You had to shoot your own stuff, edit your own stuff.  We were actually learning the skills that people need today to be able to work in the business.  So I took that tape--I heard about Soul Beat, and they were looking for people.  And I took that tape down there, and the guy hired me on the spot, just like that.
Story_ID: 159142
Speaker 1: Now, were, were there any particular mentors at Chabot [College, Hayward, California] when you were there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Stan, Stan Lichtenstein (ph.) was the radio instructor, the one that wouldn't let me on the air as a DJ, who, you know, said that--and I remember, this is part of that video.  He says, you know, he said, "I spend most of my time talking people out of working in this business because it's a hard business."  He said, "But every now and then, you know, the cream will rise to the top and then you'll find a person that you think actually can make it."  And he didn't tell me this then, but he told me this, that he thought I could make it, and, you know, fast forward to a couple of years ago when my local chapter of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] honored me, you know, and I got in touch with Stan and asked him to be there and was able to tell that story and say that, "Stan, please stand up."  And he stands up.  He was beaming, you know, but, and Stan was a sales guy.  That's how he got involved in the industry.  He was a sales guy.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an exciting time for blacks in the media on a nationwide level, I think.  The first black anchor on a network news show was Max Robinson at ABC [American Broadcasting Company].  That occurred in the late, around '76 [1976] or '77 [1977] [sic, 1978]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --In there.  [HM] Carole Simpson--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --Began to do the weekend news on ABC as well.  On the national scene, I mean on the radio--I mean, well, on--well, CBS, '60 Minutes,' Ed Bradley [Jr.] starts in '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did you have any role models amongst any of the black, or even the white news people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I really got involved in, in the news, I listened to KCBS, and I listened to the people talking on the radio, and [Clarence] Clancy Cassell was a name that always, I used, you know, remember Clancy's name, Don Mosley, you know, Al Hart, these are all people--Don and Clancy are gone.  Al is, is hanging on.  But listening to them, and, you know, respecting what they did.
Story_ID: 159143
Speaker 1: And, you know, you talk about 19--you know, when Max [Robinson] started anchoring the ABC [American Broadcasting Company] 'World News Tonight,' excuse me, you know, right around that time is when NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] was created.  It was created in 1975.  And there was a reason for NABJ, and that was that many of the reporters, black reporters who had been hired during the 1960s to cover the long, hot summers, because the white reporters could not go into Watts [Los Angeles, California].  They couldn't go into Newark [New Jersey].  They couldn't go on the North Side of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  They couldn't go up into, you know, Passyunk Projects in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  They hired, they had to hire black reporters to do that 'cause it wasn't safe.  After the Civil Rights Act was passed in '64 [1964], you know, people still weren't happy.  And so that's when you started having the riots, and they needed to have people to cover those stories.  Well, we were hired to cover those stories, but after things settled down, in the, you know, mid-'70s [1970s], when you didn't have the riots like you did before, the black reporters, you know, basically were kind of shunted aside.  You weren't given any good assignments.  You were covering garden parties and you weren't allowed to cover City Hall.  You weren't allowed to cover the State House.  You (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, they got like soft news.
Speaker 1: You were given menial assignments, yeah, and people got upset about that.  And so at one point, a bunch of men and women came together and said, you know, we gotta do something about this.  And that's how NABJ was created.  The black press had the National Newspaper Publishers Association or the NNPA, but those who worked for the mainstream publications really weren't part of NNPA 'cause they didn't work for the black press.  They worked for the mainstream press.  And these reporters said, we need to have our own association.  And that's how NABJ was created.
Speaker 2: Okay, the founders, some of the founders are [HM] Paul Brock, we mentioned--
Speaker 1: Paul Brock was the founding executive director, [HM] Maureen Bunyan, (simultaneous) you know--
Speaker 2: [HM] DeWayne Wickham--
Speaker 1: DeWayne Wickham, [HM] Vernon Jarrett, you know, you know, so many different people, you know, [HM] Acel Moore, gosh, you know, [HM] Allison Davis--
Speaker 2: [HM] Paul Delaney, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Paul Delaney, I mean, you know, there are so many of them who are still around, you know.  And it's like they created something that is fantastic.  I never will forget listening to, I think it was Vernon [Jarrett] for, one of my first convention--my first convention was 2000.  My first, I joined in 2000.  And one of the first times, listening to one of the founders talk about how when they had their first convention, they could have had it in a phone booth.  There were so few people that showed up, and they could have had it at a Motel 6.  And they said, to see it now.  And I think that was actually in Atlanta [Georgia] in 2005, to see where we've come in twenty years, you know, from 1975--or thirty years, 1975 to 2005, you know, this organization has really come a long way.  Look at, we're here in this big hotel, we've got thousands of people here.  We never envisioned it would be this big, you know, but it is.  And we all owe a debt of gratitude to those who took the chance--'cause it wasn't easy for them to do this.  You know, there were a lot of people that didn't want their bosses to know they were members of NABJ because they could have faced, you know, problems.  They could have faced sanctions.  And some did.  Some were told, "You can--you make a choice, you either you work here or you become part of, or you be part of NABJ.  You can't do both."  And some folks said, "Okay, see ya," and, and left.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you joined, you said in 2000?
Speaker 1: In 2000.
Story_ID: 159144
Speaker 1: But here we are in 1979, did you know about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: No, no didn't know about it.
Speaker 1: And you're part of Soul Beat television in Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: In Oakland, right.
Speaker 1: So how long were you part of Soul Beat, and what was the, what were some of the stories from Soul Beat?
Speaker 2: Well, Soul Beat was an interesting situation where you have it run by one guy.  And he hired me to, you know, to be, you know, to shoot video and produce some of the videos they had.  And we agreed on a salary.  In 1979, five hundred bucks a month.  And the first month, he paid me.  And I had an apartment so I needed to have money for rent and stuff.  And then the second month, he told me if I wanted to get paid, I had to sell advertising.  And he said, "Or, you know, I've got, you know, I got this apartment over here.  You can move in here and don't have to pay rent to your apartment."  And I did that, and well, why did I do that, 'cause, now, you know, he owes me--I mean I owe him.  You know, he can treat me any way he wants because I'm living in his, in his apartment.  And if I wanted to get paid, I gotta sell advertising, and that wasn't what I signed up for.
Story_ID: 159145
Speaker 1: Soul Beat Television [Oakland, California].  Now, here you are trapped.  You're living in an apartment owned by the station manager, and the (laughter), you're, so how did you, how did you make your exit from Soul Beat?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, I moved all my stuff there and it got to be, I just, I just said, "You know what?  I can't, I can't deal with this."  And it's really ironic because, you know, he had a friend who would come around, this woman would come around all the time.  And I didn't know much about her except that she, you know, they would go into his room and they'd close the door and be in there for a long time.  I didn't know what was going on in there, none of my business.  But it just wasn't, you know, I wanted to get paid, and he wouldn't wanna pay me.  So I became dependent on him.  And I realized, now, this, this ain't it.  And so I left and went back to work at Chabot [College, Hayward, California] 'cause that was an actual job that paid me, and I moved back in with my mother [Leola Moore Butler] and stayed there for a while, and, 'cause she had room in the house.  It was a five-bedroom house.  But it was just, learn how not to do things.  And you don't treat people the way that he treated 'em, and, you know, the women, especially, you know, he was trying to exploit them.  And, you know, it just wasn't, it just wasn't professional in my view.  So I left.
Speaker 1: What happened to Soul Beat Television?
Speaker 2: It eventually went off the air.  You know, I mentioned this woman.  Her name was Niesa Bey [ph.].  And Niesa, I don't know what the relation--I don't know what she was doing there.  But I remember I did this report, I did a report in the early, like 2002.  I did a series on black townships.  And somebody heard the report or heard about the report and asked me to come on Soul Beat and talk about the reports.  And so, you know, I came on, and I brought, you know, the reports.  They were on a cassette, brought my machine, and they basically put the mic down onto the speaker of the cassette and played some of the reports.  And it was, it was good.  You know, and, so we're talking and all of a sudden, Chuck shows up, Chuck Johnson, the guy that owned Soul Beat.  And he came down, and he wanted to be on the air to talk about how he gave me my start and all that.  And it was (laughter) it was really kind of, it was really kind of sad.  But eventually, you know, Chuck got sick and then, you know, and then he passed away.  And then there was a guy that was their news director, a guy named Chauncey Bailey that got with somebody else and bought Soul Beat, and they were gonna do this programming on it.  But Chauncey had run into issues because one of the people that did programming on Soul Beat was a Dr. Yusuf Bey, who owned this organization called Your Black Muslim Bakery.  And in, I wanna say it was in 19--2002, Dr.--they called him Dr. Bey.  He didn't have a doctorate of philosophy, and he wasn't a medical doctor, but they called him Dr. Bey.  Dr. Bey was accused of basically having sexual relations with girls who lived at the bakery, some of them who were as young as twelve and thirteen.  And so then they did a paternity test and it turned out that he was the father of several young, several of the young men at the bakery whose mothers, you know, could only have been in their teens when he had sex with them.  So he was now, all of a sudden charged with child molestation.  And Chauncey, like many reporters, covered the story.  And that really became a problem for people within the bakery that felt that Chauncey should not be, you know, running down a black man.  But Chauncey was doing his job as a reporter, like, like everybody else was.  So there were people that were very unhappy with Chauncey about that.
Story_ID: 159146
Speaker 1: So Dr. [Yusuf] Bey dies about a year later [2003], and his son, one of his sons takes over, Antar.  And the [Your Black Muslim] Bakery was an organization that was created that was, that started in 1971, somewhere around there--
Speaker 2: During the Nation of Islam days.
Speaker 1: During the Nation of Islam's heyday.  You know, they started the bakery in Bakersfield [California], in Santa Barbara [California], eventually moved it up to Oakland [California].  And it really was a center of empowerment for African Americans 'cause here is a black man who owns his own business, is very successful, riding around in a Cadillacs, you know, has his entourage of Nation of Islam soldiers around him.  People loved that.  And there were people that actually were helped by the bakery, early on.  But there was also a lot of stuff going on, you know, under the table, you know, that we found out later when the two women that had babies with him when they were teenagers filed suit and basically explained all that had been going on at the bakery, such as the women who had his children and were not allowed to put his name on the birth certificates, saying they didn't know who the father was, so they could get welfare.  And when they got the welfare checks, they went to him.  And this is a scam that was going on, that was pretty much proven by depositions of these women.  And then when the social services went back and looked, they were able to prove that, yeah, this is what was going on.  So, you know, that was a problem for the bakery, and Antar, the bakery had been losing business.  And when Antar took over, they had debt, so he took out this huge loan to pay off the debts.  Of course, one of the first things they did was not pay off the loans and not pay the taxes, but, you know, to set up a business and pay all the brothers, you know.  So it was basically, you know, it was a big problem.  And then they didn't have the money to pay the taxes.  And, you know, they also, one of the other brothers had took out a loan from the City of Oakland to start a home healthcare business, and nobody really got paid except for people that the last name was Bey, and, you know, one thing led to another.  And, you know, the guy that started that was kicked out.  And, it was just a whole big, a whole bunch of stuff going on.  Plus, there was real estate fraud going on.  There were all kind of things going on behind the scenes and under the table that were really unsavory--
Story_ID: 159147
Speaker 1: --We, on the Chauncey Bailey Project--when Chauncey was killed in 2007, we started a project that looked at all the stuff that had gone on with the [Your Black Muslim] Bakery.  We had a bunch of reporters, started off with about ten or twelve reporters, ended up with about three.  And we, our investigation showed that the real estate fraud, the extortion, all this stuff had been going on for a number of years.  And we also had good evidence that the person in charge of the bakery--'cause by this time, Antar [Bey] had been killed in a drive-by shooting or somebody wanted to steal his car in a carjacking.  And the younger brother [Yusuf Bey IV] takes over.  And one of the first things he does is go into liquor stores in the neighborhood and smash 'em up, ostensibly for selling alcohol in the black community, you know.  And, of course, this was caught on the stores' security cameras, and they're all arrested and it just became this, this big mess.  But Chauncey left the Oakland Tribune where he had been working, left Soul Beat [Television], did some traveling, came back and went to work for the Oakland Post, a black newspaper.  And he had been talking to, you know, meanwhile, the bakery is disintegrating. The board of directors, people that were the board of directors are basically run out because one, when Dr. Bey died, he left the bakery to--he left his CPA [certified public accountant] in charge of the bakery as a CEO [chief executive officer] and as the minister.  Well, Antar didn't like that, and somewhere along the line, the CPA disappears like within months.  Antar takes over, basically says I'm in charge now, and the board of directors is basically told, you know, it's my way or the highway.  They know that the CPA has disappeared.  They suspect that something might have happened.  And so they all kind of left.  And these are the people that knew how to run a business.  And so one of the first things that Antar did when he took over, aside from taking out that loan, was not pay taxes.  You could do a lot of dirty stuff if you run a business, but if you don't pay your taxes, you will come under--they will know, they will know.  They will come after you for that.  And that's what happened.  So Chauncey, when he took over at the [Oakland] Post, he began talking to one of the guys who was on that board of directors who said, "Listen, Antar took over the bakery illegally.  You know, we need you to write a story about this," and so Chauncey started to write the story.  And he arranges to meet this guy at his, at the Post.  Well, I don't know whether he didn't know or didn't care or, but Niesa Bey [ph.] who, from the old Soul Beat days, good friend of Chuck's [Chuck Johnson], one of Dr. Bey's former wives, she sees this guy from the bakery at Chauncey's job, at the Post.  And somehow or other, this word gets back to Yusuf Bey the IV, they call him Fourth.  And he gets very angry about this, and this all came out later on in the trial that he got so angry, and he ordered two of his soldiers to take Chauncey out.  And that was, they accomplished that, not the next day, but the day after.  And so that's, you know, so we got involved in the investigative reporting of all this, and we, we did so many stories that really pulled the veil back on this bakery and also on the police investigation which was inadequate to say the least.  They knew who pulled the trigger.  They figured--pretty sure they knew who pulled the trigger.  But the way this bakery operated, it was like, you know, any kind of mosque.  Nothing happens unless the minister says so, and at this time, Fourth was the minister, and there's people that did not believe that the guy that pulled the trigger could have done that on his own.  In fact, there was an interview done.  The police raided the bakery the day after Chauncey was killed.  And one of the people that they arrested and later released, gave an interview to the police in which she said, "Look, everybody knows that nothing happens unless Fourth says so."  So I don't think this guy would have gone out there and done this without Fourth saying so.  You know, and that ended up during the trial, when they eventually arrested Fourth and the other guy--well, actually, they arrested them the day of the bakery--the day of the raid.  And they never got out.  They just stayed in until the trial.  And the trial didn't take place until 2011 which was four years after Chauncey was killed.
Story_ID: 159148
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) okay, just to recap a little bit.  Chauncey [Bailey] was, worked--you met him way back, 'cause that's where we started the story, way back in the--
Speaker 2: Well, I met Chauncey 'cause Chauncey was a reporter at the Oakland Tribune.  I would see Chauncey out covering stories.  We did a workshop together with an organization called the National Black Media Coalition.  They did a workshop, they did, do an annual conference.  We did this workshop on working in the industry.  So Chauncey was there, I was there.
Speaker 1: This was in the '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: This was back in the '80s [1980s], maybe the '90s [1990s].  I've for--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I--probably the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: I think we were in the '80s [1980s] when we started talking about Chauncey, but this is the project that I (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, see, then--so when I was at Soul Beat [Television],that was '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, we've fast forwarded to 2007.  So it's quite a few years later.  But, yeah, twenty-one, and that's twenty-eight years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, so I knew Chauncey back then.  I knew who Chauncey Bailey was.  I mean Chauncey was well known in the [San Francisco] Bay area.  And so working at Soul Beat, you know, he tried to keep it going, but, you know, after his death, it died, it died down, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159149
Speaker 1: That's when we first mentioned Chauncey [Bailey], and, of course, his case is a much-celebrated case.  It was taken up by the Maynard Institute [Oakland, California] and other--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, when Chauncey was killed, and I'll never forget.  I was sitting in my, at my desk, and I got a phone call from a friend who said, "I don't believe this, you know. They killed Chauncey Bailey."  I said, "What?"  And I had seen the, I'd heard the story that morning about a guy being shot down, you know, with a shotgun in broad daylight, didn't know it was Chauncey.  And she calls me and said, "This was Chauncey."  And his funeral was taken--took place the next week.  I was actually in Las Vegas [Nevada] at the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention.  And I was actually running for the board at that convention, running for regional director.  And during the opening ceremony, our president talked about how Chauncey was killed, and they believed he was killed because of work he was doing.  And because of that, we were gonna start a journalism collaborative [later the Chauncey Bailey Project] to investigate what happened to Chauncey and to finish his work.  And so we're in our first board meeting, and they talk about this.  And they say, we need somebody on the--we have to be part of this project.  Who lives in Oakland [California]?  (Laughter) I was the only one.  So that's how I got involved with the project, but it was, to me, some of the most important work I've ever done as a journalist.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, this is something that, it's not unique to Oakland, the fact that there are--it's sometimes dangerous for black papers to get into investigative reporting--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: --Because the stories are not, they're not seen as, I guess for a major paper when they do that, they seem to be, there's an aura of protection around the paper because it's a major organ.  Everybody knows about say, the San Francisco Examiner or something, if they send a reporter some place.  But a little paper, when they send somebody out to a neighborhood into a sens--in a sensitive--'cause I have a friend in Detroit [Michigan] that life was threatened--about something that was going on that the major papers weren't paying any attention to.  But she was reporting for a little paper in Detroit, the Michigan Chronicle, and she had to back off, you know.  I mean she felt she had to back up 'cause she thought that she would actually be killed.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it would have, it mattered who Chauncey worked for.  You know, had he been working for the Tribune, they still would have, I think Fourth [Yusuf Bey IV] still would have tried to take him out 'cause Fourth was just, I just don't think he was very smart when it came to what happened.  But I mean that, like I told you, that to me is the most important work I've done as a journalist because that was a threat not just to Chauncey.  It was a threat to all of us because if you can kill a journalist to stop a story from being done, then none of us is safe.  So it was very important for us that we get the people that were responsible for that and to send the message that, you may kill the messenger, but you're not gonna kill the message.
Story_ID: 159150
Speaker 1: Now, how did you start with KCBS [San Francisco, California] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So after 'Soul Beat,' I took a job back at the radio--at the college [Chabot College, Hayward, California].
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, KDIA [San Francisco Bay area, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, took a job at the college, and then KDIA was looking for, you know, they had an opening.  And I applied for the job, and I got hired.  And, you know, my job, I worked the morning shift.  I would come in.  I'd be like the morning production assistant, sometimes be the morning reporters, sometimes the morning anchor.  And that job, I wanna say it lasted six to eight months, you know.  But I really, you know, I didn't realize that a job like that, you know, you may, your shift may start at six and end at twelve, but you stick around and learn.  I didn't know that that's what you're supposed to do, and when the station began having financial problems, again--it was a music station, not a news station, first place they cut, as I learned in school, the newsroom.  I was the first one out the door, the last one hired, first one fired.  I had already applied to transfer to San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California].  So I had to run over there and get classes, which I did, and I did the first semester.  Meanwhile, my girlfriend's pregnant, you know, so I'm dealing with that.  And then the next semester, which was the spring semester of '81 [1981], I wanted to get back in the business and then got an internship at KCBS.  Now ironically, the associate news director there was a guy that I went to high school with [at St. Joseph Notre Dame Academy, Alameda, California].  So I got the internship.  And, you know, that was, I was there all of spring of '81 [1981].  And they came to me one day in like June, and said, "Hey, is--are you still in school?"  I said, "Yeah." "No, I mean, is school still in session?"  I said, "No, it's out for the summer."  "Well, you can't be in here 'cause you have to be getting college credit to be here as an intern."  So they kicked me out.  I couldn't come back anymore.  So that when school started back in the fall of '81 [1981], I went back as an intern.  And in October of that year, the news director called me and said that he had a need, that they needed someone, they needed a desk assistant, and did I want the job.  I said, "Let me think about that. Yeah," (laughter).  So I started right away, and one thing led to another, and I was going to school.  I finished that first semester out.  Next semester, I was gonna be working the day shift--I was going to be working the day shift, and I got night classes.  And I did some of the night classes, and then halfway through the semester, they changed my schedule.  So I had to withdraw.  And I started working from seven at night to three in the morning.  And so now, I'm taking day classes again, and getting off at three o'clock in the morning and going home, getting some sleep and running over to school.  And then they changed my schedule again to working mornings, getting off--getting in at three, getting off at eleven.  So I just dropped out.  And, but I had a job.  I was full-time staff now, and so I didn't go back to school to get my degree until '93 [1993] and then got my degree in '94 [1994].
Story_ID: 159151
Speaker 1: But, so I started at the station [KCBS, San Francisco, California], and, you know, we had some really big stories, the whole, you know, I mean, the Falkland Islands War, I was there for that.  I mean think about, you know, '84 [1984], the Democratic [National] Convention, you know, that was in San Francisco [California].  I was there for that.
Speaker 2: That's the Run Jesse, Run, '84 [1984] Convention--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --Where [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson gives this magnificent speech, and so did you get a chance to follow the entourage in Jesse Jackson's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, but I did, there was reporter who was covering him, a radio reporter, and I, we hung out with her.  And, you know, she--I don't know who she worked for, but, you know, she--we went into the hotel room, and she took the phone apart and put all these clips on it.  It was like, wow, and that's how she did her stuff.  But then, you know, '89 [1989], of course, I'm at work, you know, five o'clock, we're carrying the World Series, can't wait till 5:04 gets there, 'cause we go from our coverage to the World Series coverage.  And then we can all breathe and relax, and, of course, at 5:03, or, you know, 5:02, 5:03, all of a sudden the building started to shake.  And we realized it was an earthquake, and it was a big earthquake, you know.  And that, I ended up working until like six or seven the next morning, you know, it was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yes, and these are the big stories--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, gee, is there any particular story that you--now, you were at KCBS for how many years, from--
Speaker 1: I've been--I started there on, I started working there in 1981.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got, I was hired in October of '81 [1981].  But I tell people, even when I was an intern, I was still working 'cause I was doing what everybody else was doing, writing stories, doing interviews, things like that, doing beat checks.  So I started, you know, figure it was January, February of '81 [1981].  I was full time until, with CBS until October, till Halloween of 2006.  That's twenty-five years, you know, on staff.  And then I continue to work at the station on a freelance basis.  So I've been there, you know, what is it, thirty-two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, what would you consider to be the--well, you were talking about some of the highlights of being there.  Now, you won an Edward R. Murrow Award.  Is that after you left or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was after I left.  I have a bunch of Murrow awards for team coverage, for the news station itself.  Those plaques are buried somewhere.  I've, you know, we--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What were some of the stories that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I mean basically, we were, you get a Murrow Award for overall excellence.  We would get a lot of those.  We're a very good station.  We're one of the best news stations in the country, by far, the best, I think, in California.  You know, we have a dedicated staff of professionals.  We know how to cover the news.  We don't, we don't put spin on it.  We just tell you what's happening.  There's no, there's no color on this.  It's just, it's just the straight facts.  We make it entertaining too.  I mean I covered a story the other night, and two [Oakland] City Council members were yelling and screaming at each other, and I was able to get that in my story 'cause the story itself was boring.  But just to hear that was, I mean that's what happened.
Speaker 2: So you turned the mic over to the contenders who were fight--
Speaker 1: No, I mean it was only like ten seconds, but it's ten seconds of, you know, them saying, "You're out of order," "No, you're out of order," you know, that kind of thing.  But we're a very, we're a very good station, and we have awards, you know, every year we get awards for something.  The Edward R. Murrow Award is one of the highest awards you can get in broadcast journalism.  I think the only one that could even come close to topping it would be the [Alfred I.] duPont Award [Columbia Journalism School, New York, New York], a duPont Award.  We have one of those too.  And I've got plaques.  You know, when we would have the out--most, the best newscast, you know.  We won a Murrow award one time because when the San Francisco Giants were about to leave and move to Tampa Bay [Florida], the morning that they announced that they reached an agreement with a local group to keep it there, that was our lead story all day.  And we won an award for that.  And I decided this, that this is the biggest story in the [San Francisco] Bay area, the fact the Giants were staying.  And we led with that, and that--we won best newscast for that.  So they, we got an award for that.  You know, there's a lot of awards that we've received just for our overall excellence.
Story_ID: 159152
Speaker 1: Now, how do you approach ra- how is delivering radio news different from delivering news on television?
Speaker 2: Well, I always tell, when I talk to young people, I talk about the difference between what I do, what a television reporter does, what a print reporter does, and what a public radio reporter does, public radio.  So we all come out of the same newscast--same news conference at 10:30 in the morning.  The TV reporter is complaining because they, they've gotta be on the air at 5:00, and they only have, you know, five hours, six hours to put their story together.  And they have to go and gather tape and, you know--the print reporter is complaining because their deadline is 7:00 that night, and they got a lot of people they gotta talk to, you know. The public radio reporter will go back to the station, you know, think about it, maybe have lunch, produce their story.  And it might get on this afternoon or tomorrow morning.  I walked out of the same news conference, dialing the phone, pulling the sound bite and going on the air.  My story has to be just as accurate as those who are taking several different hours to put their story together--several additional hours to put their story together.  But mine has to be just as accurate.  Now, mine's not gonna be quite--mine is gonna be sixty seconds in length.  So you can only get so much into that, information into that.  So the other stories might have more information, but my story is going to have the essence of the story.  That's the difference between what I do in commercial radio and what television does, what, you know, what print does and what, you know, other folks do.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  So in a given day, then what's the typical--what would be a typical day?  I guess, it's probably--I don't know if there is a typical day, but is there, I mean what would be a typical day for you--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So a typical day, let's say you're working ten to six.  You come to the station at ten o'clock.  You get your assignment.  You're, they want you on the air in the noon, so you've gotta be on.  You know, you've got two hours now to get your story and get the pieces to your story you need to get before you get on the air in the noon hour.
Speaker 1: So when you show up, you have to hit the ground running, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, like--just say yesterday.  I came to work at three.  We had an interview that had already been done with the police about a kid that lit somebody on fire on a bus.  The guy that got lit on fire was in the hospital, stable condition.  The kid was arrested yesterday.  So the story was, they arrested somebody for allegedly lighting this guy on fire on the bus.  So I got the tape, and I started at three o'clock, had to be on the air at four.  So that's what I did.  That's what you do.  You, you have to be--it's a very short turnaround many times.  Now, that's a typical day.  You'd go in, you'd do--and I'd do, I would write three versions of that story.  Do the first couple of versions live.  And then, you know, record all of three of them, and then work on the story for the next day.  So in this particular case, the story was, what's happening in the City of Oakland, City Council meeting.  I go in there, sit through the meeting, grab all my tape, and then go back to the station and produce it, get off at eleven o'clock.  Any time, you're doing that, give you another, give you an example.  In 1991, you know, I play softball.  So we had a softball championship game at our league in the next city down, San Leandro [California].  I need to have a morning story.  And I'm thinking, look, let me call the [California] Department of Forestry and find out about fire season.  It's, we're now in October.  How was fire season, and I'm talking to the PI, the Public Information Officer.  She says this has been the mildest fire season we've had in recent memory, okay.  I start getting these phone calls.  Now, mind you, the game starts at six and I'm supposed to get off at four.  So I wanna get this story in the can and I'm gonna do something else, and then, you know, I'll be there to get, be there in time to play my game.  Start getting these phone calls about a fire over in Oakland [California], and eventually, the editor said, "You'd better get over there."  I says, "Okay."  Well, I've already got this story in the can about this very mild fire season that can run tomorrow morning.  So I'm cool.  I can do a couple versions of this story, then come back, drop the car off and head to my game.  I come off, get off the [San Francisco-Oakland] Bay Bridge and I see a blanket of smoke that reminded me of Pearl Harbor.  And I realized that, I may not be going to the game.  This was the Oakland-East Bay Hills fire that killed forty-some people, wiped out several thousand homes and burned for several days, you know.  So, any day that you might have all, the best made--your best laid plans, could be knocked awry by something like this.
Speaker 1: Nature is unpredictable.
Speaker 2: Nature is unpredictable, but so is the news business, you know.
Story_ID: 159153
Speaker 1: Now, you joined NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in 2000?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And I have a note here that you became a mentor for the National Association of Black Journalists radio project. That's said here.
Speaker 2: Correct.  So what we do in NABJ is that our, one of our main parts of our mission is to train the next generation of journalists.  So student projects is a program whereby student, college students apply for it.  If they are selected, they are flown into the city where the convention is being held, put up in a hotel, given money, but not necessarily time to eat.  And they work as reporters for the entire week, covering the convention and other stories outside the convention.  So when I began, they started--we had a radio project, television project and a print project.  And then it became a multimedia project, with radio, television, print and online.  And then at one point, the person that ran the radio portion got laid off, got fired by NPR [National Public Radio], and so the radio project went away.  So now we do television, print and online.  But, you know, that, we want the students to learn all three because nowadays to get a job in our industry, you have to do all three.  So as a radio project mentor, my job was to work with one of the students and not do their stories for them, but help them in executing their stories in doing the interviews, overseeing their editing, you know, help, just helping them be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the little paper that I saw from NABJ, is that produced by the students?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: That, okay.
Speaker 2: The students take the photos.  They write the stories.  They do the layout.  They do the design.  They do all that.
Speaker 1: Okay, the one that had the headline 'The Butler Did It' (laughter).
Speaker 2: Correct.  In fact, he was--an interesting story.  We were sitting there in my sui--in my room or my--we had a little suite, waiting for the vote totals.  And I had fallen asleep.  You know, during the convention, you're running around, you're campaigning.  You're talking to people.  You gotta be around.  You gotta be seen.  And they assign a reporter and a photographer to you on Election Day.  So I actually fell out.  I was just sitting there waiting for the results to come in, and I nodded off.  And when I came to, I remember my campaign manager talking about, "Well, you know, Cindy won and Dedrick [Russell] won and Cory [Dade] won," and then he said, you know, "Congratulations, Mr. President."  And I kind of, I jumped up, and they were all trying to grab my hand, and I wouldn't--I wanted my wife [Lois Butler] and my son [Robert Butler, III], to hug them because that was, it was a very important moment.  My son, it was his first time coming to my convention, coming to the convention.  And he had a great time.
Speaker 1: This was your thirteenth convention, I would guess, right?  I suppose, this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Fourteenth.
Speaker 1: Fourteenth, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I figure 2000 to '13 [2013] is fourteen, it's my fourteenth convention, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My first time going, I looked in and, looked left, looked right, I mean seeing all these people that, you know, saw all these people that were, you know, well dressed, articulate, serious about their craft, you know.  And they all understood what I had been going through as a black journalist.  So my thought was, yeah, I'll be back.  And I've been back.
Story_ID: 159154
Speaker 1: So you joined NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in 2000.  I don't wanna jump you to the president yet.  I mean we wanna show why you wanted to be the president and all that sort of thing before--who was president in 2000?
Speaker 2: That was Will Sutton, who now is the media, like the spokesman for Grambling [State] University [Grambling, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what--I have to ask this question.  Why did it take you so long to join NABJ since--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Didn't know about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't know about it.  When you are out in the field, talking to people all the time, these are the kind of things that come up.  I knew about the Bay Area Black Journalists Association, BABJA.  I went to a few meetings in '82 [1982], '83 [1983], but it just, you know, it seemed more like a social club.  They're talking about having the, you know, the holiday cabaret and stuff like that.  And I didn't hear anything that they were doing that would help me get where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: So BABJA is the local chapter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: BABJA is the local chapter of NABJ, correct.
Speaker 1: --of NABJ.  Bay Area Journalist Association--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Black Journalists Association, yeah, BABJA.
Speaker 1: BABJA, okay, alright.  All right, so, but--okay, so nobody really touted the national in any of those (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, you gotta remember.  I'm working in a newsroom [at KCBS, San Francisco, California] where I was one of very few black people.  We had a manager who was black, but he wasn't a member.  And then not long after I started, a few years after I started, another guy came in.  He wasn't a member.  There was a woman that worked there for a while when I was an intern named Ricki Stevenson.  She wasn't a member that I knew of, you know, and Ricki left.  And there were a few people, various people that came and went, but nobody really talked about NABJ.  Now, somebody may have mentioned that, but don't forget, I'm working on the assignment desk.  I'm not out there amongst all the other people in the field.  So my world was, you know, around this desk and answering the phones and going to the wires and putting run-downs together and doing interviews and things like that.  So I didn't know that there was an organization like that.  And how I got to it, I became involved in my union, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists some time in the mid-'90s [1990s].  And I went to my first convention in '97 [1997] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I got on the local board.  And at a local board meeting in 2000, the executive director said, "Listen, if anybody is gonna go to NABJ--"and I knew what it was, but I never met a member, you know, "Ray, Ray Bradford," who at the time was our national EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] director, said, "If you're gonna go to NABJ, he'd like you to come by and help him at the booth."  And I'm like, "So, okay, well, I don't know.  I might, I'll think about it."  So I called Ray, and I said, well, "Listen, man.  So what do you need?"  And so he told me, and I knew who Ray was.  And he said, well, we're, you know, "We always have a booth, and it would be great as a member if you can come by and help us out and just talk to other members."  And I said, "Okay, well, you gonna pay my expenses?"  He said, "Nah, I can't do that."  So I said, "Well, okay, I'll come."  And I paid my own way, and I, as I walked in and looked left, looked right, and it's like, yeah, I'll be back.  And fourteen years later, I'm still going back.  But that first time I was there, I had to leave Saturday morning to fly back to [Washington] D.C. for a wedding.  My cousin got married.  So, you know, I was there.  I went to a couple of workshops.  I'm looking for the radio workshops.  There was only one radio workshop.  It was Saturday morning, at nine o'clock, which is the day after the, the day after the banquet Friday night.  You know, people were out late, and so there was nobody in that workshop.  There's like six people.  But two of those people are, are, are friends, and they're, they're important, one especially.
Story_ID: 159155
Speaker 1: So I left and went to the wedding and, you know, and then the next year, the [National Association of Black Journalists] convention was going to be in, in Orlando [Florida].  So I made arrangements to go, and I talked to the [San Francisco] Bay Area people and said, "Listen, I'm gonna, let's get together as a Bay Area group and I'm gonna buy some beer and wine and stuff.  You guys come by the room.  We could drink and talk," and, you know, nobody came by, you know, except a couple of people.  But I was able to meet other folks who heard I had the beer and wine and came by to help me drink it up.  In fact, some brothers came by and said, "Hey, I heard you got some beer," and grab a six-pack and walk.  I said, "Dude, you wanna just come and get my stuff and walk out?  You're not gonna offer me any money or anything."  He said, "Well, I thought it was free."  I said, "I paid for it.  Now, if you wanna sit here and drink with me, then great.  But, nah, man, come on," (laughter).  It was kind of funny.  So flying home from that convention, I'm reading the newspaper or the program, I'm reading something.  And it talked about student projects.  And it's like, I wonder what this is about 'cause, you know, I had--now, I'd graduated from State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].  I'm going back every semester talking to the broadcast news class, trying to get more people interested in radio, people that look like me 'cause we needed more diversity in radio.  And so I'm like, wow.  So I called the national office, and said, "Well, who, who do I talk to about this student project, for, you know, the radio project?"  "Well, talk to Doug, Doug Mitchell, who's one of the guys who was in that radio workshop in Orlando--in, not Orlando, Phoenix [Arizona]."  So I called Doug, and I said, "Tell me about this project."  And, you know, we talked, and he said, "Yes, we do this."  I said, "Well, listen, I don't know, you know, I'm, I don't work in public radio.  I work in commercial radio."  He worked at NPR [National Public Radio].  "And I'm not sure if you would like, you know, I'd like to help if I could, but I work in commercial radio."  He said, "I'd love to have somebody from commercial radio 'cause they need to learn that too."  I said, "Okay, great."  I said, "Do you help with the expenses?"  "Nah, I can't do that."  "So, well, I'm coming anyway.  So, you know, I'll be there."  And then I didn't hear from him for about a month.  And I said, just--I sent him an email, "Hey, listen, I just wanted to check in," didn't hear anything more.  So I finally sent a third email saying, "Hey, man, listen.  I was just hoping I could help out, but, you know, I'm not gonna bother you, but I just wanted to say, you know, thanks for considering me."  Within like minutes, I get an email back, "No, no, no, no, wait, wait, wait, wait."  He said, "I've just been busy," and so he was doing one of these workshop programs like a month.  So he'd been extremely busy doing that.  So my first time mentoring was in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] in 2002, great experience.  And it showed me that, you know, this is, this is, this is what I need to be doing.  So I've been--I was a mentor for that project every year since.
Story_ID: 159156
Speaker 1: And then in 2005, you know, now, I'd, I'd left corporate HR [human resources]--I'd left CBS, KCBS Radio [San Francisco, California], go to Corporate HR.  I'm now a diversity director.  So now I'm not even a, you know, a reporter.  I'm a suit.  And Doug [Mitchell] and I talked, and I said, well, you know, I don't know if I can help, but, you know, I continued to do the radio project.  And I wanted CBS to see what we're doing because I'm thinking if CBS did this, we could find people to work in our stations.  So I start emailing the senior VP for HR, you know, 'cause I'd met somebody--and I going I'm all over the place, but in 2003, I got CBS radio to send some people to the [National Association of Black Journalists] convention in Dallas [Texas].  And I wanted them to see student projects.  And the person I met, her name was Cecilia [ph.].  She was an HR person for WCBS-TV and radio in New York [City, New York].  And she saw student projects, and then she suggested I reach out to Tony [ph.] who was her boss.  So I reach out to Tony in 2004, sent him several emails, don't hear anything.  And then in November of 2004, I said, "Hey, you know, Tony, just checking back in with you--I never talked to the guy, never heard back from him.  I'm gonna be in New York, you know, in a couple of weeks.  I wonder if I could come by and talk to you about some ideas I have to help us increase diversity in radio."  I got an answer immediately.  And so I said, "Oh, shoot, now I gotta go to New York."  And I hadn't, I wasn't gonna go to New York.  I'm just saying that, so now I gotta buy a ticket to New York.  I fly to New York, you know, I'm spending all this money to go there.  And I present this idea for doing this radio training project.  He says, "Yeah, how much is it gonna cost?"  I said, "Well, you know, it cost this and this and this, you know, and you know, I don't know what, you know--I mean, you know, if I do this, would you pay my expenses?"  "Oh, sure, no problem."  I'm going like, wow, 'cause I've been paying my own expenses to NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] all these years, even as a mentor for the radio projects, staying for a week in a hotel, on my own dime.  So we put this program together, and now it's early 2005.  I say, "I need to, I need to come back and present what I've learned, what I--how much it'll cost and all that."  And he says, "Okay."  So I'm sitting there talking to him, and he says, "Listen, how would you like to do this for us?"  I was like, "What do you mean?"  "Well, we don't have anybody on staff that can do these kinds of things, so we need somebody, you know, who can help us increase diversity on staff."  And I'm like, "You're offering me a job?"  (Laughter) It's like, "Okay."  So let's, how would this work, and so one thing led to another.  And I left Corporate H--I left for Corporate HR in May of 2005.
Speaker 2: What was your official title?
Speaker 1: Diversity director.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, we didn't even have a title.  So I said, diversity--my wife [Lois Butler] said, you know, if you're gonna do something, be a director.  You can make more money (laughter).  So I said diversity director.  They said okay.
Story_ID: 159157
Speaker 1: The year before [2004] we had gone to, my wife [Lois Butler] and I had gone to Namibia for the first time.  We met this young lady who was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is southwest Africa, right?
Speaker 1: Yep, it used to be called German Southwest Africa.  We met this young lady who--and I spent some time with the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation, NBC, met this young lady who was an intern there who went to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], had graduated and then wanted to spend time with her dad who she didn't know, because her dad and mom had--she got pregnant.  Her dad moved back to Namibia.  Her mom stayed in Jamaica, and she didn't even know her dad, didn't know she had a dad.  And she finds out.  She ends up doing an internship there.  They have her anchoring the radio network news as an intern.  So fast forward to 2005, I'm telling her, "You gotta come for the [National Association of Black Journalists] convention.  It's gonna be in Atlanta [Georgia], come to the convention, you know, and now I've got this job as diversity director.  Akilah [ph.] you gotta come," and, you know, and I called, I'd call her from the station in Africa to get her--she has to submit a tape.  But they don't have any way of doing, you know, tape, you know, like recording anything, putting it on a reel and sending it, putting it on a DVD and, a CD and sending it.  So I have her play it over the phone, and I record it, and I submit that to Doug [Mitchell].  And based on that, they accepted her into the project.  So she gets to Atlanta, this is the convention in Atlanta.  And the first day she gets there, she's not feeling well.  And I said, "What's happening?"  "Well, you know, I don't know.  But I almost didn't come.  I was so sick, I almost didn't wanna get on the plane, but I'm feeling better now."  And then that night she comes to me during the student reception and says, "Bob, I've gotta go to the hospital."  She's like twenty-two, twenty-three years old, saying you gotta go to the hospital.  That's serious.  So I tell the staff, and they call in the ambulance, take her to the hospital.  She's--we're sitting in the hospital room and find out she has no insurance.  Student projects didn't have insurance for the students.  And then she didn't have any insurance, which is why she didn't go into the hospital when she got home from Africa.  And she says, you know, "I think I've got malaria."  I said, "Why?" She's like, "Well, we were in Mozambique, and I got, just bitten by mosquitoes all the time, and I know malaria's big there."  And, said, "Okay." Well, they discharged her.  And a few--she comes back, you know, I go get her some soup the next day.  She does her interview.  And then she goes back into the hospital, in the public hospital on Wednesday, and she's extremely ill.  She died on Saturday, Saturday night.  And that, you know, I still--that's still emotional for me because I'm the reason she came 'cause I wanted her to come to be part of this project 'cause I thought she had so much promise.  And it wouldn't have made any difference, but perhaps had she stayed in Africa, they could have treated it there.  But, you know, but that's what happened.  So that was a big deal.  And I don't know if you--if you were at that convention, I'm not sure if you were at any of the banquets, but Sunday morning, I got the call that she had passed away, and I, I lost it.  I felt like I lost a daughter.  And so at our gospel brunch, you know, Bryan [Monroe], the president, announced that she had passed away.  And you could hear all the forks hit the plates.  People were like, oh, my--so it was just very emotional.
Speaker 2: What was her name again?
Speaker 1: Akilah Amapindi[ph.], Akilah Amapindi.  And that was a rough one.  But--
Speaker 2: I know that's also, at that time, I think it was [HM Arthur] Art Fletcher passed, I think, the father of affirmative action.  That was announced at the convention, I believe if I'm not getting it mixed up with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: I don't remember, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All I know is that we were so busy on the student projects and then to have this happen, it hit everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's pretty--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Everybody was tore up, and I, even to this day, you know, it affects me thinking about it 'cause it was so unnecessary 'cause had she, had the hospital not discharged her, I believe that somebody would have figured out what she has, and they could have treated it 'cause it--malaria is treatable.  But if it gets to, you know, if it--anyways.
Story_ID: 159158
Speaker 1: There's a story also, you know, [HM] Dr. Asa Hilliard III died the same way in Africa in 2004 [sic, 2007], I believe.  He went to Ghana, then to Egypt to a conference in Ghana a day later, some malevolent form of malaria.
Speaker 2: Well, it doesn't kill you right away, but if you get bitten, it takes a while for the parasites to build up and to replicate in your liver.  And eventually, what happens is, when they become so numerous, they go into your bloodstream.  And at that point, it's really hard, but, yeah, so, you know, 2005 was a very tough year.  The next year, the president [of National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ], Bryan Monroe, we convened a malaria fact-finding trip to Tanzania.  And he called me and he wanted me to go.  And so we went, my first trip to Africa--my first, my second--third trip to Africa (laughter) because my wife [Lois Butler], the first time we went to Namibia in 2004, her cousin lives there.  And she was married to the speaker of Parliament.  She was married to Namibia's John Boehner.  And so that was a very, a great experience for us to be there, you know, amongst the government officials, the elite of the country.  So I went back in 2005 to do a fellowship, an Ethel Payne Fellowship, through NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], and, you know, Akeela [ph.] was gone by that time, but, you know, I met other people at NBC [Namibian Broadcasting Corporation].  I did the, I was there for three weeks.  I did some training there in Namibia at NBC on writing and they were, everyone was very appreciative of that.  They were stunned when they got the email from me that she had passed away.  They just, they just couldn't believe it.  So we went back in 2006.  We did this fellowship.  Right before we left for the fellowship, Mose [Penaani Tjitendero] the speaker, passed away.  So I had to go back to, my--before I could go to Tanzania, I had to go to Namibia for his funeral.  And he had a state funeral because I'm not sure how much you know about this country, but they only were indep--they only got independence in 1990.  And like Akilah [Amapindi]'s dad and Mose and all these other people had been exiled in the 1960s from the country, the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], they were exiled, not by the government, but by their tribal leaders.  And they were told to leave and go, 'cause the United Nations offered them scholarships to go to university for free, but they had to get out of the country.  And they weren't allowed to have passports because they were black.  So they all had to, you know, basically, escape from Namibia, you know, hundreds of these people left, got educated.  And when they got independence, they came back to run the country.  And Mose became speaker of Parliament.  And it's a wonderful story.  So, you know, he got a state funeral as, you know, a lion of the revolution and it was great.
Speaker 1: This was shortly after that, Nelson Mandela is released, and he comes in, he visits the United States--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think Mandela was released like in the mid-'80s [1980s], if I remember correctly.
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s], okay.
Speaker 2: What was it?
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s], it was '91 [1991]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In the nineties [1990s]?
Speaker 1: --'92 [1992], he came on a tour of the U.S. [sic, 1990].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, and I was there at the [Memorial] Coliseum [Los Angeles, California] when he came, when he came.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but this, you said, Namibia wasn't free until 1990.
Speaker 2: 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --So it's about the same, roughly about the same time--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But so, 2006, we did the fellowship in Tanzania.  That was, you know, momentous to talk to people, such as Anna Patris, who had lost two sons to malaria, what they call daega-daega [ph.], which, you know, is Swahili for convulsions.  And what happens, they don't realize the kids are sick.  And then they start having the convulsions, and they don't know what's going on.  They think it's, you know, it's something, you know, some kind of a curse.  And so they take 'em to the witch doctor who does what they do, but it's, you know, it's a medical issue.  You can't pray this away.  So when we met Anna Patris in the hospital up near Mount Kilimanjaro--I forget the name of the town that we were in, but--
Speaker 1: Arusha [Tanzania]?
Speaker 2: Arusha, in Arusha, yeah, Arusha district.  She had lost two sons to malaria.  Her third son had a fever, and she walked for two days to bring him to the hospital.  And it turns out, all he had was a cold.  But she wasn't taking no chances.  But to talk to somebody, you know, through the translator, about what happened, it was, it was fantastic.  You know, it was a great story.
Story_ID: 159159
Speaker 1: Now, back in the [San Francisco] Bay area [California], was this about the period of time that [HM] Ron Dellums becomes the mayor of Oakland [California]?  Or--
Speaker 2: I forget when he became mayor of Oakland.  Let's see.  It wasn't the--it was Ron, then Jerry [Brown] or was it--no, it was Jerry, then Ron.  So Ron was mayor in 2007 when Chauncey [Bailey] was killed.  He was mayor in 2008 when we did, we released this explosive videotape that showed the police had evidence that Four--Yusef Bey the IV, knew more about Chauncey's murder than he told the police, and, in fact, he had intimate knowledge of the murder.
Speaker 1: How did--why were the police, what was going on with the police department that they would, you know, sort of cover or hold back evidence in the Chauncey--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't that they held back evidence.  So the dynamic is this.  About, some time in mid-May, Fourth orchestrates a kidnapping.  They kidnap these two women, and threaten them, beat one of 'em, you know, all about, all trying to find some drug dealer's money 'cause he had so many debts.  He had to figure out a way to pay some of the debts, and they figured that ripping off drug dealers was a good way to go.  While they're beating on this one woman in the house, a police car drives by.  And they're--one of their bakery [Your Black Muslim Bakery] security vehicles was an old police car.  So the cop thinks it's some kind of an undercover operation, puts the window down and says, hey, you know, you all need some--oh, I thought you were somebody else and drives off.  Meanwhile, the guys inside the house see the cop.  They break out the back window and jump out and run.  The cop hears the window breaking and went, and then a few seconds later, a woman starts screaming.  So he goes back, you know, rescues the woman.  They leave all their cars (laughter), you know, with receipts inside for Your Black Muslim Bakery and everything else.  So they had 'em dead to rights.  So when they raided the bakery after Chauncey was killed, it was not because of Chauncey being killed.  It was because of the kidnapping case, and they suspected the bakery being involved in two other murders that had taken place near the bakery in mid-July--is that right?  Yeah, in mid-July, you know, a couple weeks before that.  You know, and ironically, the head of homicide wanted to raid the bakery like on a Monday or a Tuesday, but a couple of the squad commanders were on vacation, and the police chief said that they needed to be there.  So they put, they put the raid off from like Tuesday until Thursday, Tuesday--no, they put it off from Wednesday until Friday.  And in the interim, Chauncey is killed, you know.  So we did a story on that too, that--and the police chief that eventually (air quotes) "quit" based, based on our story.
Story_ID: 159160
Speaker 1: Did you cover the campaign at all for [HM] Barack Obama in 2008?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't cover it--I mean, well, he came to our convention [National Association of Black Journalists] in Las Vegas [Nevada] in 2007.  So that was, of course, was a big deal, you know.  And I wasn't on the board at the time, so I didn't get any access to meet him or anything like that, but, you know, we all, we all covered the election.  I covered, I worked election night.  No, I take that back.  I didn't work election night.  I was home watching cable news the night he was elected.  I had covered campaign events leading up to it, and it was surreal watching cable news that night, you know, watching Roland Martin on CNN, you know, who was somber, you know.  I mean was affected by Obama winning that race and watching Fox News, and they were more than somber.  They were, it was almost like watching a funeral.  And everybody but Carl Rove, not wanting to give Obama any credit for running a good campaign.  Carl Rove said, Obama ran a good campaign.  That's why he won, and it was true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the stunned silence, the stony silence, and the faces--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was, you know, that was a momentous time for so many people.  I mean, you know, for someone like me who grew up sheltered, not really understanding what racism was 'til later in my life, to know that, you know, the country had changed to the point where it could elect a black man to the White House.  That was a watershed moment.  Now, unfortunately since then, you know, we now--we're a post-racial society.  There is no more discrimination because there's a black man in the White House, and many will say that for people of color, it's gotten even worse because people say, "Well, there's no more prejudice.  We have a black man in the White House.  So we don't need to do any of these things."  But, you know, affirmative action is something that people talk about.  It really didn't become affirmative action until after the Civil Rights Act was passed in 1964.  And so we're talking '64 [1964], thirty-six, what, that's that, forty--fifty years of affirmative action does not make up for four hundred years of discrimination.
Speaker 1: Now, you come into NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] and immediately start on a project, but you're not on the--in the upper echelon of NABJ?
Speaker 2: I'm not on the board, no.
Speaker 1: Now, how does--tell us about your rise in NABJ because you're relatively new compared to a lot of people there are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm very new.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I've been called a newbie, and I think that actually is attractive to a lot of people.
Story_ID: 159161
Speaker 1: So we're, we're gonna talk about your climb, your step-by-step climb, you know, from a newbie in the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] to the presidency.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, when I got into NABJ, you know, we have a lot of members who join NABJ in college.  They come to the convention every year in college--since they were in college.  And they're working for many, many, many years.  What they know about the industry and the world is shaped by what they've learned in NABJ.  And that is a great thing.  But I do believe sometimes people don't have a perspective from outside of NABJ.  And I've, you know, I've answered directory assistance phone calls.  I've unloaded trucks.  I've worked in warehouses, you know, I've, you know, done manual labor.  I've been in the [U.S.] Navy.  I've got a lot of experience outside of that world.  And that shapes my world view of things.  Also, you have the fact that I have not grown up just with the black experience.  I've lived in both worlds, and that shapes me.  That shapes who I am.  It doesn't make me better or worse than anybody else, but it, I--it just shapes my perspective.  So when I went to CBS corporate, I became--I stayed on as a mentor and was able to do things for the projects that I couldn't have done otherwise, like pay for a meal or something, much to my boss's chagrin.  When I left CBS, you know, it was traumatic.  I mean, I basically, I was shown the door in October, Halloween 2006.  You know, I walked away with a package, and I probably could have gone back to the radio station [KCBS, San Francisco, California].  But the funny thing is, when I was talking to them about going to corporate HR [human resources], I, you know, I was talking to one of the VP's.  I said, "Ben, you know, so, what's my schedule gonna be 'cause right now, I'm working like Tuesday through Monday or something like?"  She goes, "Well, we work Monday through Friday."  And it was like a revelation.  I mean this is like a nine to five, Monday through Friday job?  Yes!  I could have gone back to the radio station, but then it was no guarantee I was gonna get that.  I probably could have got a contract to say this is what I'm gonna work, Monday through Friday, ten to six, period.  But that wouldn't sit well with people, and so I just took the money.  I just took the package, but it allowed me to do a lot of other things I couldn't have done otherwise.  Early in 2000--so I left in, figure November 1st, 2006.  I was approached by the [U.S.] State Department in February or March of 2000--no, I take that back.  My wife [Lois Butler] and I went to Brazil earlier.  I had met people down there.  The State Department called me and said, "We have the Shared Heritage Festival in Brazil in April of 2007.  And we'd like you to come."  Now, at the time I was teaching at [University of California] Berkley [Berkley, California].  And I took a week off from teaching to go down to Brazil to talk to black journalists.  I would not have been able to do that had I been working full time at the radio station.  I would have had to use my vacation to do it, which I would have done.  But this was an opportunity for me.  And I'm an NABJ member.  I am a professor at UC Berkeley, and these journalists wanted to talk to me about black journalists in the United States and diversity and things like that.  So that's what I did.  So that was one thing I was allowed to do.  Fast forward to our convention [National Association of Black Journalists] which was August of 2007.  A week before the convention, Chauncey [Bailey] gets killed.  And we create the Chauncey Bailey Project.  Had I been working at the station, I could not have been part of the Chauncey Bailey Project because my news director would not have allowed us to hold information and hold stories until everybody else got them.  So it would have been a no-brainer.  I would not have been able to do that.  So it allowed me to do things that I couldn't do otherwise, being--not being part of it.
Story_ID: 159162
Speaker 1: So now, we're--here we are in 2007.  The president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] calls me, Bryan Monroe, who actually was the one that convinced me to get involved with BABJA [Bay Area Black Journalists Association] back in 2002, says, "We don't have a regional director, nobody running from Region 6.  You should run for the board for Region 6."  And I did.  I ran unopposed.  I was elected to the board.  And, of course, that very first board meeting we said we're gonna be part of this, whatever project this thing is that we're gonna start, and we need somebody to be on it, and I'm the guy in Oakland [California].  So I got on it.  One of the first things they did, aside from that, they said, "Well, we need everybody to do something."  I said, "I wanna do a study of diversity in television news, not for people on the air, but for management."  And nobody saw the value in that, but I know from my days being a diversity director that the one thing that companies don't like is to be put on blast for their lack of diversity.  And they won't tell you what their numbers are.  You have to find out yourself, and so, and they said, "Well, how are you gonna do that?"  Well, look, I'm a reporter.  I can get information, and I released that first report in 2008 at the UNITY Convention [Chicago, Illinois].  And we had looked at sixty-one stations owned by ABC, CBS, FOX and NBC.  And in those sixty-one stations, in newsroom management, there were sixty-one people of color, one per station.  Seventeen stations had nobody of color in such places as Chicago [Illinois], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York], stations with, you know, cities with very large diverse populations, San Francisco [California].  Twenty-three stations had one person, you know, and that showed me that there's a big problem when the people that call the shots don't look like us, and that's why you get the coverage you get.  So that was in 2008, was the first report.  It's been done, released every year since.  So that's what I did as a board member, and that--I didn't do these things because I wanted to one day run for president.  I did these things because they needed to be done.  Also, when I was at CBS, I would constantly post jobs to our members and give them the heads up.  This is a job opening.  If you're interested, send me your resume.  The first thing I did, I'd give 'em the news director's email address, and told them to send them their stuff.  And, you know, he wanted somebody with five years of experience and a bunch of college kids sent him their stuff.  And he was like, "Are you crazy?"  So I realized I had to be a filter.  I had to filter who, what we sent to these news managers because if you send 'em something they can't use, why would they come back to you to be a resource?  So I started doing that.  And people began knowing who I am because of that.  And then giving people advice.  Well, look, you're trying to get this job because you're this, this, this and this.  So I started mentoring a whole bunch of people just, just for advice or anything else.
Story_ID: 159163
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], the vice president of broadcast, was gonna run for president [of National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ].  And the current president [Barbara Ciara] said, "Bob, you're gonna run for VP, for VP, for VP broadcast, see, 'cause I need you to--we need an adult on the board."  So 2009, I ran, and it was a very difficult campaign 'cause I ran against, first three other people.  Then one of the people dropped out, and I'm running against two other people.  And one of them was very active on our social media sites, you know, listserv, and they're always posting jobs, you know, and I was busy doing the census.  So I couldn't really campaign.  And some of my people said, "Bob, you gotta get out there, man.  This other, Andrew is all over the place, and these people"--I said, "Yeah, but you know what?  If I lose this election because I was doing the business of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I can live with that.  But I, somehow I think the members are gonna understand that, that this is what Bob has done.  He's done the census report.  He's helping people out.  He's helping 'em get jobs.  That's important to people."  So I won that race.  One of the guys I ran against, his name was Dedrick Russell.  He was a reporter at a TV station in Charlotte [North Carolina].  Dedrick was brand new on the national scene, sharp brother, but had no experience on the national level.  He had been a chapter president, but when you jump off--to jump on the executive board, you really need to start off a little bit lower than that and like start off as a regional director.  So I told Dedrick, I said, "Man, look, we're gonna stay in touch.  We're gonna talk."  And fast forward to 2011, and I said, "Dedrick, you know, your regional director has served two terms.  He can't run again.  You need to run for regional director."  He ran and he won.  And now he's on the board, 2011-2013.  And I continued doing the same stuff I was doing, helping people get jobs, but added, now adding something else.  In 2010, we had a convention in San Diego [California].  And we didn't have an executive director.  So there was nobody knocking on doors in California asking to raise money.  I began doing that and raised, you know, seventy-five thousand dollars in new money, in new sponsors for our convention in San Diego.  That became like, whoa, that's great.  And I realized that raising money, you know, it's not that--it's not easy, but it's not hard.  You just have to be able to find the right person that can write the check.  So I began doing fundraising.  And every year I've done that, I've raised more and more money.
Speaker 2: Did the money come primarily from individuals or corporations?
Speaker 1: No, corporations.  You know, like, for instance, I approached an organization called The California Wellness Foundation, which I had tried, I had tried to work with before as a member of BABJA [Bay Area Black Journalists Association].  But we never could get it together 'cause they were using, you know, they were using an agency, and the agency didn't feel what I was trying to do.  So I was, you know, gonna be in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for one of my after-board meetings.  And I called the people at the Wellness Foundation, said I'm gonna be in town.  I'd love to come and just talk to you about NABJ.  We're having our convention, and I'm sitting there.  And I'm thinking like, you know, if I can get like five grand, wouldn't that be great.  And the director--the VP of communications said, "Well, look, you know, I've got twenty-five thousand dollars that I wanna spend on your organization."  And I damn near dropped my fork 'cause that was a lot more than what I was trying to get.  But it's like, they saw the synergy of what we were doing 'cause we have a health component with NABJ called Healthy NABJ.  And the California Wellness Foundation will spend money on health issues in California.  And we're in California.  So it was a perfect match.  So that was an example of, that I learned how you do this.  So now, I'm running for reelection in 2011.  I ran unopposed.  Nobody was gonna run against me.  And so I continued to do the census, continued to raise money.  Then the executive director began leaning on me to help pick the next convention city.  And I knew that in 2011, or in 2010, I knew that the person likely to run for president was from New Orleans [Louisiana], the person likely to win the presidency was from New Orleans.  And so it wasn't a hard leap to say, "Well, listen.  Let's have this convention in New Orleans.  We're supposed to go to New Orleans in 2014.  Let's move it to 2012.   And then the president can have a convention in his hometown.  It would be a great thing for everybody," and I raised a quarter million dollars in new money, sponsorships for that convention.
Story_ID: 159164
Speaker 1: Twenty eleven [2011], now, it's 2012, 2013, you know, and it's funny.  In 2011 after the election night [for National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ], people said, "Bob, you gonna run for president next time?"  I said, "Next time?  I haven't even taken this job yet.  What do you mean, next time?"  And then I began thinking, you know, toward the end of '20--I didn't wanna, to even think about it until after our fall board meeting in 2011.  But you do have to kind of start lining up stuff.  And so I basically started thinking about it, and I talked to a few people about it.  And they said, you know, "Bob, I think you should.  I mean, you know, it's about time.  You're"--people wanted me to run in 2011.  We had three board members running for president then.  And I wasn't gonna be doing, this is, nah.  You know, because this guy [Gregory Lee, Jr.], you know, he had his team all set to go.  He'd been around the organization much longer than me.  He was one of the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] babies we talked about.  So I was more than happy to support him, and, you know, if I, if it ever happened for me, then that was gonna be okay.  But I decided to throw my hat in the ring next time, and, you know, started talking to people.  And I mentioned that first workshop, the radio workshop I went to in Phoenix [Arizona]. There were two people in there that were very important to me.  One was Doug Mitchell, who chaired the--ran the radio project.  Another was a guy named Vince Hill.  Vince was a reporter, a business anchor at KYW Radio in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], also owned by CBS.  And Vince and I talked, and he said, "If you're gonna run, I'm there with you," 'cause Vince and I have been talking for, during--over the years.  And it turned out, my opponent came from Philadelphia.  And Philadelphia is one of those places where you've gotta support the local person.  Vince was like, "Nah, Bob, you know, you've been with me.  I gotta support you."  Having Vince as a supporter was very important to my campaign because he was in the--you know, he was behind enemy lines.  And he was able to talk to people about me and what I was--what I stood for.  And it wasn't all about gotta support the local person.  Look what Bob has done and look what the other person has done, you know.  Let's talk about, you know, accomplishments and track record, look at his track record, what he's done.  The other person is Doug [Mitchell], who ran the radio project.  Doug has, he's probably--he has probably more mentees and people that he has helped train and that work in the industry now than anybody else.  And Doug never endorses candidates for the elections.  Doug came out and endorsed me.  And that sent--that was huge.  And then during the course of the campaign, you know, I'm talking to people.  I'm calling folks.  I remember, I'll never forget.  I sent an email to a young lady on Facebook, said, "Listen, I'm running for NABJ president, would love the chance to talk to you about my vision for the organization."  And I get a response back, "Bob, don't even go there.  It's a no brainer for me.  You don't remember me, but in 2009 in Tampa [Florida], I came to talk to you about my situation.  I was under a three-year contract.  I was miserable.  I wanted to walk away from my contract.  And you told me if I did that, that it may follow me the rest of my career.  So I toughed it out through my contract and now, I'm anchoring in Birmingham [Alabama].  So, of course, I'm gonna vote for you."  And then I would talk to other people, and they said, "Bob, I mean you helped me get a job, man.  It's a non brainer."  And a few of those people did endorsements for me, that, you know, Bob--one young lady, I met her.  She went to, ironically, Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], where Akilah [Amapindi] went.  And Comcast was putting together a Newsmaker program for the 2012 election.  And they wanted young college students that they could use as anchors and reporters.  And this one, I reached out to my colleague at the Hispanic Journalists Association [sic, National Association of Hispanic Journalists, NAHJ], and he gave me this woman's name.  Her name was Jeanette Reyes.  And I looked at Jeanette's stuff, and her stuff was really good.  So I called her up and talked to her and said, "So, you know, we're doing this thing, and are you interested."  "Yeah."  I said, "Listen, do you know about NABJ student projects?"  She goes, "Not really."  I said, "Well, listen, you need to apply for the student projects.  You're good enough now that you'd be part of this project."  So the convention's in New Orleans [Louisiana].  It's June, in June.  I talk to her in like late April, early May, deadline's gone.  I said, "What until, have you heard back?"  "Oh, no, I didn't apply."  I said, "Why not?"  "Well, I couldn't afford the forty dollars to join."  I said, "Are you serious?"  She goes, "Well, yeah."  I said, "Why didn't you call me."  That wasn't really, you know, her--she didn't wanna do that.  So I called the TV project lead.  And I said, "Do you know, do you need some more people," because normally, they need more people for the newscast on.  He goes, "Yeah, I could sure use a reporter and a producer."  So I said, "Look, let me send you this woman's stuff.  Check it out, and see if--and what do you think?"  Love her.  I paid her registration, I paid her membership.  I said, "I'll pay your registration.  I'll get you there.  We'll figure it out."  So she gets there, and we're talking, and she says, "Well Bob, I've already got an offer from West Virginia and another offer, a kind of soft offer from Little Rock, Arkansas."  And Little Rock, Arkansas, that's Market 56, out of 210.  That's a really large market for your first job.  She goes, "Yeah, but the news director seems really interested.  I guess it's the GM [general manager] is not really that thrilled.  So I don't know what to do."  I said, "Don't take a job.  Come to student projects.  Please come to student projects.  You will have a job when you leave there."  And so she came to student projects.  The producer, one of the students I taught at State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], wanted to be a producer, she's--for the Hispanic journalists.  She applied for their project.  They rejected her, same thing, paid her membership, paid her registration, got her there, got her--they actually roomed together.  She produced the newscast, Jeanette anchored the newscast.  The corporate news director for the company where that general manager didn't wanna hire her, saw her, anchoring the newscast, called 'em up and said, hire her.  She got hired.  She's working in Little Rock now, anchoring and reporting, first job.  I mean it's like it's amazing.  So she did an endorsement for me, and she talked about how Bob reached out to me.  I didn't know him.  And, you know, I mean these kinds of things are why I was elected because the young people who I've helped over the years came, came, they rallied, and they voted for me.
Story_ID: 159165
Speaker 1: Now, now is there a, I guess a, pretty much a consensus about what NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], BJ is doing by the membership or are there like factional ideologies within the group that, you know--
Speaker 2: There are factional ideologies within NABJ.  There are those who have been in leadership positions in the past and can't seem to let go.  There are those who go about doing their daily jobs and they don't know about all the politics.  They just know what can NABJ do for me, you know.  And there are those who say, "Listen, when I was young, NABJ helped me.  I'm going to be there to help the next generation."  You know, you have all, you know, from one extreme to the other.  But there are people there that, you know, are the hierarchy of the organization, who believes that they know what's best for the organization, more than anybody else.  And those are the people, a lot of them are past presidents, did not support me.  They supported my opponent.  And there are those who believe that they did that because they felt like, okay, if we get this person in there, then we can have an influence on what happens.  We know if Bob gets in there, you know, Bob's a newbie.  He doesn't understand how it works.  But a lot of other people said, "Bob is a newbie, and he doesn't, he's not, he doesn't have that baggage of the tradition of NABJ and maybe we'll get some place 'cause you know, like many organizations, we always have room to grow."  And I think people look at me as somebody who cannot be tied down to the traditions of the past, that things had to be done a certain way, and that we will move forward under my leadership.  And, you know, we, I've done things already in the first hundred days, is it--or ninety-four days or however many days it's been that, you know, that have not been done.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your vision and what have you done?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the first thing I did is I reached out to the membership, and I said, "Listen, during the course of the campaign, many of you said that you would like to volunteer, but you never get the opportunity.  Here's your opportunity.  Send me your resume and what you wanna do, and to this link, and then we will--I'll call you.  But when I call you, answer the call."  And many people have answered the call.  So a lot of people now are on committees that had been wanting to get involved in the past, but couldn't.  We have a constitutional commission that has been set up that's looking at the Constitution, which was written in 1975 and it's been amended several times since, but, you know, I mean, I'll never forget my BABJA [Bay Area Black Journalists Association] Constitution that talked about making meeting notices via telephone, postal mail or telegraph, you know, or--not telegraph, telegram.  I mean these, back in 1975 these things were viable.  But nowadays, how about email?  How about Facebook and Twitter?  We have to take all those things into consideration.  So just looking at changing the Constitution.  Now, the members mandated this.  And they've, I don't know, they've, maybe they thought I wouldn't, didn't wanna do it.  But I'm glad to have a commission.  Even some of those folks that did not support me to run for president, but are great minds and love the organization to help put us in that position.  So that's been done.  You know, I've got a finance committee that's brand new, except for one person.  And it's, we've taken the politics out of the finances, you know, because we've had people that have made financial reports, you know, based on information that's incorrect.  And based on this information that's incorrect, they're saying, see how bad you guys are.  You know, one of the big things is, what's the board doing?  You know, what's the board doing?  Well, you know, the board's busy.  Most--everybody but me has a full-time job.  You know, so they're working their nine to five and doing NABJ on the side.  I actually do NABJ full-time and do my job on the side, (laughter) when they call me.  But you need to do this.  You need to be in the position where you can actually take the organization.  Jobs for our members has gotta be number one.  We have to have a--we have to be able to find jobs.  The industry has shed black journalists, you know, like, you know, a cat sheds fur.  You know, when the industry, when the times got tough, diversity went out the window.  And many people will admit that, that diversity became not even a second thought.  It became an after--not even an afterthought.  It wasn't important anymore.  And we see that in the numbers that see in my report.  We see the fact that, if you look at all these corporations, people that look like me aren't there calling the shots.  And people that look like, you know, my good friend, Hugo Walter [ph.], president NAH State [ph.], they don't look like him either, you know.  It's become very monochromatic, and we've gotta change that.  And you're never gonna change it by standing outside shaking your fist.  The first thing we're doing is, we're also training our members for these jobs.  So we're gonna find them that--we're gonna train them, help 'em find the jobs.  We're gonna have the money to do the training, 'cause that's--I know how to raise money now.  So we can do the kind of training that we need.  I have partnerships.  We have our student projects.  We're training people to be--work in television, to be able to shoot and edit their own video.  Yet, until 2010, we didn't have a camera for them to use.  So now we have cameras developed based on a partnership that I created with a, with JVC [Victor Company of Japan, Ltd.], which now loans us cameras to use for our student projects.  We have another company, Manfrotto, that gives us tri--loans us tripods.  Sennheiser [electronic GmbH & Co. KG] loans us microphones.  Hewlett Packard, HP, gave us all the computers to use for the convention in 2013.  That's a hundred computers.  They loaned us these computers, didn't cost us a dime.  These are the kind of partnerships that we need to do the training for our members.  You have to think outside the box on how you get the stuff to help the membership.  And I'm very good at doing that.  And now, I'm trying to train my board on how to raise money, and we had training at our very first board meeting, which normally takes Friday, Saturday and half of Sunday 'cause we like to talk so much.  We did training on Friday, where we learned about the responsibilities of nonprofit board members which includes raising money, and how do you do without--that without compromising your journalistic ethics?  We also had a sponsor come in and talk about, "Look, I'm a sponsor.  Don't call me and say, 'Hey, Xavier, how you doing?  I need ten thousand dollars.'  Why am I gonna give it to you?  Who are you?  If you call me and say, 'Hey, how you doing, man?  You know, what's going on?  How's the family?'  You know, I get to know who you are.  Then when you come to ask me for money, then I'll think more seriously about it."  It's about building the relationships 'cause that's what I'm really big on trying to do.  And it's helping our board realize the relationships.  Every board member in 2014 is doing some kind of a program, whether it's a media institute, whether it's a regional conference.  And they're responsible for creating the program and raising the money.  And, no, don't go to our national sponsors and say you have this program.  Find some new sponsors because you have to come up with so much money.  Otherwise, I'm gonna be on your, on your tail--on your case.  If I can do it, you can do it too.  And that's my message to the board, taking NABJ to the next level is making sure that we are part of the conversation when it comes to the media and diversity in the media.  You know, we can't be an afterthought.  We can't be waiting for two weeks to make a comment on something that needs a comment right now.  The people that need the comment right now are part of the conversation.  We can't be an afterthought.
Story_ID: 159166
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, so many things.  But I couldn't even tell you (laughter) right now.  I've done so much in my life, I mean, you know, I'm--there're a lot of things I would do differently when it comes to NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], when it comes to the way I've lived my life.  You know, one thing I wouldn't do is become a drug addict and alcoholic.  You know, I'm a recovering addict and alcoholic.  I mean those are things that I think, you know, stunted my growth and effected my relationships with people.  I've been in recovery now for twenty-five years.  So I haven't touched drugs or alcohol for that long.  I have a loving wife [Lois Butler].  I have a wonderful family.  I'm in a position now where I can help people, and I love helping people.  But, yeah, I would probably, you know, if I could choose not to become an addict and alcoholic, yeah, I would definitely not do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's two professions.  There's my journalism profession, and then there's my NABJ profession.  I think my journalism, you know, the two stories I'm the most proud of are the Chauncey Bailey Project, and the story of Kisa Holmes [ph.], a young woman, who, along with her husband and five kids bought their first house in New Orleans in 2005 right before [Hurricane] Katrina.  And before they made their first mortgage payment, the flood hit, and then not knowing anything about how being a homeowner works, when they talked to their bank, you know, they got their insurance check made out to them and their bank.  And they tried to cash the check, but they couldn't because it was made out to both.  And they called the bank, and the bank said, oh, send us the check, and let us know what you wanna do with the money.  You ought to think about paying off the house.  You haven't even made your first payment yet.  But here's enough money to pay off your mortgage.  If you pay it off, there's gonna be some money left over that you can use.  Not knowing any better, they did that, which started a seven-year torturous trail that they had to, to, to walk to get back into their home.
Story_ID: 159167
Speaker 1: This story is the story of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, Kisa Holmes.  Kisa and her family buy the house.  They get flooded out.  They, they follow their bank's advice to use their insurance money to pay off the house, but by doing so, they cut themselves off from some of the federal aid that was available after Hurricane Katrina and Rita.  Number one, SBA [Small Business Administration] loan.  They got an SBA loan, but then when they went to Road Home, which was the federal program created to give people grants to rebuild their homes, they were told, "Oh, you aren't eligible for an SBA loan because you voluntarily paid off your mortgage."  And they got $967.00 from Road Home 'cause the rest of the money went to pay off the SBA loan.  They tried everything to get their house fixed.  They went to the federal government.  They went to state government, went to local government.  They went to the Red Cross, the Salvation Army, any new program that came up to get their house fixed, they had doors slammed in their face.  They were put on lists to get their house fixed.  And the week before the construction was started, they said, "Oh, you know what?  We had to close down the program.  Oh, I'm sorry, we, you know, we had, we couldn't do it."  I met Kisa in March of 2009, four years after the storm, and she still had no place to live.  She was living with her sister.  Part of the family was living up in Kentwood [Louisiana], which is ninety miles away from New Orleans [Louisiana].  And she didn't have a permanent residence.  She was working and her husband--they were working and didn't have a home because their home, they couldn't live in it.  You know, they had bought materials to fix their home.  Thieves stole, broke in and stole everything they bought, all their supplies and stuff.  So they really had a hard time.  And when I talked to her, you know, she just explained it to me, what it was like.  And then I would call her, and she wouldn't return my phone calls for like months on a time.  And then I'd call her and she--we'd talk for a little bit.  So finally I got funding from the, a Fund for Independent Journalism [sic, Fund for Independence in Journalism] to do a story.  But I needed to find a partner.  I needed to find somebody on the ground in New Orleans.  So this organization called The Lens which was an investigative reporting website.  We talked to their director, and he said they had an intern that would be willing to work with me on this.  And I'm thinking, an intern, okay.  But it turns out she was just what the doctor ordered because Kisa, I found out, did not wanna share with me all that she had gone through.  So, and I had Jessica Williams was her name, went out to the neighborhood.  My original story was going to be to talk, to profile one street in one neighborhood, and how these people had a forced mortgage payoff.  That never did pan out.  But she did talk to Kisa, and we ended up settling on Kisa's story.  And I was in New Orleans one day, getting ready for the convention [National Association of Black Journalists], you know, I made a trip there, and Jessica and I met with Kisa.  And Kisa sat there and said the reason she hadn't called me is because she was just, didn't wanna think about what she had been going through.  And now, it was, this was like June--no, this was like April of 2011.  And we're going on now six years out of her house, six years.  And she started saying that she didn't want people to know that she had to go to the gas station to use the restroom.  She had to go to fast food restaurants to wash up.  And she stayed with her sister, but when her sister had company, that she slept in her car.  This is all the stuff that she didn't want people to know.  She was proud.  People in the South are proud.  They're private.  And she said, "Well, I don't even know if it'll do me any good to do, to tell this story."  I said, "Well, Kisa, I can tell you this.  I can't guarantee you that by doing this story, that we'll find any help for you.  I can guarantee you if we don't do the story, nothing's gonna change because you've tried on your own for six years, and you're still not home."  So finally she relented.  And we did the story.  It was finally published in December of 2011.
Speaker 1: Where was it published at?
Speaker 2: It was published on The Lens, The Lens published the story.  And then all the interviews I had been doing, I'd done on audio.  So I put together an eleven-minute audio story that detailed her plight.  I had talked to lawyers who said, "Yeah, this happened a lot down here.  People didn't know any better."  I talked to another lawyer who said, "Yeah, it happened to me, but I got the bank to send me a letter saying they were forcing me to pay off the mortgage.  Now, I was able to go to Road Home, and I was able to look at the Road Home manual which was three inches thick, you know.  And I'm a lawyer, and I don't think anyone could, you know, figure out what they were trying to say.  I was able to make sense out of the rules and regulations."  I said, "But, now, you're a lawyer.  And you were able to figure it out.  Given the fact that forty percent of the adults in Orleans Parish [New Orleans, Louisiana] are functionally illiterate, what chance did they have?"  He said, "None, not any chance at all.  And even a person that was literate could not figure out the Road Home manual or the Road Home program or the Road Home rules and regulations 'cause even the Road Home people didn't understand 'em.  I would call up and tell them that I'm allowed to apply for reimbursement.  And they would tell me, 'Oh, no, no, no, no, you're not.'  He said, 'Well, if you look on page, you know, XXX, you know, Letter A of Clause C, it says that.'  And she goes, 'Oh, you're right.'"  So he was able to do that.  But he was a lawyer.  So for the common man, common woman in New Orleans, they had no shot.  So this story detailed how difficult it was for people to navigate--
Story_ID: 159168
Speaker 1: --And you had, you know, you had the racism issue where people in New Orleans [Louisiana] are used to following authority.  You know, if, if, if the man says do it this way, then it's gotta be right, so I'm gonna do it this way.  Never mind the fact that by doing it this way, I'm hurting myself down the road.  And in many cases, people just got tired of fighting.  They just didn't wanna fight anymore.  Kisa [Holmes] wouldn't give up.  So we finally got her story out there, and there's an organization called the St. Bernard Project in New Orleans.  And I made sure, and I had been trying to talk to them about this forced mortgage issue.  But I made sure that they saw the story.  And the executive director emailed me and said, "Listen, man, I'd like to talk to her to see if we can help her."  They weren't able to help her, but I was down in New Orleans in like March or April of 2012, right before the [National Association of Black Journalists, NABJ] convention to shoot video with the mayor [Mitch Landrieu], to get some promos from the mayor.  And I said, "You know, Mr. Mayor, we're doing a community service project.  While we're down here, we're gonna be helping three families, who've been out of their homes since [Hurricane] Katrina, get back in their homes, and we're gonna help with the St. Bernard Project, to rebuild their homes."  "Oh, that's great, that's great."  I said, "But there's another story that nobody knows about that I've done, that talks about, it's one family's plight and what they've done with--because of forced mortgage payoff."  And he said, "Really?  Well, you know, why don't you get them to contact my office?"  And they contacted his office, and I kept talking to Kisa.  And she said, "Well, yeah, they got me talking to Ms. Erica," with a nonprofit called Project Home Again, which was started by Len Riggio, the chairman of Barnes and Noble Bookstore, who put his own money into a nonprofit down there.  And what they were doing was taking damaged properties, and trading them for new homes.  And so I'm talking to Kisa.  She said, "Well, yeah, well, you know, they tell me it's gonna happen.  But it's taking a long time," and, you know, the story ran in 2011.  And we've got them in touch with the mayor like in April or May.  In June at our convention, we--our community service day, we went out to one of the homes that had been fixed.  And we had a big celebration there.  The next day we had our gospel brunch, and we had ceremonial keys for each of the families.  We made presentations, and I had Kisa and Jewell [Holmes] come up.  And I said, listen, and I had a photo of Kisa and I can get you a copy of this photo, of her standing there, inside the burglar bars of her house, where you can see straight through the shotgun house to the back door.  And you can see nothing but beams in there.  And she basically was in jail because she could not get out.  And I put that photo up there and said, "You know, this is a great story that we've done about these three families.  But there're a lot of families like Kisa and Jewell who bought their house right before [Hurricane] Katrina, you know.  And followed their banks' advice to pay off their mortgage with their insurance money and because of that, lost out on much federal aid.  They are still not home.  Kisa and Jewell are here.  Can you please give them some NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] love?"  And they stood up, and she was in tears, and I get teared up when I think about it because it was a very touching moment.  And less than a month later--in fact, she moved into her first--they moved into their first house July 20th, 2005.  This event took place, I believe on July 22nd--June 22nd, 2012, at the convention.  And I'm talking to Kisa, and she says, "Well, we're doing this," and I said, "Well, so you--you know, it sounds like this is gonna work out."  She said, "Yeah, well, I'm not gonna get excited. In fact, Ms. Erica asked me, you know, why am I not excited.  I said, because Ms. Erica, this has happened to me too many times, and I've been let down.  So I'm not gonna be happy until I get the keys in my hands."  So July 20th, 2012, seven years from the day, they got the keys to the house.  They signed the paperwork.  And I said, "So Kisa, what's your mortgage gonna be?"  She goes, "There is no mortgage.  It's a five-year forgivable loan.  If we stay in the house for five years, twenty percent is knocked off each year.  We don't have a mortgage payment."  And so she calls me, and they're on the way in, and I can hear singing in the background, her husband, who I'd never met, is singing--I'd just met him the first time.  He's singing.  And she goes, "We got the keys.  We're on the way to the house."  I said, "Wait a minute.  Hold up, hold up."  She goes, "What, what?"  "Make sure the key opens the door first," and she started laughing.  And you could feel that seven years of tension just leave.  So the next month I went down there and shot video with them about them being in their new house.  And they were just so happy.  And had I not done that story, that would have never happened.
Speaker 2: So this is a story that won the Edward R. Murrow Award.
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the 2012--
Speaker 1: 2012--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Edward R. Murrow Award.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Elected the president of the NABG--NABJ in 2013.
Speaker 1: Yep (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 159169
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family now.  Who's, who--you have children?
Speaker 2: I have a son [Robert Butler, III].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: He's, he's thirty-two.  He attended his first NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention in Orlando [Florida].  He's thirty-two.  He's good looking, and he's single, so you know he had fun because half our membership is women (laughter).  He was the life of the party, and a lot of my mentees got a chance to meet him.  Several of them knew him from Facebook, but they got a chance to meet him and hang out with him, and he had a good time.  He told me that he's already saving for Boston [Massachusetts] in 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents [Leola Moore Butler and Robert Butler, Sr.] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: My dad.
Speaker 1: Your dad did?
Speaker 2: My dad, yeah.  My mom passed in '89 [1989], but dad is up in Reno [Nevada], and, you know, I owe him a call.  We haven't--he suffered a minor stroke a couple of weeks ago.  And so I've, you know, after our board meeting I got a call on Monday that he had suffered a stroke and was in the hospital.  So I flew home that night and my wife [Lois Butler] and I, we drove up--my sister [Alicia Butler (ph.)], we drove up to Reno the next day and spent time with him.  And he was discharged from the hospital.  He's doing much better.  He's eighty-three, so you know, and it--the problem was, they were asking him questions like, you know, well, you know, where did you work?   And, you know, do you remember what you did while you were there, and do you remember this, do you remember that?  And he said, well, I just can't, you know, I just--it's just his, you know, he just had the stroke.  His brain hadn't quite reboot yet.  So he was having trouble remembering things, which is really scary, 'cause I do that now (laughter).  So I hope, I'm, you know, I hope I live to be as old as he is and to be sharp as he is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so here in your household now is your wife and your--
Speaker 2: And my sister, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your sister, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's, you know, she works, she's working at a retail job and taking care of her, you know, she has four grandkids, and, you know, she spends time with them.  And, you know, it's great.  I mean it's great having her here.  You know, she, you know, she's been a godsend.  I forgot my computer one day, and I was on a trip and left my laptop here.  And thank goodness, she was able to, you know, drive it out to me, all the way to San Francisco [California] which is, it's like seventy miles, sixty-five miles.
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She's been a very big help.
Story_ID: 159170
Speaker 1: So, is there, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we've talked about a lot of stuff, and I mentioned my struggle with drugs and alcohol.  I mean it's part of who I am.  I mean I'm a recovering addict, and I spent many years, you know, in misery.  And it's the one thing that I would change if I could but I can't.  I'm glad I got it behind me when I did.  I spent, you probably fifteen years out there getting loaded after high school.  And when I went into recovery, it was a great thing.  And it's been easy in that I don't have to pick up.  And, you know, I--it's tough to get up in the morning and look in the mirror and hate yourself.  It's tough to be sitting there and at the dope house and realize you're pulling the rent, you're pulling the PG and E [Pacific Gas and Electric] bill out, but you're gonna spend it anyway.  It's tough doing those kind of things.  It's tough--we call it being sick and tired of being sick and tired.  You know, I got sick and tired of being sick and tired quite a while ago and got into recovery, went--thank God I had a job.  I had insurance to go to a treatment center.  It cost a whole bunch of money, but I was able to do that.  And I've been, you know, pretty straight ever since.
Speaker 1: Is there any one single factor that made the most difference, I guess, the biggest difference in you being able to overcome that so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in a dope house one day.  And my son [Robert Butler, III] was sitting out in the car.  I told him to, you know, just keep low, don't let nobody see him.  And I'm in this dope house, you know, and I'm coming out, and I see him peeking up.  He was probably about--let me see that was--five, four or five years old.  And I would take him with me sometimes.  And then one time I was coming out of that same dope house, and I walk out the door.  And a guy was walking up the hallway with a shotgun.  And I don't know whether or not that, it was for me, whether he's mad at somebody or whether he's there to trade it in for some dope.  But there was nowhere to go.  If he wanted me, I was done.  And I said, "If something happens to me, who's gonna raise my son?"  And I think that more than anything, you know, got me to realize that I need to change this.  And so I used to, you know, call the treatment center, you know, I got the number when I had some issues.  And I would call, and I would say, "You know, a friend of mine's got a problem, and, you know, what can I tell him," and one--this day, I picked up the phone.  And I said, "I need help."  And a short time later, I went in, I went to my news director at the time, and I said, "I need, I need to go in the hospital."  And I said, "It's a twenty-eight day program."  They go, "Whoa," I mean that was like, he's thinking I'm talking about a day or two.  I'm talking about a month, you know.  I'll never forget when they started doing drug testing for employment.  I wished that they would drug test me so I can get caught because I didn't know how to stop.  But finally, I went in.  It was, I was in when the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] blew up.  And that would have been the big story that I would have covered.  And it was, I was going crazy because I couldn't be there to cover that story.  But, you know, your health is more important.  So I don't think, had I done what I did then, that I'd be here now.  I know you wouldn't be here now.  I wouldn't be in this house.  I wouldn't have a loving wife [Lois Butler].  I mean, you know, doing that, doing all that I was doing was just crazy.  You know, I had the GI bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act] to buy a house.  I couldn't buy a house until I got myself straight 'cause I woulda fucked it up (laughter).
Story_ID: 159171
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Somebody who wanted to help, you know, somebody who was able, who, who, who saw a need to help people and was more than willing to do it.  You know, and I've helped people, I mean I've helped total strangers.  I've brought total strangers into my house.  I met some people in 2007, walking down the streets in San Francisco [California].  And they were trying to get Sacramento [California] from San Francisco.  And somebody was telling them, you know, giving them bad directions.  And I said, "Wait, nah, y'all can, we need to get on the train, go into the [San Francisco] Bay [area], go to the train station."  And I took them, you know, under my wing, got them to the train station.  We're pulling up in the taxi and the train was taking off.  I ran in, talked to the train, the agent, and they said, it's going to Emeryville [California], the next station, got 'em to the train, and they were just so appreciative.  They're from Northern Ireland.  And the next day, they called me and they said, "Thank you very much."  I said, "What are you all doing, 'cause you're here for a conference that doesn't start till like Wednesday or Thursday."  "Oh, nothing," went and picked them up, brought them to my house and we hosted them for a--we picked them up on Saturday and took them back on Tuesday.  They saw their first Fourth of July celebration in San--in the Bay area.  They got to see the Golden Gate Bridge, you know.  We did tourist stuff.  And then on Monday, the girls were in heaven 'cause they got to go to the Outlet Mall (laughter).  But that's, that's just me.  I love helping people.  And I think, you know, in the end people will say, "You know what, Bob, he really liked to help people.  He really did help a lot of people, you know.  And that's what I heard when I ran for president [of National Association of Black Journalists].  Bob, it's a no-brainer.  You helped me."  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a good legacy to leave.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159172
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Let's see it.  So this is a photo taken at my dad's [Robert Butler, Sr.] house.  It looks like my dad's house up in Sparks, Nevada.  And I think we went up there for his birthday or something like that.  And I gotta say that had to have been back in 2009, 2000--I can't even tell you when that was 'cause--And obviously, that's Christmas time--is that, is he wearing the same thing?  Yeah, that's the same time as that.  So we were up there for Christmas, but I can't tell you when.  I don't know what year that was.
Speaker 2: If you can give us a decade, that'd be--
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) well, it was probably, you know, the last eight years.  That's my brother, Mark [Butler], who now lives in Severna Park, Maryland.  That was, I think, his senior ball, which would have been back in the early 1970s or the mid-1970s.  Okay, that's my sister, Melissa [ph.], and that's obviously a high school photo of her.  She graduated, let me see.  She was born in '67 [1967].  So she would have graduated in like '85 [1985], somewhere around, you know, early '80s [1980s].  That's me in Guantanamo Bay [Naval Base, Cuba].  This, in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.  That's overlooking the Guantanamo Bay itself.  That's up at the port control tower.  That would have been 1972.  And that's Melissa again, and I have no idea when that was.  Okay, that's me wearing my KCC Radio T-shirt which is the call letters for the campus radio station at Chabot College [Hayward, California].  That would have been 1978 or so.  That's taken in Hayward [California].  And this is me, my wife [Lois Butler] and I--well, before we got married, we went on a trip up to Humboldt County [California], which is kind of like, she thought I was gonna ask her to marry me, but I fooled her and didn't ask her till we got home, after that.  But that would have been 1992.  And that's my mom [Leola Butler] and my sister, Melissa, holding my son, Robert [Butler, III].  That would have had to be back around in '81 [1981] when he was first born.  Right behind Melissa is Marsharee [ph.], who is my sister who lives here, Alicia [ph.], that's her oldest daughter.  So that had to be '81 [1981].  And that's my wife, Lois.  That's where we were on that trip back in 1992 up to Humboldt County [California].  Okay, there's my sister, Alicia, and then her daughter Marsharee sitting down and Tasheila [ph.] standing up there next to her.  And that would have been, I don't know when this was taken.  I can ask her.  She might know.  And that's on that same trip to Humboldt County.  I think we were up--I don't know where we were, but that would have been in '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: That's me.  On the same trip up in Humboldt.  That's in the rental car, and this is at one of those trees that you can drive through, that's up in the Redwoods.  And that's me and Carroll O'Connor, aka Archie Bunker who came by the radio station for an interview, and I'm thinking that's probably the early '90s [1990s], just based on the fact that there's no gray hair.  That's Robert and I, my son, Robert and I.  But he's still in the t-shirt that says KCBS 74 and the 49ers.  We carried the 49ers until the mid-'90s [1990s].  And he was born in '81 [1981].  He looks to be about nine or ten years old.  So that could have been '89 [1989], '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: That's when they went to the Super Bowl, I think '89 [19890].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that could be.  Okay, that's me and Stan Bunger.  Stan is the morning anchor at KCBS Radio [San Francisco, California].  We played softball together.  That's me wearing one of my many softball shirts.  (Laughter) so there we are covering John Gioa.  It's spelled G-I-O--G-I-O-A.  He's a supervisor for Contra Costa County [California].  I'm not sure what he was saying, but you may notice that I have a camera around my neck because we, I started taking photos for the radio station, probably back in the '90s [1990s], well before we started doing multimedia journalism.  And I'm not sure why I'm frowning, but, you know, there it is.
Speaker 2: Maybe he's saying the wrong thing.
Speaker 1: Let's see. (Pause) so this was taken in high school [at St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, Alameda, California].  It has to have been like my sophomore year in high school, which would have been 1968 or '69 [1969].  And I notice on the back I wrote--obviously, I was supposed to give that to somebody who never got it because I signed it.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) trying to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that's me, that's probably early '80s [1980s], I would say based on the--
Speaker 2: Satin jacket.
Speaker 1: --Satin jacket and the no gray hair.  And that's high school graduation would have been 1971.  And that was taken August 2, 2013.  That was the paper that was published August 3, 2013, the day after I'd won the election for the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] presidency, and you can see my wife and my son are there.  That was--it meant a lot to me that they were there.  So, there we go.  That's all the kids.  Sitting down is my older sister, Maxine [ph.].  Then there's me behind her.  To my right is Alicia.  That's my brother, Mark, and then there's Melissa.  Gosh, I don't know when that was taken, but based on the part in my hair, that had to have been in the late 1970s 'cause when I came back from Cal--from Pennsylvania I remember I used to part my hair like that.
Speaker 2: You're there, right?
Speaker 1: That's me.  That's December 1st, 1971 when we graduated from boot camp in the [U.S.] Navy.  So there's me up there in the top left, and then that's me there as we were getting ready to go home.  To the left, right there, yep.
Speaker 2: So that's him there.
Speaker 1: That's me there, winning the, I believe that was the quarter mile, and that would have probably--let's see, that was probably 1969 or '70 [1970].  That's the track team.  Yeah, that would have been, that would have been my junior year 'cause that's John Manney (ph.).  He was a sprinter.  Once he graduated, these three are all seniors, Paul Kemple (ph.), Walter Allen (ph.), they were the three seniors on the team.  Once they graduated, I began doing the sprints.
Speaker 2: Now, where are you here?
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is me here.  That's me there and there.  And then right there. And that was in 1971.  Actually, that would have been 1970 during soccer season.
