Story_ID: 209800
Speaker 1: Your name is again?
Speaker 2: It's Racine Tucker-Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Tucker-Hamilton.
Speaker 2: So, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, we're gonna begin and we are going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton--
Speaker 1: I coulda waited then.
Speaker 2: --and I am the interviewer and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer, and this interview is taking place on Tuesday, August 17, 2004, in Baltimore, Maryland.  And if you would, Judge, please for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it, please.
Speaker 1: My name is Robert M. Bell and the M is Mack, M-A-C-K.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And all of those spelled the common way, Robert and Bell?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Yeah (laughter).  I'm from the South, but we didn't--we didn't do any creative spelling.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, Judge Bell--
Speaker 1: Bell is without an E, by the way.  It's B-E-L-L.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you, Judge Bell.  And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 1: I was born July 6, 1943, in Rocky Mount, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your occupation please.
Speaker 1: My occupation is judge, actually.
Story_ID: 209801
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get familiar with the process and to also help us learn a little bit more about you.  So if you could just give me short answers to these questions, that would be great.
Speaker 2: I've been givin' you short answers already.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And we just got started.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: You know, I--I'm not sure I have a favorite food.  I, I, I like virtually all parts of the pig.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That'll do.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: I don't have one 'cause I don't go very often, but if I were going to go, I'd probably say north, maybe Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sure I must, but I don't--somebody else will have to tell you what it is 'cause I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: But if it comes to you throughout the course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --of our interview, please share it with me.
Story_ID: 209802
Speaker 1: Now if you will, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, let's talk a little bit about your mother.  Would you start with--begin with telling us her name and where she was born and where she grew up.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Rosa Lee, and that's two words, Bell.  Her maiden name was Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N.  She was born in Halifax County, North Carolina, in April of 1918; it would've been April the 18th.  And she grew up in Halifax in, in the environs in North Carolina.  And I--at some point, I suspect they moved down to around Rowland County--I mean Robeson [County, North Carolina] which is in Rowland County--no, Robeson County, North Carolina which--to the town called Rowland [North Carolina] 'cause that's where my father [Thomas Bell] was from.  But most of the time, I suspect she was in northeast North Carolina, which is right around Halifax--
Speaker 1: And did she ever share--
Speaker 2: --and Enfield [North Carolina], rather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well she had a bunch of brothers and sisters, of course, and they were farmers, sharecroppers.  And, of course, she with her sisters and brothers worked on the farm and didn't get much schooling.  Most of their life was in helping out on the farm.  My mother only went to about the third grade, I guess.  Yeah, yeah--so yeah she talked about that from time to time.
Story_ID: 209803
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father [Thomas Bell] starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: He was born in Robeson County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Could you spell? is it--
Speaker 2: That's R-O-B-E-S-O-N.  That's down around the South Carolina border, not too terribly far from, from Lumberton [North Carolina].  You might've heard of that and not far from Florence [South Carolina], I guess, on the other side of there.  He was born--you know, actually, I've never really known the exact date of my father's birth.  He was at least ten years older than my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] but he, too, was--you know, he, too, grew up on a farm.  He, too, was a part of the sharecropping regime in those days and I think he had a, a little bit more education than my mother, but not a whole lot, maybe sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they met?
Speaker 2: No, except that it, it must've been--you know, in those days, I suspect everybody went to town on a Saturday and if you lived in the neighborhood, I mean, you'd meet the people who lived in the area, and I suspect that's what happened.
Story_ID: 209804
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell]?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), she was extremely strong-willed individual.  She wasn't terribly--well, I guess she was about 5'7", very resolute, determined, had a--had a set jaw, you know, that kind of thing, walked always straight and always with her eyes straight ahead, and was--liked to get her way.  She liked to have her way and she did have her way.  I mean, she did--she knew she didn't know everything, but what she did know, she was very secure in the fact that she knew it.
Story_ID: 209805
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father [Thomas Bell]?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a little bit more low key.  I didn't spend a lot of time with him, actually.  My mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] and father separated when I was very young, and my brothers [Ellison Bell and Joe Louis Bell] and me were raised by my mother, not by my father.  We came to Baltimore [Maryland] when I was about a year and a half, and I think--my father came to Baltimore, too.  I'm not quite sure when, but I do know that for most of the time when I was growing up, he was not in the home.  He and my mother did get together again later in life and, in fact, when he died, she was--they were, they were living together in New York.
Speaker 1: And do you know what led to the family's move from North Carolina to Baltimore?
Speaker 2: I suspect it was pretty much the same as anybody in those days trying to do a little bit better than they were doing, moving to the big city, which was the big migration thing in those days.
Speaker 1: And did your parents have family members here, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were--there were family members on both sides of the family, that is to say my father's family part--members of that family were here.  My mother had family members here as well.  And I recall my mother talking about our staying with one of our cousins down Aisquith Street [Baltimore, Maryland] when we first got here.
Speaker 1: And even though you said your father wasn't in the home, did you get to see him often, or?
Speaker 2: Not often.  I saw him from time to time, but not often, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 209806
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, how far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you know a lot about your origin?  Did you come from free people, slaves, or do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Have no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, you know the--I've never really done the research.  I understand that there might be some, some, some people on my father's [Thomas Bell] side who may be trying to do the genealogy, but I have never--I have not taken the time to do it.  The best I can do is to go back to my, I guess, my grandparents certainly, and then I've heard some things from my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] and my father about their grandparents, but that's about as far as I can go.
Story_ID: 209807
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell and Thomas Bell] do for a living when they came to Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was involved, as far as I know, in construction work basically.  He was--or laborer.  He--as I indicated, he didn't have a great deal of education so that he would not have been sitting behind a desk (laughter).  My mother initially was involved with, you know, house kinds of--housekeeping (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So domestic type work.
Speaker 2: --kinds of things, so she would do domestic work.  And in later years, she became a healthcare provider, that is to say someone who went into the homes to assist the elderly or the sick with their--and that was done basically when she went to New York--
Story_ID: 209808
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandparents starting with your maternal grandparents, your mother's [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] parents?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know my grandmother [Ann Liza Jordan] very well 'cause she died when I was fairly young.  My grandfather on--was Willie, Willie Jordan was his name.  He lived in Enfield, North Carolina, all of the time that I knew him.  He had a --he, he worked a farm with his youngest son, actually, my Uncle Charlie [Jordan], and my uncle's children, Uncle Thomas' [Jordan] children, and his second wife, Ms. Lucinde [ph.].  And I used to visit him on summers and sometimes during the Christmas holiday, and I do remember him driving an old car, driving it slow to town and smoking a pipe.  He was more in those days supervisor as opposed to the hard worker and I remember very well the, the breakfasts and the lunches and the dinners where you had all of the, the food laid out, and always cheese, always fatback sliced up and fried, and biscuits, and, and always very pleasant my uncle--my, my grandfather was to those of us who were from "up north," as they put it who were coming to visit, 'cause, you know, we didn't get down there that often and he was very fond of us and he was very glad to see us when we came--
Story_ID: 209809
Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Mr. Link Bell--again, my grandmother died fairly early while I was very young, so I got to know my, my grandfather Link, and he was--as a matter of fact, I'm told that I took after him.  He was--both of 'em were short, by the way, but Grandpa [Willie] Jordan had--he was a little heavier.  Grandpa Bell, of course, was, was thinner.  He was shorter than me.  They both were about the same complexion.  No, actually, Link Bell was brighter, was lighter, but had a reddish tint to him, but he was very spry.  He died when he was eighty-four, actually, and was very spry up until the time he did die, walked every place, and was very fond of children and, and took a lot of time with us.  I don't remember him doing a lot of driving; I'm not even sure he drove, but he got around with us quite, quite a bit.  Now when I was going to visit him, I'm not sure he was doing very much.  I mean, he didn't live on a farm but he was probably retired.  He used to come visit us as well much more--my other grandfather never did come to visit us, but Grandpa Bell came to visit us from time to time just to make sure we were all right.
Speaker 1: And his name was Linc?  L-I-N-C?
Speaker 2: L-I-N-K.
Speaker 1: K, L-I-N-K.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, Link Bell.
Story_ID: 209810
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, let me ask you this.  What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I can remember growing up when I was very young.  I mean, I remember being with young kids and, and playing and what not.  I remember before going to, to kindergarten, which would've been--I went to kindergarten when I was five, I guess.  I remember before that.  I remember playing with young kids.  I remember playing with one in particular.  I remember playing with a, a little girl in the--in the hallway of the apartment building where we--it wasn't--it wasn't an apartment building in the grand sense, it was just a, you know, three or four story--three story house and we lived on the third floor.  I remember playing with her because some friend of my mother's [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] had brought her over and we were left to our own devices and I remember doing that.  But, no, I can remember back to when I was about before four, I'm sure, yeah.
Story_ID: 209811
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house growing up.  Were they special times, Christmas and Thanksgiving?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you know, I remember particularly with Christmas, you had this whole business about Santa Claus and trying to hide stuff and I learned fairly early on that there was no Santa Claus 'cause I found the toys, you know.  But that was a big deal, you know, trying to get the toys in the house and, and hidden, and then on Christmas Day, you get up and--early, and then you see what you got and you spend the rest of the day breaking the stuff up.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean--(laughter).
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Easter, you get dressed up and you put on your carnations and, and you go to church and you put on a, you know, your brand new suit or whatever you got, and you went out and you, you kinda showed it off.  And Thanksgiving was a big time for the turkey and the ham, and every now and then maybe a duck, but, you know, generally it was turkey and ham.  I can remember my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] preparing the, the meals the day before and the big thing was doing the stuffing and then the potato salad, and we always had--we always had sauerkraut.  See, in Baltimore [Maryland], for some reason or another, we had sauerkraut with pigtails (laughter).
Story_ID: 209812
Speaker 1: Can you kinda describe to us a little bit about like what daily life was like?  So you'd wake up in the morning and what would a typical day be like for you?
Speaker 2: Well it depends.  I mean, when I went to school, when I started school, of course, the typical day was going to school and then, then you come home and, and do your--do your lessons to the extent you had some, but you also would go outside and you play with your friends if it wasn't too cold or, or wet or something of that sort.  Before school, though, I would--I would have to stay home with my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] and she had to try to find something to keep me busy.  Because, see, I'm the youngest of, of, of three and my brother, Joe [Louis Bell], went to school a year before I did, and so for that one year, she had to try to find things to keep me busy.  I recall that she used to give me coffee, you know.  I'd sit there and drink coffee with her in the mornings and she did it by giving me, you know, a little bit of coffee, a whole lot of milk, and so it made it look like I was--and so I've been drinking coffee since I was a youngster, very young.  But, generally speaking, once I went to school, you went to school, you, you came in--at one time, we were going to school a half day.  I remember once we were going--I went in the mornings and we were off in the afternoons.  And then there was a time when I went in the afternoons and then off in the mornings.  In those times, of course, whether you played and how you played and with whom you played depended upon what the schedule was for them.  But, generally, playing was a big part of it, of course, with your friends in the neighborhood.  And also, my mother was very, very concerned about getting an education, so you also had to do your lessons, you see.  Before I went to school, my mother used to, even though she didn't have much education, used to try to help me write my name and, and to say my A-B-Cs and count and that--those kinds of things; she did that.
Story_ID: 209813
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, could you give us the names of your siblings including their birth--the names of your siblings, their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest brother is Ellison, E-L-L-I-S-O-N Bell.  He was born February 6, 1939.  Next to me is Joe Louis, named after the Brown Bomber [Joe Louis] of course, Bell, who was born October 6, 1941, and I was born July 6, 1943.
Story_ID: 209814
Speaker 1: Describe your community for us a little bit, your block.  Like, what was the name of the street that you lived on and can you kinda describe your block for us?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember--well, it--we lived on Aisquith Street [Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: --when we first got here.  A-I-S-Q-U-I-T-H.  But the one I remember the most was Gay Street, we lived 909 Gay Street.  And it was a three-story building as I said and, and we lived on the third floor.  Across the street from us--well, we lived above a tailor shop and across the street from us was a bar.  On the corner of the 900 block of Gay Street, on the corner of Gay and Caroline [Street] was another bar.  Across the street on Caroline Street, there was a restaurant with high steps; we used to play under the steps.  And then down on the corner of Caroline and Ashland Avenue because Gay Street--our entrance was through the alleyway 'cause you couldn't go through the tailor shop; you had to go through the back way, and you entered off of Ashland Avenue.  Right alongside or just right around the corner from there, right on Ashland Avenue, was a candy store.  I think it was Mr. Mac's [ph.] candy store.  Right across the street was a barber shop.  On Ashland and Caroline on the other side of the street was Clara Giles' house and down the street was a, a dentist.  And there were businesses along Gay Street in addition to the tailor shop.  On Gay--on Caroline Street as I mentioned, it was Clara Giles and also Leroy Thigpen [ph.] lived over there, too.  Leroy Thigpen was the nephew by marriage of my mother's [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] brother, John Henry [ph.], so I met him early on.  Clara Giles was the daughter of a school teacher [Freeman Giles] who lived right over there.  Right around the corner, there was--and I can't think of his name now--there was a police officer that lived right there.  So we had a neighborhood that was varied in terms of the, the, the distribution of, of professions and, and, and whatnot.  I went to school, kindergarten, with Leroy [ph.] and with Clara Giles, both, knew 'em both since I was four years old.  I--Leroy died.  Clara's still living; in fact, I just got a DVD from here, so we started school together and still remain friends today.  Mr. Mac sold us penny candy and whatnot.  At the corner bar was Federico's [ph.], Italian fella [Anthony Federico, Sr.], who was a lawyer, and everybody who had a case took the case up to Federico.  Years later--well, his sons are now--well, his son [Anthony "Tony" Federico, Jr.] is now a lawyer and I remember them from way back then and we still--and Tony Federico who was the young man then, not the father, used to always reminisce with me about growing up together on Gay Street and, and Caroline Street.  There was a Chinese place somewhere around there, too, 'cause I remember Ms. Kate [ph.] and Mr. Bob [ph.] sending us down to get Chinese food, and that was right in that same neighborhood.  Up the block on Gay Street, there were other stores including some seafood places where you could get live crabs and other seafood.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Did you all eat a lot of seafood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you did.  I mean, seafood--you, you ate--well, you ate a lot of stuff, I mean, including the, the fare that you had when you were in North Carolina, which was a lot of the pork and, and stuff of that--like that, chicken and that.  But you, you, you used to be able to buy chickens live.  You'd go down on Gay Street, farther down on Gay Street, which is now called Old Town Mall [Baltimore, Maryland] and you would--you would go into stores and they had live chickens and would--they would kill the chickens for you or you go over to "Jew Town" which is over on Lombard Street and they had a bunch of stores over there, and you'd buy food there, and a lot of that was live as well.
Story_ID: 209815
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, always a nice pot of some greens or, you know, food, some certain foods remind me.  We used to do--well, the fried chicken was, was a big thing for us.  For me, though, I really do remember the, the, the pig feet and the pig ears and the--and those kinds of things.  Sounds, any of the sounds--I mean, 'cause the, the hustle and the bustle of the city [Baltimore, Maryland] was always evident where we lived.  I mean, you didn't have as many cars and whatnot, but there were a lot of people around, and, and living across the street from a bar and up--down the street from a bar--well, the Federico's [ph.] bar was a cut rate.  It was--cut rate meaning that you didn't go in and, and buy drinks by the drink, you, you, you bought the bottles and you, you left.  Across the street and I think it was Charleston's [ph.] bar, I think, I'm not really sure about that, you could go in and you could buy your drinks and whatnot, so you had a--you had a little disturbance from time to time over there (laughter).  But sometimes if I'm--if I'm in the--in the old neighborhood and I see some of the row houses, you know, they--that will remind me of growing up and certainly when I see some of the folk I grew up with, and I still see some of 'em.  We've had--I guess we're getting to the point where--what, 1961 was my year for graduating [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland], so if you--if you think about that, I mean, I think we've had our, what fortieth [high school reunion]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: So we're getting close to the forty-fifth and we still see people.  And so when I see them, that reminds me of growing up.  But it's the--it is the noises that you hear in the city that, that remind me.  It's some--it's different now, of course.  You, you, you do have a lot more transportation and whatnot, but I do--a siren, for example, they, they remind me.  If I see somebody who might've been a little bit tipsy and walking along the street, that might remind me because I saw some of that growing up.  And sometimes if you see some of the old-fashioned, and you don't see many of them, penny candy stores, you know.  You don't see many of those, but when you go to New York [New York], you see some of them and it's reminiscent of what it was like.
Story_ID: 209816
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, school and going to school and some of the experiences that I had.
Speaker 1: What was the name of--
Speaker 2: For example, one of the things I did, I do recall very vividly, when I was going to school a half day in the afternoon, I remember going to school, having to pass a residential area which is--right now, that area no longer exists because on one side of the street, they've, they've converted into, into a, a health department, still there, and the other side of the street is a parking lot, I guess, for [The] Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland].  But there were houses there, and I remember going by and this young boy who was going to school in the mornings, I guess.  He was out by the time I started going, and so he would--and he lived on the other side of the street, but he would cross over.  And by the way, I was not allowed to cross over the streets except in so far as I'm going straight to school, but I went by myself.  And this kid would be there and we would--we would fight every day.  He would wait for me and I'd fight to get to school and then fight to come on back.  I mean, it was just that kinda thing.  I mean, I remember that very well.
Speaker 1: So you all would just look for each other every day; you'd be counting on that fight every day.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I had no choice.  He'd cross over and, and he'd wait for me, and so--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And--but then I'd get to school and I remember, you know, what you did in, in elementary school in kindergarten and, and those kinds of things.  You had your little cookies and milk and you put your head on the desk and take a rest and, and you play with these little things that the teachers had.  I, I remember all those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: It was--you know, it was a number.  It was [P.S.] 101-A [Baltimore, Maryland], I believe it was called.  But actually, it was in fact [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland]--I mean, it was Dunbar.  I didn't know it at the time, but Dunbar which is where I went to high school and junior high school, Dunbar at one time was an elementary school and then they, they made it a, a junior high and then it progressed to a high school, and that was to serve the people in East Baltimore where Western--I mean [Frederick] Douglass [High School, Baltimore, Maryland] served the people in West Baltimore.  And so it took 'em some time to get to the point where it was a high school, and when it became a high school, they started to phase out--
Speaker 1: The lower grades.
Speaker 2: --the lower grades--
Story_ID: 209610
Speaker 1: What happened--[Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] was the eastern school for blacks, [Frederick] Douglass [High School, Baltimore, Maryland] was the western school.  So when they got to the--in the old days, you had people who went to western, they'd go to the elementary school at Dunbar [P.S. 101-A, Baltimore, Maryland] if they lived on the east side and then they'd have to transfer over to Douglass and finish school.  So as they reached high school status, they started to eliminate the elementary school, but the elementary school was a part of the building.  So I went from--so 101-A, I went from kindergarten through the third grade there.  Now once I got to the third grade, I had to transfer to [P.S.] 139 [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Why in the third grade?
Speaker 1: Because that's when they eliminated the elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see--
Speaker 1: --portion of it, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So I--so I had to finish my elementary school at 139 which was about, you know, several blocks away from Dunbar.  And then having finished there after the sixth grade, I went back to Dunbar for junior high school.  The only problem was, I didn't go to the main building because in those days, it was overcrowded.  Dunbar was the largest school in the city [Baltimore, Maryland] and it could not handle the number of students, so it was--they, they developed a--an annex, so I went to the Dunbar annex for a year and then came to Dunbar for junior high school and stayed at Dunbar for high school--
Story_ID: 209611
Speaker 1: Let's go back to elementary school [P.S. 101-A and P.S. 139, Baltimore, Maryland], and tell me a little bit about what type of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I was a pretty good student.  I think--I thought--I think I did pretty well.  I don't--you know, sometimes you wonder.  You, you wish you had kept some things, but I did okay.  I was not a problem student.  I mean, I got my lessons done and, and, and I was generally I think considered to be one of the better students.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I always liked history.  I always liked history.  I didn't--actually, I didn't mind any of them, quite frankly.  I mean, the one that I probably didn't like quite as much was mathematics, probably, but history--because it was--it was very interesting to learn about what had happened and who had done things.  And, of course, we didn't get--we didn't get terribly much in terms of black history, but we, we got black history week, I guess it was.  And in those days, all you got were, you know, the usual, Joe Louis and [George Washington] Carver, Booker T. [Washington].
Story_ID: 209612
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years [at P.S. 101-A and P.S. 139, Baltimore, Maryland], did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well I started out wanting to be an artist.
Speaker 1: Were you good at a particular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought I was until I--
Speaker 1: --type of art?
Speaker 2: --until I--no, I thought I was until I ran into William Lockett [ph.] who is now an artist.  When I used to draw these little things, you know, thought I was doing pretty well until I saw what he could do and he could draw horses and, and they looked like horses, you know, and so I decided then that I did not want to be or could not be an artist, so I changed.  And I--then I started thinking about becoming a, a lawyer actually.
Speaker 1: In elementary school?  While you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were you--
Speaker 2: But see, I was reading--I read--you know, I read Perry Mason books [series by Erle Stanley Gardner] too.  So I mean, there were--there was some foundation for it.  I mean, I was--and it had more to do with this whole idea, the, the romanticizing of, of what one can do as a lawyer and what he did as a lawyer, being a be all and end all for everybody.
Speaker 1: Did you know any--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --black lawyers?
Speaker 2: Knew none.  Knew none at all.  Didn't meet my first lawyer--well, I don't know, I guess I did know.  I mean, I knew [Anthony] Federico [Sr.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But I didn't think about that, yeah.  And he was--you know, he was just the guy who handled all of these cases, personal injury cases and whatnot for anybody who was hurt on the job or who got hurt in an accident, something like that.  I wasn't thinking about the law in that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --sense at that time.  So, yeah, I knew him.  I knew no black lawyers at all.
Story_ID: 209613
Speaker 1: What type of child were you during the elementary school years [at P.S. 101-A and P.S. 139, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Were you quiet?  Well-mannered?  Mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Probably mischievous.  I probably got into more trouble than my brothers [Ellison Bell and Joe Louis Bell] did and, and probably was disciplined more than they were.  'Cause I guess, I would--I would ask questions when sometimes they would not.  If my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] said do something, I would not always do it without having a little something to say, and that used to exacerbate her a little bit.  And I was, you know, curious, and I suspect that was part of it, so--
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about how you liked to spend your time.  You--like, you said you liked to read Perry Mason books [series by Erle Stanley Gardner].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What other things did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was--I thought I was an athlete in those days, too.  I mean, I used to--used to play ball and was quick to do that, and quick to play in general with, with, with your friends.  I mean, I liked to be outside with 'em.  I liked to talk, to run, to laugh.
Story_ID: 209614
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: Well, I went down--went to Faith Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland] over on, I guess Ashland Avenue and--Ashland and Eager [Street], I guess.  No, not Eager, Ashland and something [N Bond Street].  I can't even remember the name of the--
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like in church?
Speaker 2: Ah, you know, church is, is something (laughter)--it was a drudgery in, in a real sense because, you know, you had to be there and you had to stay still, and, and you weren't always listening to--
Speaker 1: And were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --what they were saying.
Speaker 1: --you there all day?  Was it one of those type of experiences?
Speaker 2: No, no.  But--no, you'd--you go for morning service which would--which would last until what, 1 to 1:30.  But sometimes, my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] would insist that we went to Sunday school.  Well--and if, if that happened, that then extended it a bit.  And also had to go to church from time to time with my aunt which--who was a member of an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and so it (laughter)--and it was really basically the same but, I mean, the difference of course was that she sat always up front, you know, closer to the front, so it was more difficult to cut up and more difficult to sneak out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 209615
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about the junior high school years.  What type of student were you in junior high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School, No. 133; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a good student.  I--in fact, I was--I guess I might've been the best one or, or, or top two or three anyway.  We, of course, had--we were--we were in academic curriculum and, I guess--I think I might've been class president or something.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I know I was--I know I was in student government or student council, I guess we called it in those days, in elementary school [P.S. 101-A and P.S. 139, Baltimore, Maryland] and I think I did the same thing in, in, in junior high.
Speaker 1: And it was Dunbar Junior High School?
Speaker 2: Dunbar Junior High School.  And I was a good student.  I did the same kinds of things everybody else did.  I, I was not an athlete, of course.  I mean, I, I tried it one time to, to, to do some of it, but--I tried running, and I did run for a short time, cross-country, didn't do too well.  And then I--we played a little basketball and--I.Y., not, not, not the official basketball team.  But I had to walk to school a long ways, so it was long days for me.
Speaker 1: How long of a walk was it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--in those days, we moved--had moved over to Hoffman Street and so I'd have to go from Hoffman Street twenty-hundred [2300] block which was right around the fifty-hundred block--thirteen-fifty-hundred [1350] block of, of Washington Street down to Bank [Street] and Broadway, so that was a pretty fair walk.  I don't know maybe, you know, more than a couple of miles.  I mean, I could almost talk about walkin' five miles.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Barefoot uphill (laughter)?
Speaker 2: All that, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Snow and rain, that whole thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Some of the same ones.  I went to kindergarten with Leroy [Thigpen (ph.)] and, and Ralph Williams [ph.], and Clara [Giles], Melvin Howard [ph.].  They all were friends of mine and, and continued to be so, and we were all in the same class, actually, from kindergarten all the way to junior high school.
Story_ID: 209616
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you during the junior high school years [at Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School, No. 133, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Who were you most influenced by?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, always your mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] because mine was always the main influence 'cause she kept you focused and, and, and insisted on your doing what you're supposed to do and not getting above yourself as it were.  But I guess some of the teachers, as had been the case before, by the way, one of whom was probably Charles [G.] Tildon [Jr.] who was the teacher we got in seventh grade for--he taught health I guess.  It was his first year I found out later, teaching, and he was a--he was a young fella who, who had, had a certain air about him and, and who, who had a--an influence on, on all of us I think.  And then we had, you know, I'm trying to remember who else was in that junior high school.
Speaker 1: Were you still thinking that you wanted to grow up and become a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I'm--I haven't changed very much, I mean, at that point.  But, Ms. Woodford [ph.], I guess, and Ms. Alston [ph.], and we had--I'm trying to remember when Mr. Bainder [ph.] came in.  Because Bainder was one of the teachers--he taught--Bainder taught history.  I'm not sure when he came.  Was it eighth, ninth grade maybe?  So--and then there was Phil Yar [ph.].  Phil Yar was French teacher and later became a Spanish teacher, very polished, proper, you know, guy who, who knew French and you, you got the impression that he was refined and that sort of thing.  And, and then there was a--and I suppose the first principal that, that we knew in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] was Robert Pack Diggs and it was his first year as principal and I think we had an affinity to him and he to us, and he became an influential voice and person for us.
Story_ID: 209617
Speaker 1: How did you spend your time in [Paul Laurence Dunbar] Junior High School [No. 133; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Were you still spending your time doing some of the same things?
Speaker 2: Sure, except that you did a little bit more.  You used to try to--you know, you stand out on the corners a little bit more and, and, and it was the days of the doo-wop and whatnot and you tried to sing.  And, and, and I started to experience a bit with smoking and, and those kinds of things.  I started smoking actually when I was twelve or thirteen and, and smoked until I was--until about 1988, '89 [1989], um-hm, so--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: For the most part, yeah.  So I started doing that and you started to look at girls a little bit and, you know, and, and try to sneak around and, and quote, unquote, court and that sort of thing.  So, I mean, in addition to hanging out with, with the guys and doing the, the things that guys do, playing ball on, on Saturdays or whatnot, you'd--going to the movies, actually on Saturdays.  We used to do that a lot when we were in, in elementary school, too.  Saturday--Saturdays were the--was the day or Saturdays were the days when you went to, to the movies.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite type of movie?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we always went to see the, the westerns, you know, or the, the, the Bowery Boys or, you know, some of the comedy kinds of things.  But, you know, the things involving the smart-alecky types.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I guess the jungle pictures.  Believe it or not, we all cheered for the--for Tarzan in those days (laughter).
Story_ID: 209618
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about [Paul Laurence Dunbar] High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] now.  What were your experiences like in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, high school--you know, high school was just an extension of, of junior high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School, No. 133] for us.  We didn't move.  We were still in the same place.  In ninth grade, Reginald [F.] Lewis joined us.  You know who Reginald Lewis is?
Speaker 1: I believe so.
Speaker 2: Reginald F. Lewis.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Reginald Lewis.
Speaker 2: Reginald F. Lewis is the guy who did the leverage buyout of Beatrice International [Foods, TLC Beatrice International Holdings]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who, who died in '92 [1992; sic. 1993], was really--who wrote this book or had a book written about him called 'Why Do White Guys Have All The Fun?'[sic. 'Why Should White Guys Have All the Fun?: How Reginald Lewis Created a Billion-Dollar Business Empire,' Reginald F. Lewis and Blair S. Walker] about his experiences as an entrepreneur.  He was a member of our, our class in high school.  In fact, he and I were on the same ticket when we ran for student government president and vice president; he was vice president, I was president.  He joined us at around that time, and he was a big-time athlete.  But he, he brought a, a, a different dynamic to, to, to my life in a sense because he was pushing, you know, the entrepreneurial things and he got me involved in doing some things that I would not otherwise have done.  While I had sold newspapers off and on when I was growing up, The Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and whatnot just to make a few dollars, Reggie had me going to the Thanksgiving Day Parade, pulling the floats, going out to the stadium and hocking or, or filling the soda cups so that they could be hocked in the stadium, and those kinds of things.  He brought--he brought that, and also he--as I said, we ran for student government president together.
Speaker 1: And did you all win?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: That's a given, right?
Speaker 2: I'm afraid it was (laughter), you know.  It was a given, I mean.  Reggie was a--was a three-sport athlete, three-letter athlete, and then I was--I guess I was also president, president of the class, so I had some popularity too.
Speaker 1: Were you very popular in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, I--in, in, in my own sort of way I suppose.  I mean, people knew me and, and, and I was the valedictorian of the class, and so they knew that--well, student government president, valedictorian, I was involved in a whole bunch of things down there and, and--
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the issues you campaigned on?  Like, what were some of the issues?
Speaker 2: You didn't campaign on any issues (laughter).  I mean, I don't remember any issues that we campaigned on.  It was really about being more popular (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean, what issues did you have in high school?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, no better cafeteria food, nothing like that?
Speaker 2: No, we--
Speaker 1: Less homework?
Speaker 2: No, that was not--that's--that was not one of the issues that we had.  Actually, I don't remember.  I really don't remember any specific issue that we campaigned on.  We did put up some signs and whatnot, "vote for us"--
Story_ID: 209619
Speaker 1: Were you starting to become a little bit more socially aware?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.  I--you know, as you grow older--I mean, as I say, we were beginning to notice the, the women, we were beginning to notice a lot of things.  But you gotta remember, we were still rather segregated in those days.  I mean, I remember going to some conferences outside of the ghetto area [in Baltimore, Maryland], but that was an eye-opening experience.  But I did have--in 1960, I did have a, a very interesting and I think important occurrence.  That was when I got involved with sit-ins myself.
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your sit-in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, see--
Speaker 1: --experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see we, we were--we [Bell and Reginald F. Lewis] ran for student government president in my junior--at the end of our junior year, so it would've been for the next year.  So at the time that--at the spring of that year, I was student government president elect and this Morgan student came to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] seeking some assistance.
Speaker 1: Morgan college students.
Speaker 2: Morgan State College [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  In, in those days it was a college, yeah, seeking some assistance in a planned demonstration that was gonna take place on the last day of school in June, and they needed someone to be point person in recruiting students.  As student government president, you know, we--I was the one that they checked with and we got some--took some responsibility for trying to get the people together.  And in fact when the day came, we did have some people.  We got on the bus and we went downtown and participated in some picketing and ultimately, the group I was with ended up going in and sitting in at Hooper's Restaurant [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Hooper's?
Speaker 2: Hooper's, H-O-O-P-E-R-S, with the result that we were arrested.  That didn't mean that we were physically arrested on the spot.  What it does mean is that we were permitted to go home, that was a Friday, permitted to go home and come back that next Monday and then be fingerprinted and processed.
Speaker 1: So you weren't taken to jail.
Speaker 2: Not right then.  No, we weren't taken to jail at all, did not spend a day in jail, but we were prosecuted.  I was sixteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you scared?
Speaker 2: --at that time.  Well, you're always scared when you don't know what's happening or you don't know what's going to happen.  Yeah, I was scared in two ways, scared of what, what, what might happen, but also scared not to do it in a sense because it was something that I, I decided was important to do.  And, and there was a third way, I guess, I was also a little bit concerned about what my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] would say and do because--
Speaker 1: What did your--what was your mother's reaction?
Speaker 2: She--once it was done, she was very supportive.  If I had told her in advance, I'm not so sure she would have permitted me to do it.  For that reason, I didn't tell her (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this was in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960], yeah.  This was--this would've been June 16th or 17th of 1960.  Now, this is after the southern thing [Atlanta Student Movement]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because they--that all started in--that all started before.
Speaker 1: Right, I think it was in March--
Speaker 2: That's right, see, and--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in March at southern--
Speaker 2: --and then before March, you had A & T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and so it moved up the coast, so--
Story_ID: 209620
Speaker 1: Were you surprised or when you look back now that the students from Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] came to a high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to recruit participants (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I am.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  And, you know, it's a question that if I had it to do over again, I would ask because it didn't have any advantage.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: It, it, it might have.  You see, we were sixteen.
Speaker 1: So maybe you wouldn't have gone to jail because of your age or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, that's it, but that's the only--except that we were tried as adults.
Speaker 1: You were?  Was that unusual?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was because--well, sixteen years old is normally not an adult.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In Maryland, in Baltimore City [Maryland], it was.
Speaker 1: Oh, at that time.
Speaker 2: At that time.  No place else except Baltimore City were you treated as an adult.  And I'm not sure whether it was because they didn't understand that or not.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or whether it was contrived, that you get some young people involved because it's necessary to get 'em started early--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it's their fight and that kind of thing.  It could've been.  I don't know.  But as far as I know, we were the only place where they used high school students as opposed to just college students (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 209621
Speaker 1: So on Monday, you go down and you're fingerprinted and--
Speaker 2: Processed.
Speaker 1: --mug shot, processed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what happened next?
Speaker 2: Tried--we were charged with trespassing and we were actually tried.  In the--in those days, it was called the Supreme Bench of Baltimore [City; Baltimore City Circuit Court, Baltimore, Maryland], now the circuit court.  We were actually tried by Joe [Joseph R.] Byrnes who was the circuit court judge, not a jury.  It was a--it was a court trial.  And after a, a trial--after the trial was over, he found us guilty of trespassing and, and imposed a fine of ten dollars and cost, which he suspended.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, we were represented by Juanita Jackson Mitchell, the wife of, of Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.], I believe, 101st senator, and Robert [B.] Watts, and Tucker Dearing, and the state's attorney or the assistant state's attorney was a fella named James Murphy.  As it turns out, Rob Watts and James Murphy both became judges on the Supreme Bench of Baltimore City.  Joe Byrnes is the father of two circuit court judges, one of whom was a former state senator.  Well, Juanita of course, you know, went on to, to continue to be the first lady of civil rights and--
Speaker 1: How did you all pay for your defense?
Speaker 2: Oh, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the civic interest group and that crowd.  Somebody did it; it was not us, and that was part of the deal.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and the civic interest group was the group that, that spearheaded the, the demonstration, so I suspect that they made the arrangements probably with the NAACP and some of the other organizations.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you had gotten off somewhat lightly compared to what was happening with students, you know, in other parts of the country?
Speaker 2: No, it was the idea--as explained to me, that it was the idea of the conviction that was--that was critical.
Speaker 1: So that it could be appealed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was concerned certainly about--since I wanted to be a lawyer, concerned about its impact on, on me as a lawyer--
Speaker 1: Were you concerned about perhaps--
Speaker 2: --by getting into law school.
Speaker 1: What about going to jail?  Were you concerned about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I wasn't concerned about that, particularly since the judge imposed a fine of ten dollars and suspended it.  I mean--I mean--(laughter).
Speaker 1: But before that--
Speaker 2: Before that.
Speaker 1: --like, before the judge's--
Speaker 2: No, I--really, I was not--was not all that concerned about that, particularly since it was, it was not as if you'd gone out and, and done something malicious.
Speaker 1: Right.  So after--
Speaker 2: It was--it was--if you looked at it in its best light, it was for a good cause.
Speaker 1: Sure, absolutely.  After you were convicted, what happened next?
Speaker 2: The appeal was taken to the Court of Appeals [of Maryland, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And how were you named?  Why, why was it just your name?  Was it alphabetical order (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alphabetical.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alphabetical.  I mean, that--that's, that's one of the reasons.  It is the reason, actually.  And whenever you--when they title cases, generally they'll do it alphabetically unless there's some other reason to do it.  But the appeal was taken, I'm the named person because alphabetically I've got the first name, and it's heard by the court of appeals.  The court of appeals affirms the conviction, finds that we did in fact trespass and that there is no impediment to that conviction.  And what the argument was, was that you cannot use a neutral law, a facially neutral law, to enforce racially segregated policies because the enforcement by use of the police of those policies is state action, which is prohibited by the [U.S.] Constitution; that was the argument.  Court of Appeals didn't buy it, and that prompted a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States--
Story_ID: 209622
Speaker 1: What year did it go to the [U.S.] Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: The Supreme Court decided it in '64 [1964], so it would've gone probably in sixty--'62 [1962], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In any event, Supreme Court accept the certiorari on it and had arguments on the case, and was unable to resolve it definitively.  What I mean by that is, you had justices who wanted to affirm it and that group was led by [Justice] Hugo Black.  And you had justices who wanted to reverse it; that one was led by [Justice William O.] Douglas and I think it was [Justice Arthur] Goldberg.  And you had that middle group that realized or recognized, that because it couldn't get a majority one way and the other, the case had to go back for reconsideration.  And the basis for sending it back for reconsideration, the basis for that middle ground, was the fact that Maryland and the City of Baltimore [Maryland] both had passed public accommodations laws after 1960, which would've made legal what we did in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so the question was, what would the court do in light of the new legislation.  So the case went back to the Court Of Appeals [of Maryland, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: In Maryland.
Speaker 2: In Maryland.  And Maryland court of appeals affirmed the conviction a second time, but it--on motion for reconsideration several months later reconsidered the sentence--I mean, the verdict, and reversed it, so I'm no--I'm not a convicted misdemeanor now.
Speaker 1: Essentially leading to the desegregation of restaurants and public facilities in Maryland?
Speaker 2: Well, that was done with the statutes, so what this did was to terminate our exposure to the--or our guilty finding in the criminal justice system; that's what it did.  Because the statutes that have--were passed by the state and by the city had taken care of the public accommodations issue.
Story_ID: 209623
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, we were talking about the case [Bell v. Maryland, 1964] after it went back to the Court Of Appeals [of Maryland] in [Annapolis] Maryland.
Speaker 2: Right.  And what happened was, the court of appeals reaffirmed its prior judgment, but, but on motion for reconsideration, it reversed, and so none of us now has a criminal record as a result of that.  An interesting aftermath of that or some ironies that, that, that probably ought to be noted, I started to tell you something about some of the players.  Joe [Joseph R.] Byrnes was the father of a state senator.  John Carroll Byrnes, John Carroll Byrnes was my state senator when I was appointed to the District Court of Maryland [for Baltimore City], and he was the one who sponsored my nomination.  James Murphy and Bob [Robert B.] Watts both went on the circuit court, Supreme Bench of Baltimore [City; Baltimore City Circuit Court, Baltimore, Maryland].  I joined that court in 1980 when they were both members of the court.  The court of appeals' decision or, or the, the case, the hearing, the first one, the state was represented by Lawrence [F.] Rodowsky and the second one, the state was represented by Robert Charles Murphy.  Rodowsky went on the court of appeals in 1980 and Bob Murphy went on the court of appeals as its chief judge in 1974--1972.  I went on the court of appeals in 1991; both of them were still on the court of appeals.  And when Judge Murphy had to retire in 1996, I replaced him as the chief judge of the court of appeals, so there's a little bit of irony there.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 209624
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your senior year in [Paul Laurence Dunbar] High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As a result of the sit-in [at Hooper's Restaurant, Baltimore, Maryland], the kids were--
Speaker 2: Didn't have any impact at all.
Speaker 1: None whatsoever?
Speaker 2: No, because we had--we had the decision--we had the trial [Bell v. Maryland, 1964], but that was--you know, you had to take a day or so off, but that's it.  I finished my course work and got a scholarship to Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 209625
Speaker 1: Before your scholarship, what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Actually, I wanted to go--I really didn't know where I wanted to go to college.
Speaker 1: But you knew you were going.
Speaker 2: I was going to college.  I knew that I was going to be doing a pre-law curriculum, and it really was a big thing of trying to get a scholarship to go because I didn't have any money, my mother [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell] didn't have any money, and so it was really--the big thing was getting the, the wherewithal to do it.  And so it was important to do well on the SATs, and I already had good grades and I was, I was active in extracurricular kind of things.  I was in pretty good shape there but it was really the SATs that were the main concern.  And so I, I continued to work hard as I said.  I was the valedictorian of the class senior year [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] and also student government president, so I had a--I had a lot of things going for me at that time.
Speaker 1: Where did you really wanna go to college?  Or it didn't matter--
Speaker 2: Actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as long as you got scholarship?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was really--see, I didn't--we didn't have the, at least I didn't, have the ability to--or didn't take the time or didn't know 'cause the guidance counselors didn't, didn't guide us in that way--I didn't have the ability to, to look around and say I wanna go here, there or the other place.  I wanted to go to a school because it was a means toward an end.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, I applied--actually, I applied to the University of Maryland at College Park [College Park, Maryland], but I didn't apply to a whole lot of places.  I might've applied to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but keep in mind, too, you, you had to be limited in the number of applications you put in 'cause that cost money.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So I was very frugal in that regard.
Speaker 1: So you got a scholarship to Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Scholarship to Morgan, majored in English--I mean, in history, majored in history.
Story_ID: 209626
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a bump in the road.  I started Morgan in September of '61 [1961].  I had to drop out of Morgan in the, I guess it would've been that winter right after the first semester because I ended up having tuberculosis and I spent a year in the hospital.
Speaker 1: A year in the hospital?
Speaker 2: In the hospital, yeah.  So I didn't come back to Morgan until 1960--let's see, '62 [1962], '63 [1963], January 1962.  Now, a very fortunate thing happened.  There was a professor of mine in, in the first year, Mr. Walter Fisher, who taught history, who saw something in me, of course, and, and insisted upon making sure that I kept up with my studies, and so he brought me the work--
Speaker 1: While you were in the hospital?
Speaker 2: --right, while I was in the hospital, and he kept up, and so when I was out of the hospital, he assisted me in getting back in and, and I got not only did I keep my scholarship, but I also got an additional scholarship, which allowed me to stay on campus.  So I started again in '63 [1963], continued in, in, in history and finished one year after I should have.  But I did that because I--well, I could've finished in '64 [1964]--or '65 [1965] like I should have because by the end of my fourth year, I had all of my credits except one and I chose not to get that one credit, but to stay and take additional credits, and I ended up during my last year taking English courses, philosophy courses, and--you know, advanced English literature and philosophy courses.  And so when I ended up, I had enough courses for a major in political science, history, and almost enough for English.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 209627
Speaker 1: But I ended up spending three years on that--on campus that I would not otherwise have spent on campus.  Now Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] was an interesting proposition because it had a three-tier system when I went there.
Speaker 2: Meaning--
Speaker 1: You had A curriculum, B, and C; C being the, the highest, A being the lowest.  And you had English in the C curriculum, which was supposed to have been the toughest, so I ended up in, in C curriculum English.  I'll never forget that the first assignment I got in--when I came back, not when I first started, when I came back.  When I first started, I had Robert Smith [ph.].  When I came back, I had the brother of one of the teachers who taught at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland], Dr. Nick Aaron Ford.  His brother, Robert Ford [ph.], was a teacher at Dunbar High School.  He also was a doctor and he taught Latin.  I never had Robert Ford; I had Nick Aaron, and Nick Aaron gave us this assignment, and the assignment was to outline a particular piece of literature.  And I'll never forget, I, I did the outline and, and got an F.
Speaker 2: Was that your first F?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Ended up getting an A in the course, of course.  I ended up at Morgan with number two in the class.  Now, I had the experience of meeting at Morgan, Robert Gill.  Now Robert Gill was the guy who, who kept telling me how important this case [Bell v. Maryland, 1964], [HistoryMaker] Robert Mack Bell against State of Maryland was.  He was a political science person who kept track of all of the important civil rights cases.  And, and when I went to Morgan, the first person that I ran into was Robert Gill, who made me a semi-celebrity by, by pointing out that I was involved in that particular case, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you were kind of a big man on campus.
Speaker 1: Well, eventually I became student government president.  I had a degree of popularity on, on campus.  I also had a reputation for being reasonably intelligent and informed, and also I was fairly active.  I wanted to be a, a lawyer certainly, and so you, you tended to lean towards--people think of lawyers and politicians in pretty much the same--at least they did in those days, and so you tended to get involved in things which were perceived as political or aiming toward the political and so--
Speaker 2: What kind of--
Speaker 1: --I was very active on campus.
Speaker 2: And what other kinds of clubs--and did you pledge a fraternity or?
Speaker 1: Well, at some point, I ended up becoming a member of Alpha Phi Omega, which is the one that's affiliated with the Boy Scouts [of America].  I did not pledge one of the traditional social fraternities, thought about it, but I was not enamored by the, the kinds of activities that they engaged in in the initiation process, and I was not inclined to undergo the hazing and that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --kind of thing.  But, yeah--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I was involved in--as student government president, of course I was involved with the, the disciplinary board with the president's office.  I was consulted on a whole bunch of things and I--you know, I was involved with the student union and the newspaper [The Spokesman], one of the honors clubs or a couple of the honors clubs.
Story_ID: 209628
Speaker 1: So after you left Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] after you got your degree, what year did you get your degree in?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In one year after I should have (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went to law school.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to law school?
Speaker 2: I went to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Did you get a scholarship to Harvard?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Now there's an interesting background to that.  I was--I was at home one day, and Paul Sarbanes is the senator for Maryland, who's running for House of Delegates in Maryland; it's his first election, and he and Christine [Dunbar Sarbanes] were going door to door.  I was in his district and he rang, rang my door while I was at home.  And I, I sat on the steps and talked to him about his, his run.  He found out I was at Morgan studying for, for my degree and, and was intending to go to law school, and we discussed going to law school.  He took--he just spent a long time just sitting there talking.  And he told me that it was the best place in the world to go to law school, that is to say the Boston [Massachusetts] area, and he recommended Harvard.  I had already been thinking about Harvard, of course; it's one of the better law schools.  So I ended up on his advice after that discussion, applying to only three law schools; all three of them were in Boston--
Speaker 1: So Harvard--
Speaker 2: --or in the Boston area.  Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and Harvard, and I ended up being accepted at all of 'em, but I got more money from Harvard than any place else, and I ended up going to Harvard--
Story_ID: 209629
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: You know, we were--interestingly enough, when I got to Harvard, there were--let's see, there were about five hundred and some students in each class.  There were probably ten or so African Americans in the entire school when I got there.  With my class, that raised the number to about twenty-five or thirty because we had the largest number up to that time.  It's interesting to note that Reginald F. Lewis was in Harvard when I got there.
Speaker 1: So he was already there at Harvard.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  See, he, he came out of school and he went to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and he came out in '65 [1965] as he should have, and he went to Harvard from Virginia State.  I went in '66 [1966], having been out a year, and so we had--which was amazing, we had two African American students from the same high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] at the premier law school in the country at the same time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But--so it was beginning--Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and a lot of the other Ivy League schools were beginning to make an effort to bring in more African Americans, and it was not the easiest of transitions, a couple of reasons.  One is that there were a lot of folk who didn't want you there and, and they made no bones about it.  The second thing was that you were a little bit uncomfortable yourself, and some of us had some questions as to whether or not we really belonged there, not having had any experiences in the past dealing with a predominantly white situation 'cause all of my schools had been predominantly black--not predominantly, had been black.  And so you had--you had the adjustment issue.  And then there were some issues that came up with regard to how they accommodated us and whether they were willing to do what was necessary to make us feel as comfortable as we could.
Story_ID: 209630
Speaker 1: Did they [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] do a good job of accommodating?
Speaker 2: Well there were always issues, but that was the beginning of the BLSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] chapters, you see.  Because the--when--my first year in law school saw the beginning of the development of the BLSA--
Speaker 1: And what is that?
Speaker 2: --chapters.  BLSA is the Black Law Students Association.  [HistoryMaker] A.J. [Algernon Johnson] Cooper [Jr.] was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  He and I went to--we were in a Foreign Service officer training course together when we were both in college, and he went to NYU, I went to Harvard.  He developed--he started the, the BALSA chapter at NYU and it spread throughout the country, so we got one in the same year.
Speaker 1: And tell us again what BLSA is an acronym for?
Speaker 2: Black--it used to be Black American Law Students Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Black American Law Students Association.  They've changed it now, so it's now Black Law Students Association so it includes those who are not American.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that developed that year, and that--the whole point was to be a support group.
Speaker 1: And was it successful that first year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think so.  I mean, we--I think so.  We're talking about '66 [1966], '67 [1967] [sic. 1968], and, and--but the biggest problem was the adjustment that each of us had to make.  I remember I--my biggest problem was making the adjustment to that new situation.  You know, I didn't have dinner table discussions about the law and I didn't know a bunch of lawyers and whatnot, and so it was all new to me.  I mean, it was a whole new language and whatnot until I realized that it was really a question of adapting and realizing I was able to adapt as well as anybody else, and once I got that in my own mind, it was easy.
Story_ID: 209631
Speaker 1: And how were you faring with your studies?  Were you having a difficult time keeping up with your studies or were you still excelling academically?
Speaker 2: Well, you gotta remember now, we didn't--you didn't have any way to gauge that--
Speaker 1: Well, by your--
Speaker 2: --at [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] because you only got one exam a year (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You rose or you sunk (laughter) on the basis of that exam, you see.  I mean, so--no, I, I ended up doing pretty well at, at, at Harvard.
Speaker 1: What were some--
Speaker 2: And, and the reason I can say that is because what Harvard was doing.  I was the first black from Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] to go to Harvard.  They had no track record, so they were taking a chance.  Now, once they have a track record, they then will let other folk in or not depending upon what that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --person did.  I went in '66 [1966].  In '67 [1967], there were two more from Morgan (laughter).  So the--I did all right--
Speaker 1: Sure, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --in order to get--and opened the doors for those guys because otherwise they would not have been as quick to bring in--and they didn't just bring one, they brought two.  So--no, I did all right at Harvard--
Story_ID: 209632
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite courses in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any favorite courses in law school.
Speaker 1: Not even, you know, just a lot of lawyers I've interviewed, they say they really like the evidence that--no?
Speaker 2: No, actually if--yeah, if I had to choose one, it would've been probably criminal law because those were the--that was an exciting time when, when there were many, many changes going on in criminal law.  And also I had a professor that you will probably have heard of.  My criminal law professor was Alan Dershowitz (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --who was, you know, interesting.
Speaker 1: Was he then as animated and excited as he is--
Speaker 2: Well, he was, but he--but he was young and had no experience at all.  And some of the better professors were teaching courses like property and, and contracts.  In fact, one of the professors, Clark Byse, was, was an excellent professors.  He knew how to use what, what is called the Socratic Method to get the students to think aloud and, and during its--and during their analysis and thing through that problem and, and thereby solving.  But, I mean, it was very stressful going to those kinds of courses because they call on you with a hundred fifty, two hundred people in the room, see, and, and, and then you've gotta sit there on display for however long he allowed you to stay there and, and he would keep you there.  But it was--it was a means toward and end as far as I was concerned.  I mean, I was there to get a degree, which then would allow me to go back home and, as all of us--or not all, but most of the people who were there would've told you, they were there to make a difference, to save the world and that sort of thing, and so that's what I was all about--
Story_ID: 209633
Speaker 1: So you wanted to go back home [Baltimore, Maryland] and do what?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go back home and do good.  I mean, now what does that mean?  It didn't mean--I don't know what it meant.  I mean, it meant you were gonna make a difference in terms of what--the way things were.  You're gonna be relevant.  You're going to change the laws.  You're gonna make it right for everybody, you know, that sort of thing.  Very amorphous kind of thing.  Nobody really sat down and defined it with any particularity, but that's what we all wanted to do.  So I went back--interesting thing I did, though.  I didn't go back and go to work for [Maryland] Legal Aid or anything of that sort.  I went back and I went to work for Piper & Marbury [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And that was a black law firm?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Biggest law firm in the state, largest law firm in the state, white law firm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was the first African American hired by that law firm as an associate.  And guess what?  The first summer associate they had who was African American was, guess who?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Reggie [Reginald F.] Lewis (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: The year before.  He went to work on Wall Street and I came to Piper.
Speaker 1: And that was in 1969 when you went to Piper.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], right, um-hm.  That's exactly right.  Came out in--I came out on time, passed the bar on time.
Story_ID: 209634
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the first time.
Speaker 1: --in terms of passing the bar, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell.  Back then, I know that at some point in time in Maryland, only so many African Americans could pass the bar.  Was that still the case when you took the bar?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't could pass, but did pass.
Speaker 1: Well, allow to pass, right.
Speaker 2: Well, see I'm not so sure.  That's, that's a loaded term.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was some issues as to whether or not the bar review people--well, not bar review, but the bar examiners were biased in their grading.  That was never proven to be the case.  It was an anonymous test so that they weren't supposed to know who was sitting for the exam and that sort of thing.  When I came, there had been very sparse and sporadic pass rates.  When, when, when I came to the bar in '69 [1969], six African Americans passed the exam--
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: --and that was big news.
Speaker 1: In 1969.
Speaker 2: Six of us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Big news, because that was the largest class in some time.  Now right after the war [World War II (WWII)], you, you had some classes like that, but since then, there had been, been very few, and never as many as six.  Now of those six, two of us are appellate judges.  One of us is Billy [William H.] Murphy, Jr., and David Mitchell--I mean, David [Burke] Allen who was Milton Allen's son, and, and John Wood; those were the six of us.  Arrie [W.] Davis, Robert Bell, Billy, John Wood, Billy Murphy--how many is that?
Speaker 1: I think you said Billy Murphy twice.  Say it--start over again.  Billy Murphy--
Speaker 2: Billy, David, John Wood--
Speaker 1: Robert Bell.
Speaker 2: --Robert Bell, Arrie Davis; so it's only five of--I thought it was six.  There's five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 209635
Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about what your experiences were like at Piper [& Marbury, Baltimore, Maryland].  Were you met with some resistance or was it, you know, wow, you know, this is a Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained attorney, doesn't matter that he's black?  What was that like in 1969?
Speaker 2: Harvard was--I mean, Piper was an interesting firm actually 'cause the senior partner was William L. Marbury who is an--who is a, a--who, who is one of the successors to the Marbury in Marbury against Madison [Marbury v. Madison, 1803], one of the really old important cases, very fair-minded guy who insisted that it was time to change the old way of doing things.  The old-boy network had to go.  We had to reach out and bring people in.  He insisted that Piper begin to do things the way it ought to be doing--they, they ought to be done as opposed to doing things the way they'd always been done.  So he was very, very supportive and he insisted--well, at the same time, Piper had begun to prepare to reach out in another way.  They were going to reach out into the community and provide legal services--
Speaker 1: For African Americans?
Speaker 2: No, for anybody--
Speaker 1: Who couldn't afford--
Speaker 2: --who couldn't afford it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --including African Americans, but mostly African Americans certainly because they would be the bulk of 'em, but it would--they were more concerned about access to justice being available to everybody.  And so they had just begun to set up a new office, a part of the firm, but put it in the community, so this was all part of their revamping effort.  And so when I got there, I was accepted, and Bill Marbury insisted on that.  But you also had a lot of other people there who were, were right-minded people, people of good will including Clint [Clinton] Bamberger and Frank [T.] Gray, folk who, who understood what it--you know, the interrelationship and the need for, for better relationships among the races.
Speaker 1: And what kind of cases did you handle at Piper?
Speaker 2: Well, I did--I had a couple of--when I first got there, I worked a good deal for Frank Gray and I was doing some public interest kinds of things.  I, I represented The Salvation Army and some real estate.  He had--he also represented First National Bank, which no longer exists, but I did real estate leases and those kinds of things.  And then I worked for Frank--I mean, Roger [D.] Redden.  I did, did a lot of stuff involving municipal finances and, and bond work, and some taxation stuff.  And then I worked for Jack [John Martin] Jones, primarily, and Jack Jones did real estate financing and development.
Story_ID: 209636
Speaker 1: --Were you wanting to be in that [Piper & Marbury] office that was down in the community [Baltimore, Maryland] assisting--
Speaker 2: Oh, no--well, I ended up going there at some point, but no.  The, the, the reason that office was set up, and it had people they hired for that office and not me.  In fact, they were--they were clear they didn't want the first director of that office or the first person in that office to be black because it would send the message that it was done just because--
Speaker 1: Because.
Speaker 2: --of that.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: And that that person was hired just because of that.  They didn't want that to be the impression.  They really wanted the impression to be what it was, that they hired me because they thought I could do the job in the main firm.  And so, they hired two people to, to handle it.  And the two people they hired were top-notch people, and they put them in that office with the expressed purpose of doing that.  The idea was those people would rotate out of the office into the main office and two other people would--
Speaker 1: Would--
Speaker 2: --go into the--
Speaker 1: --into that office--
Speaker 2: --office.  But they would be people who were hired not for the office but for this office and, and so you'd run--you'd end up with the firm benefitting from the diversity that would be of experiences that would be experienced by people going in and out.
Story_ID: 209637
Speaker 1: And so, when you left Piper [& Marbury, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1975, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, when I left Piper, I went on the District Court of Maryland [for Baltimore City].
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about that process?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to be appointed by the governor.  And in those days, you, and it still is, you have a judicial nominating commission and you apply for the judgeship, you go through an interview, file an application, and the governor interviews you and, and makes the appointment.  And once that's done, it's a confirmation by the [Maryland State] Senate and you're there for ten years.  So I, I went through that process with the support of the--of the firm.  I was appointed some time in December and took office January 2, 1975, on the district court.  District court is a court of limited jurisdiction with no jury trials and it's--it handles mostly misdemeanor criminal offense--offenses and civil cases in those days up to about ten thousand, fifteen thousand dollars and traffic, of course.
Story_ID: 209638
Speaker 1: Just tell us a little bit about what your thoughts were on becoming a judge.  Was that something that was in the plan, or?
Speaker 2: No.  Never even thought about it actually.  The reason I became a judge was because we had very few judges in 1975--in 1974.  We had--we had only two or three on the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City] in Baltimore City [Maryland], one on the Circuit Court in Prince George's County [Maryland], and only about three or four on the District Court [of Maryland] in Baltimore City, and maybe one in Prince George's County statewide, and with very few prospects of getting any others.  And the decision was made by some of the judges and community people that given my background, I probably had a chance, and so they talked me into applying, and I, I did so with the idea of giving it a couple years (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And so I applied and, and, and became a judge.  I, I, I never really wanted to become a judge, but I also believed and still do believe that the most important court in the system is the district court, which is the lowest court, because you deal more directly with the people and the impact you have is probably more evident than--and more immediate than any place else.  And so I, I was somewhat interested in doing it.
Speaker 1: And so--and you served in district court until 1980, so for five years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  A little more than five years because I went to the circuit court on January the 22nd of '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And circuit court was from 1980 until 1984.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 209639
Speaker 1: And so can you tell us a little bit about some of the differences between District Court [of Maryland for Baltimore City] and Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, jury trial is the most evident one and also you--in--when I was on district court, district court criminal cases were held in police stations and, of course, the circuit court, you had your own court building.  You had no personal assistants or assistants answerable to you in the district court.  You had no secretary who was your secretary.  You had no clerk that was your clerk.  Circuit court, you had both a secretary and a clerk whom you hired and who worked just for you.  The nature of the cases were totally different.  In the district court, as I told you, they were minor kinds of cases, in the circuit court, the most serious of cases.  The other difference was that in a district court, the appointment was made by the governor.  You got a ten-year term if you're confirmed by the [Maryland State] Senate.  In the circuit court, appointment is made by the governor, but you also had to run for election and it could be a contested election, and in Chicago [Illinois], you know what that's all about.  And--but you got a fifteen-year term if you want.
Story_ID: 209640
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, why didn't you stay in District Court [of Maryland for Baltimore City] for ten years until 1975?  I mean, '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Because the pressure is on to move up if you're considered to be a fairly good judge, and I was considered to be a pretty good judge and, and there were a lot of--I stayed five years, which was a long time, and actually I was very happy staying on the district court.  But the pressure was on to, to move another person onto the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland].  And, of course, again given my background, they thought I had a chance of doing it, and so I was pushed to do it.
Story_ID: 209641
Speaker 1: What were you starting to think about your judgeship now?  You had said you kinda signed on for just a couple of years, and so were you starting to enjoy being a judge as much as you did being a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, it was something that needed to be done.  I--I'm really not sure that I've always enjoyed being a judge.  When I--I did enjoy being a trial judge more than an appellate judge, and the reason for it is because you're much more involved when you're involved at the trial level as opposed to the appellate level.  At the trial level, you are calling the shots.  At the appellate level, you are reacting to what somebody has already done and the decision is made not by one judge but by a committee of judges, I mean, either three or in the case of the court of appeals, seven.  So was I getting used to it?  Yes, of course, I was getting used to it and, and also recognizing the value of being there, and also recognizing the necessity to, from my perspective of having somebody in a position on all of those courts and actively so.
Story_ID: 209642
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the cases that kinda stand out in your mind on the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland] from 1980 to 1984?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the ones that I guess would stand out would be the criminal manners that I had involving young people for the most part.  I remember I had a juvenile case where the, the young man--the respondent was, I guess, seven or eight and he was charged with murder and the question was what do you do with a seven or eight year old in a juvenile setting to try to provide treatment to that young man and make sure his life's okay?  So we put him in a hospital and I understand that he, he, he did okay.  I remember the Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] jacket cases--a case where a young boy [DeWitt Duckett] was killed in a school [Harlem Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland] because of the Georgetown jacket.  That's when Georgetown was a big, big school--
Speaker 1: And someone--
Speaker 2: --with basketball.
Speaker 1: --wanted his jacket and killed him.
Speaker 2: Somebody wanted his jacket, and three kids killed him, and I remember the sentencing.  When--you know, some judges spend a lot of time lecturing folk.  I, I, I never believed in that.  I remember what I told those three kids.  The youngest one was sixteen and the oldest was eighteen, I think.  And I, I remember what I told the three kids that we are witnessing the wasting of four lives, the young man who was killed and your three, and I sentenced those three kids to life plus twenty years; that's what you do in this.  And I guess the other one that I remember was the case involving [William Lloyd "Little] Willie" Adams who was a political figure, a community activist, leader-type, who was charged with gaming involving--being involved in numbers game and nobody really wanted to try the case and--
Speaker 1: How come?
Speaker 2: Because he was well known and, and, and, you know, you don't gain a whole lot from trying a case like that.  And I remember that I had done the same thing.  I said, "I'm not gonna try the case."  But then I thought about it and said, I don't know why I shouldn't, so I ended up agreeing to try the case, and did try it, and, and resolved it.  And I'm glad I tried it because as it turned out, it wasn't him, so--in my considered opinion, it was not him, so--
Speaker 1: He wasn't guilty of that crime.
Speaker 2: Right, and so I was able to do the right thing and, I mean, the fact that I did it probably was beneficial to seeing that justice was done.
Story_ID: 209643
Speaker 1: Are there some days when it's just really hard to do your job?
Speaker 2: A whole lot of days, a lot of days (laughter).  But--and it's a lot easier when you're involved yourself on a day-to-day basis, I mean--and when you're calling the shots, when you're hearing the cases, when you are actively engaged in the process and, and, and the development of the case, and, and, and its progress, it's a lot easier.  When you're dealing with papers, it's more difficult--
Story_ID: 209644
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell, tell me a little bit about some of the differences that you started to notice, or if you did, in terms of like some of the crimes that were being committed and the cases that were coming before you, just throughout the years.  Were you starting to--or was there a difference?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you've had--the numbers have increased and there are more drug cases than you used to have.  I suspect there are more killings now than you used to have, but we've always had a rather large variety of cases.  We've always had drug cases, we've always had violent cases, we've always had murders.  But it's the--I guess it's the number and also the, the shift may very well be in the number of young people who are involved in those kinds of cases that used to be done only by the adults or at least largely by the adults.  I think you've got the young people becoming more and more akin to and like the, the adults in terms of the, the kinds of behaviors they are--they are reflecting.
Speaker 1: More African American faces too?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but I--when, when I started, you had a lot of African American faces--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --even then, so--
Speaker 1: Is it more or is it just relative?
Speaker 2: It's difficult to say.  I suspect--it is more in absolute terms.  It has to be more in absolute terms, but it's also--you also have to take into account the number of or the change in the population base and, and, and that kind of thing.  So whether it--while it's absolutely more, whether or not it's relatively more or whether it's proportionately more, I don't know--
Story_ID: 209645
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack Bell], you served on the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland] from 1980 until 1984--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then from 1984 you went to the Court of Special Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the differences with the Court Of Special Appeals and that process as well.
Speaker 2: Well, see, the Court of Special Appeals is the first tier of the appellate system.  I mean, there you're not--you're not driving the system, the system is being driven by the trial courts, and what you're doing is trying to monitor the actions of the trial court.  It's a--it's a question of determining whether the trial court did it right or committed an error, so you're reviewing a paper record for the most part and you're making a decision based on that paper record and the arguments that are made by the attorney.  You don't see the clients.  And, in fact, your decision has nothing to do with whether or not the--you believe the client or not.  It's not your job.  Your job is merely to determine whether or not in making a particular ruling, the trial judge was right or wrong or, or could conceivably be right or wrong, whether he instructed a jury properly or not.  So it, it is a--it's a less active, in a real sense, position than a trial court is.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy the Court of Special Appeals as much as you did the circuit court?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think--I think trial court is, is, is much more interesting.  It's--it--it's, it's, it's better for me.  Although, there are some challenges that are presented by the intellectual issues or the issues that test the intellect that come before you.
Speaker 1: How so?  What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, the issues are you have to grapple with some, some really tough issues, complex issues.  You gotta resolve them.  You've got to write out the result, and that result is going to be there for all to see for posterity, for years and years and years.  And it's stimulating to, to grapple with some of those issues, and so in that sense, yeah, that's very challenging.  But you still are guided by or you're driven by what happened below as opposed to your driving the system from above--
Story_ID: 209646
Speaker 1: Are there any particular cases on the Court of Special Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland] that come to mind?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, a bunch of cases.  We used to do somewhere around a hundred or 110 cases per judge per year.  I'm trying to remember--you know, I don't think--I don't remember a whole bunch of cases that, that, that stand out for me.  I remember one, we had a search-and-seizure case which dealt with the whole issue of exigent circumstances and whether or not a person who opens the door to the police officer is subject to being arrested or have--or having--whether the police officer can enter the house just because the door has been opened or whether there must be some exigent circumstances to get the police officer in.  But I really don't remember a whole lot of important cases on, on that level.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: But you--you'll also remember that--see, I'm not one who, who focuses very much on the cases or focuses very much on the names of cases or things of that sort.  I, I, I won't--
Speaker 1: What do you--
Speaker 2: I could hear one tomorrow and I might not remember it.
Speaker 1: What do you focus on?
Speaker 2: You know, my--it is not individual cases that, that I--that I'm concerned about.  I, I think more about process than anything else and, and in recent years particularly, I've been more concerned about issues that, that don't relate directly to trial.  I mean, I'm talking about things like, how fair is the system?  Is there sufficient access?  Do we have enough resources in the system to ensure that a person who does not have a lawyer can get one or can get assistance in processing or trying a case?  I'm more concerned about the, the procedures that are followed in terms of trying to get a matter through the court system, not the case itself.
Story_ID: 209647
Speaker 1: You stayed on the Court of Special Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland] until 1991.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then from there, you went to the Court of Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us the difference between special appeals and appeals.
Speaker 2: Well, they're both appellate courts, of course, but the Court of Special Appeals is the court where the appeal has to go.  I mean, it is the court that has to take any appeal that comes to it.  It, it has no choice.  It, it reviews everything that is properly appealed.  Court of Appeals is a discretionary court.  That is, we don't have to hear anything except four categories of cases, death penalty cases--I mean, if a--if a death penalty has been imposed in the case, that case comes to us automatically.  We have nothing to say about it; we have to decide it.  Cases involving attorney discipline, court attorney character, those are matters that we regulate and, therefore, they come to us.  If there are questions about Maryland law being considered by a court outside of Maryland, the federal court or another state court, they may submit or certify to us a question about that particular issue of Maryland law and we have to resolve that.  And the final one is every ten years, redistricting occurs, and it is the responsibility of the Maryland Court of Appeals to review any redistricting plan that is prepared by the governor and approved by the legislature [General Assembly of Maryland].  Other than those, we have to decide whether the case is important enough for us to take, so we are what is called a certiorari court.  We only take cases that are in the public interest to decide that will have some benefit in terms of educating bench and bar, or which will further the legal policy of the state--
Story_ID: 209648
Speaker 1: How did you like the Court of Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: It's--the Court of Appeals is a court that is less busy in the sense that you don't have as many cases, so you have more time theoretically to consider and digest and decide tough issues.
Speaker 1: There are less cases even though the Court of Appeals has to take--I mean, it's not as specific as the Court of Special Appeals [Annapolis Maryland]?
Speaker 2: We, we decide which cases we take.
Speaker 1: In the Court of Appeals.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we only hear somewhere between sixteen hundred--I mean, sixteen--160 and two hundred cases a year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is spread out among seven judges.  Court of Special Appeals, you're talking about a good deal more than that.  You're, you're talking, what fifteen, sixteen hundred cases spread out among thirteen, so you can see there's a considerable--
Speaker 1: More--
Speaker 2: --difference.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you have--it's less hurried.  It's less busy, so you can--theoretically, you can spend more time considering the issues that are presented to you.
Story_ID: 209649
Speaker 1: So you served on the Court of Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland] until 1996 and then--
Speaker 2: I still serve on the Court of Appeals (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, well, well, right.  But you made history in 1996 when you became the chief judge and were appointed by the [Maryland] governor [Parris Glendening].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that, what that was like in 1996 for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a big, big change because, you know, there's a difference between being a judge on the court and not being responsible for the administration of the court, and then being the person responsible for it.  Maryland has a system which places responsibility for the entire court system in the hands of the chief judges of Court of Appeals, the budget, overall administration of the three thousand employees, the assignment responsibility for the various judges including the administrative responsibility for determining who will be administrative judge in each one of the courts, appointing the chief judge of the district court, being the face and the voice of the court--of the judiciary actually, not just the court.  In other words, I am to the judiciary what the governor is to the executive branch and what the speaker of the house and the president of the senate is to the--to the legislature.  If you looked at the three branches of government, the head of one of those three branches, that's me.  It's a tough job and at--and at the same time, you have to preside over the court.  I mean, I sit the same as everybody else and I write opinions the same as everybody else, and I'm responsible for that just like they are.  So my job consists of that primary function, which is the, the decision-making process in addition to those other things that we've talked about, the administrative stuff primarily.
Story_ID: 209650
Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting 'cause I'm wondering if you ever think how, you know, when you were sixteen years old how you were part of the court system and now, here you are just, you know, in a completely different capacity.  Do you ever kinda think about that and draw any parallels or--?
Speaker 2: I wish I could say I were--I was so deep a thinker--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --that I sat back and thought about that possibility or now that I'm here I sat and--I'm--I think about all of the significance.  I don't (laughter).  But I do realize that in everybody's life, one starts looking for goals and one sets goals.  One does not know where one's gonna end up, if one puts the will and the mind and the effort together.  But that what I guess my life points out, is that virtually anything's possible.  Because who would've thought that the youngest of three born to Rosa Lee [Jordan Bell] and Thomas Bell, sharecroppers in North Carolina, undereducated with no history of this level of achievement, would one day end up being the head of a, a court system [Maryland Courts] or would end up being a judge or would end up being a lawyer.  Who would've thought it?  But it's possible.
Story_ID: 209651
Speaker 1: Earlier, you said, I'm not the type of judge who lectures and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that kind of thing.  What type of judge are you?  What, what would people or lawyers and, you know, defendants, and--what type of judge would they say you are?
Speaker 2: I hope they say I'm fair and I try to do the right thing.  My thought is that my job is not to be a, a person who, who drives morally a result.  My job is to ensure that the result is consistent with the law and the Constitution [of Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Is--
Speaker 2: --under which we operate.
Speaker 1: Is it hard to separate the two sometimes?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's terribly hard.  I mean, if you're the last say--if you've got the last say, then it--it's easy to, to, to impose your own view of the world on somebody else.  It's much more difficult to keep it all in perspective and say, "I don't like this result, but this is the result that is required."
Speaker 1: How do you keep it all in perspective?  How do you keep it all in perspective?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure that I can explain it other than to say that I have a, a, abiding commitment to the rule of law as I see it and, and I'm continually trying to test what I do against that premise, that it's the rule of law that, that controls.  And, and I'm sure I fall short because I'm sure it's, it's difficult for anybody to, to maintain a perfect focus, but all you can do is continue to, to, to recognize what your role is and continue to work toward ensuring that you do as best you can, the job of staying within that role.  It's hard work.  It means that you've gotta--you, you can't let your guard down.  You can't--you can't get comfortable.  You, you got to--you gotta always be on edge to some extent and testing yourself to make sure that what you're doing is consistent with your view of the world in terms of what your role is as opposed to being consistent with the way you'd like the world to be.
Story_ID: 209652
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy will be, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell?
Speaker 2: I have no clue.
Speaker 1: What would you like for it to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As I said, I just want people to say that I tried to do the--and this reminds me of Thurgood Marshall, you know, he said, "What do you want 'em to think of?"  He said, "Well, I--he, he did the best he could with what he had."  You know, I'd like for people to just think that I, I--I've tried to, to do the best job I could given all of the circumstances under which I operated.
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, Judge Bell, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: What stands out?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, the most.
Speaker 2: You know, I guess the thing that stands out is that I really have--I really have achieved the goal that I set for myself, which was to become a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Far surpassed that goal.  Or would you say--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not so sure of that--
Speaker 1: --you surpassed?
Speaker 2: I mean, it's--I achieved the goal.  I mean, and that was the big thing.  And having done that, I guess--maybe you can say I achieved--I exceeded it by far, but to me, the critical thing was to achieve that.
Story_ID: 209653
Speaker 1: Any regrets?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Absolutely not.  Why would I have any?
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: That's right, I don't.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: What haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: Retire.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And--
Speaker 2: I'm tired, that's all (laughter).
Speaker 1: When do you anticipate that happening?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I--you know, I could retire tomorrow.  I've been--I've been able to retire from the standpoint of the vesting of a pension since I was sixteen--see, sixteen years--almost fourteen years ago, but I don't know.  I, I'm--I have no idea yet.  I'll have to see.  But I'm just tired right now, that's why I said that (laughter).
Speaker 1: And quickly, what, what are you gonna do when you retire?
Speaker 2: Again, I'll refer to Thurgood [Marshall].  Thurgood said, "I'm gonna sit on my butt, and that's right," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you very much, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 209654
Speaker 1: Circa 1981 when I was appointed to--when I had been elected to the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland], and that was my official photograph at the time.
Speaker 2: I like it.  Hang on one second, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's the same--that's the same person (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Circa 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I took a, a different official photograph to replace the other one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's--that's--
Speaker 1: And if you could go from left to right, if you don't mind.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The--all right, that's Areka [ph.]--what is Areka's last name?  Areka.  I mean, I, I can't think of her last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's okay.
Speaker 2: That's me, Connie [Langford] used to be my, my secretary.
Speaker 1: What's Connie's last name?
Speaker 2: Langford.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And don't even tell me--I knew--that was one of my--both those were my two law clerks at the same time and, and Vonda [Reed] will give you the names.
Speaker 1: Okay, sure.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: And about what year?
Speaker 2: This would've been--you know, that, that would've been 1996?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's [Maryland] Governor Parris Glendening who, who, who named me chief judge, that's me, and that's Harry Hughes, former governor of the State of Maryland, who appointed me to the Court of Special Appeals [Annapolis, Maryland] and to the circuit court.
Speaker 2: In about what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, that is '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: 1996.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's definitely '96 [1996].  That's when I was named chief judge.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's just that whoever does the photographs may not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's Kathleen Kennedy Townsend who was lieutenant governor [of Maryland], Governor Parris Glendening, me, and John Willis, the secretary of state [of Maryland].  Now, that's October 23, 1996.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Judge.
Speaker 1: That's when I was being sworn in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ah (laughter).  That's--at the bottom, that's me swearing in the present lieutenant governor, Michael Steele, and in between us is his wife [Andrea Derritt Steele].
Speaker 2: Okay, and that--
Speaker 1: And that is--that's January of 2002.
Speaker 2: Two, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, 2003.
Speaker 2: Right, January--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: January, 2003.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's me on the left, believe it or not--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --and I'm talking to my buddy, Arnold Marion Jolivet.  That is--
Speaker 2: Could you spell Jolivet?
Speaker 1: J-O-L-I-V-E-T.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What year?
Speaker 1: That is in the--that's nineteen sixty--I think it's nineteen sixty--it's either '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were still at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I was student--it--it's gotta be '66 [1966].  I was student governor president and I had named Arnold the chief justice of the student court.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh--
Speaker 1: Oh, God.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: These are my grandnephews.  I don't even wanna try to tell you who all these people are.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was taken, Judge?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can tell you.  That, that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: -that would've been nineteen--1991.
Speaker 2: Another--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that's also around 1991.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Those are all of my law clerks.  Now you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --don't want me to tell you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's okay.
Speaker 1: --all those people.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So all of your law clerks throughout the--throughout your twenty-five--
Speaker 1: No, no, that's only some of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but, but that--that's some of 'em.  What you got is also two of my secretaries, Connie sitting there and right behind Connie is Rita [ph.].  Both of them are my secretaries.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And about what year was this one taken?
Speaker 1: This was about 1990--wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Is it easier to see--look on the monitor?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess, 1991 I would think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is you right here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The reason I say that is because--yeah, that's me.  The reason I say that is because I do not see my present secretaries.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If it--had, had it been '96 [1996]--yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, God.
Speaker 2: And so, Judge Bell, when you see them in the monitor--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So when you see them in the monitor, [Edgar] Carey [Lane] will zoom in on 'em, then you can talk about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Judge.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Paul Smith [ph.] on the left, I'm in the middle, and Arrie Davis who was on the Court of Special Appeals, is on the right.  Now, that had to be early '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and it had to be before '82 [1982] because I--or actually it's probably--I got my hair cut--so it, it had to be before I got my hair cut, so it would be early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay, early '80s [1980s], that's fine.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me and, and actually that's in--that's sometime after 1996.  I, I was chief judge [of Maryland] at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, that's, that's in 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that one is in 1980--that would be 19--around 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, I think I was about to leave to go to the Court of Special Appeals when that was taken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think that's it in there, right?  All right.
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  Trying to remember--let's see--
Speaker 1: I know that's Bob Dean [ph.].
Speaker 2: It is Bob Dean, and, and this would've been last--it's two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2002?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was the--at the J. Franklyn Bourne [Bar Association] function, year 2002, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  I--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, God. I don't know when that is, yeah.  I'm--it looks like I'm, I'm--
Speaker 1: You're speaking.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--well, you have on a skinny tie, so what, maybe like--
Speaker 2: No, that's not a skinny tie.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: No, this--no this is--this is really--I can tell by the haircut.  I was chief judge then, so it's--
Speaker 1: So, 1996?
Speaker 2: It's after '96 [1996], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: So we'll say mid to late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was in Puerto Rico last summer.
Speaker 1: Can you name the other two?
Speaker 2: I can--I can name one of 'em.  I don't know this lady on the--on the left.  But on the right, that's Annice Wagner, A-N-N-I-C-E--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who is the chief judge of the D.C. [District of Columbia] Court of Appeals [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is a very nice photo.
Speaker 1: This is--that's, that's Bob [Robert I.H.] Hammerman, Robert Hammerman, [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell on the right, and I'm in the middle.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a nice photo.
Speaker 1: And that is--that occurred in nineteen ninety--I think it was '97 [1997] or '98 [1998], probably '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a nice photograph, Judge Bell--
Speaker 1: What?  The, the--
Speaker 2: This one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Just--
Speaker 1: Well, no, let me--let me--let me just say something to you.  I don't like the man.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: But it's still a nice--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, Judge--
Speaker 2: You know, I'm glad--you know, I'm glad I didn't bring the one with, with [Justice] Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I got that one--I got one--well, there was two (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh that's my--yeah, that's my--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my--that's my--that's my--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's--that's my--interestingly enough, you know, that's not a bad picture either.
Speaker 1: No, it's not.
Speaker 2: That my yearbook picture from Morgan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, what 1966?
Speaker 2: That's 1965.
Speaker 1: 1965, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 209655
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Rosa Lee [Jordan] Bell (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: About what year was that photograph taken of your mother, [HistoryMaker] Judge [Robert Mack] Bell?
Speaker 2: That picture would've been--oh, God.  It would've been within a couple years of her death.
Speaker 1: So like 2000 maybe?
Speaker 2: Maybe 2000, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my mother when she was very young.  She used to always try to tell us that was her sister--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --Sally [ph.], but, no, that's ma.  She was very young--I'm not even sure how old she was.  She was--but she was extremely young.
Speaker 1: How, how old would you guess, Judge Bell?  She looks about maybe anywhere from like fourteen to sixteen.
Speaker 2: Well, I think she was probably- -I think she was probably a little bit older than that.
Speaker 1: If you had to guess a year, what would you guess?
Speaker 2: I'd give you sixteen then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--and what year was your mother born?
Speaker 2: In '18 [1918].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: 1918.
Speaker 1: --we're looking like nineteen--what is that '34 [1934] maybe?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And I presume these are your three, your two brothers [Ellison Bell and Joe Louis Bell]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me see.  Yeah, that's us.  That's all of us (laughter).  That's all of us, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: There's another one up here too--they--now that one is--now that one was in 1996.
Speaker 2: Okay, and can you just name everyone from left to right?
Speaker 1: Ellison--Ellison Bell, that's my oldest brother, my mother, me, and Joe Louis Bell, my, my other brother.
Speaker 2: And your mother was Rosa Lee--
Speaker 1: Rosa Lee--
Speaker 2: --Bell.
Speaker 1: --Bell, right, um-hm.  Now that one right there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And are these your parents [Rosa Lee Jordan Bell and Thomas Bell]?
Speaker 1: That's my parents, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, that's me, Joe Louis Bell, Rosa Lee Bell, and Ellison Bell, and this was done in 1994, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Thomas Bell and Rosa Lee Bell.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think?
Speaker 1: God.  You know, that one would've been sometime in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I betcha that would've been--it was before--he died in '76 [1976], so it would've been in the '70s [1970s], probably around '73 [1973], '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Okay, great, thank you.
Speaker 1: Now, it--there's another one.  See that one right there?
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was nineteen--I'll tell ya, that was 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you and your mother.
Speaker 2: Me and my mother.  That's 1980 when I was sworn in at the Circuit Court [for Baltimore City, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now that one over there--okay, now that's the swearing in, that's William Donald Schaefer, who was the governor of the State of Maryland, my mother's holding the Bible, and I'm being sworn in to the Court of Appeals [of Maryland, Annapolis, Maryland].  That's 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay, super.
