Story_ID: 3038
Speaker 1: My name is Marion Barry, M-A-R-I-O-N, B-A-R-R-Y, Junior. I was born March 6, 1936.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We're in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 3039
Speaker 1: I usually start out with five questions. They have no relationship to anything except I start asking them when I first did it of everyone, and I'd first like to ask you what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: Burgundy, probably, in terms of accent color, but probably blue into the clothing or tan.
Speaker 1: Okay, never heard burgundy before.
Speaker 2: You have burgundy socks and shoes on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Burgundy tie (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's cute. And what's your favorite food.
Speaker 2: Seafood of various kinds.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean [Sea].
Speaker 1: Okay and--we just got back from the Caribbean--and favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring and fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) "If it should be, it's up to me."
Story_ID: 3040
Speaker 1: But I want to start out by asking you about your mother and her name and I'd like you to describe, you know, about her and, you know, what type of person she was?
Speaker 2: My mother is still alive, thank God for that. Her name is Mattie Cummings, C-U-M-M-I-N-G-S. She's eighty-three years of age [in 2000]. She was born in Mississippi and she married my father when she was about nineteen or twenty years of age--he was much older, and they were sharecroppers in Mississippi. Means that you leased your land from some white person and you grow cotton, and you pick cotton, and you chop cotton, and you sell the cotton, and on the side you'll grow pigs and vegetables and other things that you can use to, you know, survive on. And it's a funny thing about that--every year you end up in the red as opposed to the black, I mean that because they manipulate the figures. And we moved to Memphis [Tennessee] when I was eight years of age and she was a domestic--she went to about the third or fourth grade, I guess, in school. And then she got a job at a packing company, which is a pretty good paying job. We stayed in Memphis. And she's, you know, doing housework, as they called it, after the packing company closed and I guess she retired about fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to go back--.
Speaker 2: She's a very religious person. She's, you know, one of those God-fearing, praying kind of mothers, you know, that really believes in encouraging me to succeed in spite of the difficulties and the challenges ahead. And we were very, very poor, very little money in our family and I had to work two or three jobs to try to make it through high school, and then make it through college waiting tables doing a whole number of other things, but she was very supportive, been supportive. And just about three weeks ago, we went to a retreat in Florida. I took my son, who's twenty years of age, and my mother and they slept together and stayed together--they stayed in the same room together--and had a lot of fun. That was the second time we've done so they can sort of bond with each other. But she's strong willed. She's still ambulatory, a little arthritis in the back but she's a just great, great, great, great, great woman, great, great character, great stamina, and just beautiful.
Story_ID: 3041
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back though and have you tell a little bit about her family and what you know of her side of the family. You said she was born in Mississippi. I want to know where and do you know much about her parents or even her grandparents?
Speaker 2: The only thing I know about is my grandmother, Miss Lillie Nash, who lived in Chicago [Illinois] for about sixty-odd years before she passed some years back. I know very little, hardly anything about my father's side of the family. As I said, my mother [Mattie Cummings] left when I was eight coming to Chicago really, literally, but my grandmother I knew and, you know, I'd visit her in Chicago, and I came to work in Chicago, I stayed with her in Chicago. And I don't know anything--I know her mother's name but I don't recall every meeting her mother and she had one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother ever talk anything about growing up?
Speaker 2: About me growing up?
Speaker 1: No, her growing up?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, but my grandmother left Mississippi, I don't know when, but it was very early in my mother's life. I think she left a little bit after I was born or maybe even before. Back in those days we didn't talk a lot about family and roots and who her grandmother was or who her mother was. I know a little bit about it now because we have had family reunions where my great, great, great, great, great, I guess, grandfather goes back to slavery from the bland side, helps explain so I know that much about it from that side of the family, but we don't know a lot more, I don't anyway.
Story_ID: 3042
Speaker 1: Okay and did she [Barry's mother Mattie Cummings] ever talk about how she met your father [Marion Barry, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, I mean they were somewhere in the same general area and I guess they just sort of ran across each other. She didn't tell me anything specific about it though.
Speaker 1: Okay and your father, what is known about him?
Speaker 2: Not a lot. Not a lot.
Speaker 1: Not a lot except you're Junior?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I said, we left [Itta Bena] Mississippi when I was eight years of age--and I remember him vaguely. My mother talks a little bit about him, but after we left Mississippi she lost contact with him and so I don't know much about him at all.
Speaker 1: Okay. Has she ever, in growing up, said you're like your father in this way or--
Speaker 2: Not really, not too much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She said I look a little bit like him. Or walk like him (laughs).
Story_ID: 3043
Speaker 1: And you have two sisters, right?
Speaker 2: I really have four sisters.
Speaker 1: I was confusing the material.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two sisters by the same father [Marion Barry, Sr.] and the same mother [Mattie Cummings]. I have two sisters by the same mother and different father than my father.
Speaker 1: I mean, I'd like to know their names and ages. I mean, you know, we'll just go down--
Speaker 2: Well, Lillie is the oldest and she's a year and nine months--
Speaker 1: Give first and last name.
Speaker 2: She'd know better--well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's just a Barry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. She didn't marry?
Speaker 2: When she got married then she got unmarried, kept the same name, so I mean it can get confusing. She passed some three years ago. My next oldest sister is Elizabeth. She lives in Memphis [Tennessee]. She has one son who's my nephew. He lives in Bowie, Maryland. He went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], got a degree in communications. He's a heck of a cameraman. He does this kind of stuff that cameramen do at the Howard University [television] station [WHUT], then he moved to the public education [television] station [WETA], Channel 26, so he was the cameraman there. They have one son--he has one son that's about nine years of age. Then my other sister, Gloria, is ten years younger than I am, so she must be fifty-four and then Shirley was about thirteen years younger than I am and Shirley passed almost twenty years ago during childbirth. She had a congenital heart problem that flared up when she had her daughter.
Story_ID: 3044
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about growing up in--it's Itto Bena?
Speaker 2: Itta Bena, I-t-t-a.
Speaker 1: I-t-t--Itta Bena.
Speaker 2: In Mississippi they call it "Ate-oh" Bena (phonetic).
Speaker 1: Oh, "Ate-oh" Bena.
Speaker 2: "Ate-oh" Bena, Mississippi. In fact, there's a university, Mississippi Valley State University [Itta Bena, Mississippi] is there, that's where Jerry Rice [football player] went to school. Everybody knows who he is. He played for the San Francisco 49ers [football team].
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first, any part of memory that you'd like to share with us about growing up there?
Speaker 2: In Mississippi?  Not a lot. I remember when I was very, very young. My mother [Mattie Cummings]--picking cotton is where you put a sack on your back and you pick cotton and you put the cotton in the sack. I remember being dragged on the sack while she was picking. She'd just have me on the sack dragging, you know, dragging and dragging the sack. And, you know, I used to play after school. Now, you know, not much to play with, but just, you know, play outside with other young people. And a very funny thing I remember, which is kind of interesting, the Greyhound bus came right up the highway from where I lived and a lot of people were leaving Mississippi on the Greyhound bus--and on the railroad too--but the bus. And it stopped everywhere, not like now where you go to the station. It just stopped along the way, you see, you wave, you flag the Greyhound down. So some of us guys used to go up and watch the Greyhound bus (laughs). I guess we wanted to get on it and, I guess, and leave, but that was our little play thing, you know, every couple days we'd go--Greyhound bus. We were fascinated by the bus, I guess, and the Greyhound on the side of the bus. But, you know, I went to school in a little one room shack somewhere. I guess when I was first--second grade. And I used to try to pick cotton a little bit, but then I was too young to pick cotton and I used to just mess around and take the cotton boles and put it in the sack. I probably picked ten pounds a day, probably.
Speaker 1: And you, in terms of the sisters, where did you fit--were they older than you?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: The only boy, yeah.
Speaker 1: The only boy in all this, okay. So when you--so do you have any other memories of that time otherwise I'll--?
Speaker 2: Not too much, going to the grocery store to get things. Incidentally, what happened back in those days, you very rarely used cash when you went to the grocery store. They used to call "putting you on the book," and there was a purpose in that so they could cheat you, that's what that's all about. I learned that after the fact that they probably--if you bought eight dollars, they probably put ten dollars down or twelve dollars down. And unless you, you know, kept track of it yourself, at the end of the cotton growing season when you sold your cotton is when you went to the store and do what you call a "settle up." You made--oh, $800 or $900, but it was always more than you probably should've been paying. We were going to the store--I went to church, one of those little country churches, you know, back in the country someplace. It'd be dirt roads. There were no paved roads back there, all dirt roads except the highway. And the town I was born in was really not a town, just a name, 'cause even now I think they only have about 6,000 people in that town including the college students that are there. And see we have a black mayor too, first black mayor about three years ago, four years ago, black woman, but not a lot--not a lot about that.
Story_ID: 3045
Speaker 1: So what precipitated the move to Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: My mother [Mattie Cummings] was leaving my father [Marion Barry, Sr.], that's what she told me.
Speaker 1: And why do you think she choose Memphis?
Speaker 2: We had our relatives in Memphis. And so we were literally on our way to Chicago [Illinois]. My mother said we're going to Chicago because her mother was there, my grandmother was in Chicago. We have relatives all over Chicago and so, you know, it was not unusual for Mississippians and people from Louisiana and from other southern states to go to Chicago. And my mother didn't have enough money to go beyond Memphis. She said "we'll go to Memphis." We took the Greyhound bus to it (laughs), to Memphis and said "I'll work for a little while and make some money then we'll go to Chicago," 'cause she wanted to come to Chicago because my grandmother lived in Chicago. We got to Memphis, we have relatives there, and we started living with an aunt of mine. And my mother got a job as a domestic somewhere and working in somebody's kitchen and then she got this job at the packing company, which was a good paying job, decided to stay. I'm glad we did.
Story_ID: 3046
Speaker 1: Now tell me, when you moved to Memphis [Tennessee] what was that experience like because obviously you were in a town [Itta Bena, Mississippi] that was, you know, very small and you're really moving to the city, so--
Speaker 2: Well, almost like, I guess, a culture shock, you know, the usual--paved streets and cars on the streets and, you know, back in Mississippi there were very few cars, mostly people use wagons and buggies and horses, you know, to travel around. We never had a car and nobody I knew (unclear) had a car. One guy I know had an old truck, pickup truck. So moving to Memphis was just a heck of a culture shock, you know, and I was fascinated, you know, by Memphis. And we lived right next to, I guess, one of these railroad express delivery package kind of thing as it preceded FedEx and [U.S] Postal Service and et cetera. And I can't remember exactly all of it, but I know I started school. No, school was out during that time. We must've come during the summertime, I don't remember--anyway, I start school in the area where I lived. And about three or four months we moved from one area in Memphis to an area further out from the city. Now that was much more rural even though they had paved streets and some paved sidewalks. It was still not as city-like as where I first moved, a place Douglas. It was still in the city limits but it was much more rural in its character. And, obviously, it was a segregated neighborhood because everything in Memphis was segregated. Then I started school at a school named Douglas High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. I think I was in third grade, fourth grade, I can't remember all that. And then we stayed there for a couple of years and we moved to another part of Memphis called South Memphis, which was much more cosmopolitan and much more built up than Douglas. Then I started the elementary--I went to a elementary school called Florida Street School [Memphis, Tennessee] and graduated from Florida Street School in 1950.
Speaker 1: Well, you actually moved closer into the city?
Speaker 2: South, into an area called South Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I went to Florida Elementary School--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Until the eight grade.
Speaker 1: So if you were eight you got there in 1944, 1945?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so you lived in the Douglas area how many years?
Speaker 2: A couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I moved to South Memphis and we stayed there for at least four years. Then I graduated from elementary school, then I went to two years of high school at a school called Booker T. Washington Senior High [Memphis, Tennessee]--every community's got a George Washington Carver or Booker T. Washington or one of those kinds of schools, you know, black schools.
Story_ID: 3047
Speaker 1: So tell me what you were like at that point in your life. I mean, what's the young Marion Barry like?
Speaker 2: Well I was very, I don't want to say ambitious, but I was very much work oriented. I mean, even when I was in elementary school--well, when I was going to elementary school, my mother [Mattie Cummings]--as I said we were dirt poor 'cause by that time the packing company had closed and she was back into domestic work, you know. And back in those days I even chopped cotton when I was in the ninth grade at three dollars a day, thirty cent an hour, ten hours a day, in the hot sun and I don't want to do that again ever, but that's what I had to do to try to survive. And another thing I did--I was always a sort of a genius about trying to figure out how earn money. My mother would make me two sandwiches, maybe peanut butter sandwiches or bologna sandwiches or some other kind of fun sandwiches. so I cut them in half and I'd sell one of the sandwiches. Every day I was selling sandwiches trying to earn some money. I don't know how much it was, five cent, ten cent, something like that, but the idea was to try to, you know, make some money. I carried the morning paper, carried the evening paper. I worked at restaurants when I was a sophomore. I worked for the American Legion [veterans organization], which was awful because these were all white veterans and they get drunk and call me "nigger" like that. I worked there about seven days, I couldn't take it. I told the manager "I'm going to hit somebody in the mouth," you know, I couldn't take that kind of abuse. You know, if I was called "boy" I could take that maybe, but not nigger. So I worked there and worked at Pepsi Cola bottling company at night, you know, watching the bottles go up to the machine. What else did I do? I used to sell pop bottles. I was just always trying to find ways to earn a little money legitimately, so anything I could do to earn money, if it was a nickel, dime, a quarter, I would do so.
Speaker 1: Did you feel because you were the oldest and you were a boy did you feel that you had a responsibility to help or do you think it was expected back then?
Speaker 2: Not really. My mother used to make me carry my sisters around. I hated it. "You have to go with Elizabeth." I said "I don't want to do that," and one time I left my sister in the movie and went home and my mother's, "Where's Elizabeth?"  I said, "I don't know where she is. She's in the movies somewhere." (Claps hands) Beat the hell out of me, took me back up to the movie and found her in the manager's office and took her back home and gave me another spanking. No, I didn't feel any kind of responsibility for my sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you feel any responsibility to be the man of the house?
Speaker 2: No. I had a stepfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, so your mother got married again?
Speaker 2: Yeah, several times.
Story_ID: 3048
Speaker 1: Also when I was growing up--as I said I was always ambitious and trying to find ways to earn legitimate money. But at church--my mother [Mattie Cummings] made me go to church every Sunday. I hated church at that time. And at our church though, every second Sunday young people stay, so we had to do something. And I couldn't sing that well, so I didn't get in the choir. So I took saying poems, that's why I think it helped me to learn how to speak publicly in terms of doing that and doing that. And there was a guy named Harold Sims [activist] who was head of the [National] Urban League for a quick minute when Whitney Young [activist] died, was my mentor. He was a year ahead of me and I used to say little poems. I think the first poem I said was  'The House by the Side of the Road' [by Sam Walter Foss].  "Let me live in a house by the side of the road--" something like that. Then I got to 'If' [by Rudyard Kipling], then I got to 'The Creation' by James Weldon Johnson [poet], that was a classic and so practiced that. I'd practice in the mirror, I did things, so I finally did that Sunday. My mother was just so excited about the fact that I had made my little debut doing that kind of stuff. So I did that at church and--let me see, I'm trying to think of some other things. Believe it or not, when I was growing up I was very bashful, very shy, very, I guess, insecure about myself. 'Cause I was around guys and ladies who had a lot more money and they were sons and daughters of working people who made a lot more money. Sons and daughters--this is a famous high school [Booker T. Washington Senior High, Memphis, Tennessee] I went to. Everybody wanted to go to that high school because it was the high school to go to, with 2,000 students. These were sons and daughters of morticians and preachers and teachers and so I really felt very insecure because I had--nobody in my family ever gone to college, I was the first one to go to college. But I think I started outgrowing that when I was a junior in high school. I started running for student government positions and played a little football, a little basketball and I was very bright. I'm not being egotistical about that, but I made good grades. Some of the football players would sometimes pay me to assist them and quite frankly--the statute of limitations is over--take the exam for them or tell them what the answers were--they'd be sitting there, I'd be doing my--I'd just give 'em the answers. They'd pay me, you know, entrepreneurship at that age, you know, it's not right to do. But, I guess, in my junior year I started sort of outgrowing a little bit of the shyness. I'm still somewhat shy and timid in much of my private self. My public self I try to exude, you know, confidence and a number of other things. And when I was a senior, probably getting a lot better at that.
Speaker 2: What do you think made you start changing around, you know, your junior year?
Speaker 1: I don't know, just watching other guys who I liked and respected. They were running for student government--president and other offices--and I decided I needed to do something, you know, it sort of evolved, you know, with it. I think in my Sunday school, we had this Sunday school class that was very lively so I had to talk up, you know, and argue my positions about things. You know when you're talking about Jesus and so on. So I had to argue it, so I think during that process I just learned how to speak up, speak out, and then have more confidence in my own ability.
Story_ID: 3049
Speaker 1: And what do you think were some of the major influences? Church was a major influence--or church was something you had to do?
Speaker 2: Church was still a major influence--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In terms of just being involved and helping me to develop my own character and as well as--I said Sunday school class assisted me in being able to have to argue to speak up with these guys. They were very, you know, they were--most of them were a year or two ahead of me in school and that helped a lot. The Boy Scouts [of America] helped me, excuse me, I joined Boy Scouts--in fact I became an Eagle Scout, one of the few black Eagle Scouts in Tennessee or in the South. That helped me a lot. I mean, you know, I learned how to swim as a Scout. I had took a life saving course so I can learn how to be a life saver. I got merit badges. I did camping. Again, that taught me some leadership because, you know, I was moving ahead and young guys right behind me were sort of trying to emulate my merit badges. These are little badges you get for doing certain tasks in the Scouts and I'm proud of that. That helped me a great deal. So other than church, Scouting. 'Cause my neighborhood was not a neighborhood that was very positive in terms of--most people growing up most people didn't go to college most people didn't do anything but just hang out. Some went to jail and back in those days drugs certainly were not a major problem 'cause that wasn't happening like it is today among young people, so that's helped to shape me a little bit.
Story_ID: 3050
Speaker 1: And school--let me ask you this--were there any teachers that were your favorite teachers? Were there any subjects that were you favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Well, science was my favorite subject area, math and physics and chemistry. I always liked that. I was fascinated with those subjects. A number of teachers, Ms. Cassaway. Then I had another teacher who taught us political science, and Nat Williams who was a local DJ [disc jockey] and helped to found a local black radio station, so Nat D. Williams. And there were other teachers. Mrs. Johnson when I was in elementary school [Florida Street Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] but I don't remember all those teachers now, it's been so long, but I was fascinated with science. In fact, I was good at it too.
Speaker 1: And why were you fascinated with it?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, you get fascinated with the things, you know? My mind was always, I guess, an inquiring kind of mind. I don't know why you get fascinated with that, at least I don't know why.
Speaker 1: Okay and what about the quality of education you feel you received at that time?
Speaker 2: It was good--even though it was segregated it was good. I mean they had some outstanding elementary school, high school teachers who really gave it their best, because back in the day the teaching profession was much more an area that black people went into for real, not just because it was the only thing they could do. In fact because they couldn't do a lot of other things, teaching became a very fashionable thing to do, and I had some very, very good teachers who taught me, even though we were in segregated schools, they did it very, very with me in terms of teaching.
Story_ID: 3051
Speaker 1: Your mother worked as a domestic, which was very common back then. Did she ever, you know, complain? Did you have any perception of, you know, being a domestic?
Speaker 2: Of course she complained. She didn't like it. I mean she used to, you know, work for some people that she'd describe 'em, nasty white people, you know, who didn't talk to her in any kind of dignified way. Oh, she hated it but she had no--well, at the time she saw no alternative except for do that.
Story_ID: 3052
Speaker 1: And who were your friends, some of your friends, you know, maybe in high school, who were some of your--
Speaker 2: Oh, God, there are three guys, that--well, we were friends in high school but we became very, very good friends when we were in college. A guy named Kenneth Cole, Logan Westbrook, and Alan--what's Alan's last name? It'll come to me shortly. And we used to hang out together and they were always--in fact they assisted me in developing because they were all active. Two of them were a year behind me. Kenneth and I were in the same grade but different classrooms, homerooms. Those were the main three or four guys who I'd hang out with.
Story_ID: 3053
Speaker 1: Now, that's what I want to know--what would you guys sit around and talk about? What were your dreams and ambitions at that time or what were you saying you wanted to be or?
Speaker 2: You know we really didn't do a lot of discussing. Imagine in high school and there wasn't much discussion. Most of it was about athletics or about Friday's football game or occasionally about women. We used to shoot dice in the corner, you know (laughs), and sort of hang out on the corner. I mean, I was not much of a drinker in high school. I think I started drinking wine when I was a senior in high school, it was Thunderbird [wine, generally considered low-quality], I think (laughs). We just played the dozens [game of exchanging insults], you know, just hang out. We played basketball after school. We'd used to take these apple crates, you know, these baskets and make us a basket 'cause we didn't have any goals--you take it and nail it up on a post, put your backboard on it and so that was, you know, have you seen those baskets, like, that apples or something come in, big bushel baskets what they call them. We used to make those into basketball goals, pass the basketball, shoot, play to nine, ten o'clock at night. Sometimes in the dark when the light was just very low, didn't do much else.
Story_ID: 3054
Speaker 1: You said that no one in your family had gone to college and I'm wondering--you could have easily not gone as gone. What made you want to go?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I think probably William Hawkins [Barry's friend] and several people at my church had a lot to do with that. But I had no idea what college was until I was junior in high school. I mean, I didn't pick my college, not like these young people now. They know about the Ph.D., the master's [degree], the bachelor's [degree] and all this kind of stuff. And since William Hawkins and several other people were a year ahead of me--so here I am a junior in high school--same school, Booker T. Washington [Senior High School, Memphis, Tennessee]--and they were seniors in high school. I hear them talking about getting ready to go to college and getting ready to do this and do this and so I said--I asked them "well, what's college?"  I didn't know what the hell college was. And so when I became a senior I applied to about a half a dozen schools. LeMoyne College [Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] was a local college. I applied to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and a couple of other schools. These were schools I'd heard about. I didn't know much about them, I just heard they were great black schools and so I thought "let me try the black"--got accepted to them. But I didn't go to Morehouse because they had this work-study program. I had to have some kind of financial aid, and back in the day they didn't have any government's financial aid, you had to just get it where you got it from. And they had this program where in the summer you go up into Connecticut and pull tobacco. I said "well that might be something I'd do," but then I got the information on bringing your boots and umbrellas and raincoats, and I said "no, sir," 'cause I'd done enough chalkin' cotton and all,  so "I'm not doing that." If I had to go to college, I'm not going to do that. So in the mean time I got a partial scholarship to LeMoyne College--I went to LeMoyne College. So that's what helped me to understand what, I guess, the guys in my Sunday school class I used to hang out with.
Speaker 1: And LeMoyne is based in?
Speaker 2: Memphis.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about LeMoyne.
Speaker 2: It's a historically black institution. I think it was founded back in 1877 [sic, 1861] by the American Missionary Society [sic, American Missionary Association] or the forerunners or the Congregational Church, and you know, the Church of Christ and all these churches sort of merged in later years. But they started, you know, for ex-slaves and the daughters and sons of ex-slaves. It's a small school, about 1,000 students. It's accredited. For a long time it had a white president. I think Hollis Price [educator] was the first black president. There was a lot of these--private schools they have white presidents, majority of the white board of directors and those kind of things. And it was a good school. It was right for me, because I decided to major in chemistry. And now why I made that decision because back in Memphis there were like five or six things that black people would do. You'd be a social worker or a teacher or a mortician or a funeral director, a preacher, a lawyer, doctor, or dentist. Now I was dirt poor so I knew I couldn't be a doctor--at least I thought at the time I couldn't be a doctor or lawyer or dentist. I didn't have that kind of money. Didn't want to be a preacher, wasn't interested in being a funeral director, trying to be one anyway. And I really didn't want to teach, I wanted to do research, so I decided to go into chemistry. And it was this long thing about why I wanted to go into chemistry from LeMoyne College. So I went into chemistry.
Speaker 1: And were you living on campus?
Speaker 2: No, it's a community college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lived at home.
Story_ID: 3055
Speaker 1: So you lived at home, okay, and you were still working? Were you working?
Speaker 2: Working and walking to school [LeMoyne College, Memphis Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] and every day I walked down about three or four miles to school. I didn't have enough money to catch the bus.
Speaker 1: Now what was the family saying at this point, were they supportive? Was your mother supportive or was your father supportive?
Speaker 2: My mother [Mattie Cummings] was very supportive. My mother had married twice so I think the second husband was supportive, but he wasn't--my stepfather, both of them, never treated me like I was their son in the sense of, you know, the kind of bonding that goes on. They, you know, were married to my mother, that was about it, I was in the house. Neither one of my stepfathers ever punished me or disciplined me. I don't know why, they probably should've. So my mother, of course she was supportive, very supportive and my sisters were supportive too.
Story_ID: 3056
Speaker 1: Was there any other thing memorable about your time at LeMoyne [College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College], you know, during those--
Speaker 2: I mean I was active on campus. I played college basketball. I wasn't a natural basketball player. I just did it 'cause I wanted to do it and also you got free lunches, so that was another reason I played basketball, you got free lunches. And you travel. You know, we traveled to New Orleans [Louisiana] to play Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] and we traveled to Nashville [Tennessee] to play Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], so, you know, we were traveling. Then I ran track, again for the same reason, to have a good free lunch 'cause I had to pay for that. I wasn't a track star, but I mean I was on the team. And then I got active with student government association. In my junior year I became president of the LeMoyne chapter NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. We had a movement on campus, you know, just concerned about civil rights in the city 'cause everything was segregated. In my senior year, it must've been about April or May, I wrote a letter to the president of the college. We had a former mayor, Walter Chandler, on the board of trustees at LeMoyne College. He was a lawyer, and he had taken on the case of defending the city against NAACP desegregation suit. We didn't mind it, that's his profession, you know, if you want to take on that. But he said some derogatory things about black people in the process. And so I wrote a letter to the president, Hollis Price [educator]. I said, "Mr. President, I don't understand how you can have a white person or any person on the Board of Trustees at this college," you know, 99.999 percent black college, "saying derogatory things about black people. He ought to either apologize or he ought to resign from the board." And I wrote the letter, I guess, on a Thursday, so then the editor of the student newspaper convinced me that the newspaper will run the letter in the paper, front page, you know. "Barry writes letter to president denouncing Walter Chandler." Here you have this white man who was former mayor, his father was former mayor and so they were like institutions in Memphis. "How dare some of those upstarts--or attack," you know, "this kind of guy." And then the next day on a Saturday it came out in the morning paper, front page news, about I had written this letter demanding an apology or resignation from the Board of Trustees. And it just so happened the Monday after the Saturday Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was coming to Memphis to speak anyway, and so Maxine Smith and other people at the head of the NAACP said "you ought to speak." And I never spoke in front that many people in my life, you know, over four or five thousand people. So I got my other speech together. Then my speech was in the paper the next day what I said, so that started out a controversy. The president called me and said he's going to put me out of school. I said, "no, you're not. You're not putting me out of school."  So I went and rallied all the other students and they had a little rally on campus saying that they didn't want me put out of school, then the president rescinded his decision to put me out of school, and I graduated, that's when I really go started in the [Civil Rights] Movement in my senior year.
Story_ID: 3057
Speaker 1: Let's describe Memphis [Tennessee], though, since, you know, you were a Memphisan--because you arrived at [age] eight [1944] and you were, I mean, you're in your twenties in college [at LeMoyne College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] and I was just wondering what was Memphis like at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, Memphis was probably the largest city in that part of the South, larger than Jackson [Mississippi] at that time, I think it was larger than New Orleans [Louisiana] and it was like the king cotton capital. A lot of the cotton was brought to Memphis and put on barges on the Mississippi [River] to go up or go down the river and so it was like a commerce center for commerce, 'cause the river, the Mississippi River was there. It bordered Arkansas, so easy to go across the river to Arkansas. And it was, I guess it was probably considered in Tennessee--it was the largest city in Tennessee so it was--I don't know the population--but it was a modern kind of town. It had a big old hotel called the Peabody Hotel, it had these ducks coming from the penthouse walking, you know, this kind of stuff. And it was the commerce center of the South, but it was segregated. Everything was segregated. I mean, I lived on the street--my street was say like this street here (points to his hand), then the streets that were perpendicular to my street there were white people on it. And I used to carry a paper so about 60 percent of my customers were black and 40 percent were white. But I used to have pass by recreation centers to go to the black recreation center, I had to pass by black, I mean, white libraries, white recreation centers, white libraries, white schools, and everything to go to do that. Even the Memphis Zoo was segregated. We could go on Thursdays, and if Thursday were a holiday, like Thanksgiving or some other time, you couldn't go, so we lost our place in going even just to see the monkeys. And the buses were segregated too. And the thing what happens, the bus may start in a predominant black community and so you move closer to the front. You could never sit in front of a white person or beside a white person, you've got to sit in the back of a white person. So as the bus got less and less black and more and more white people came on the bus, we had to get up and move from where we were and say we're maybe five seats from the front, move back to maybe ten seats from the front so white people could do that. Or take the reverse, you know, if you came on the bus where a majority of the white people on the bus you had to go pass them, even though they might be empty seats, and sit in the back of them. So everything was--even the bus stations, the train stations, everything. White only, colored only [drinking] fountains. I used to ask my mother, "why do they have those signs there?"  She said, "you can't drink out of that fountain."  I said, "why?"  She goes, "you'll get in trouble."  I'd do it anyway sometimes, you know, "I am," you know. Or we'd go to the lunch counter and said "you can't sit at the lunch counter you've got to get your food in the back." Wxcept, you know, all black restaurants you can sit where you want to sit, so that's what it's like.
Speaker 1: And in--
Speaker 2: And politics, there were no black people involved in politics. No members of the City Council. Obviously nobody that had been black had been a mayor. No members of the Board of Education were black, nobody, nowhere. I saw no black leadership during that. On the other hand I grew up at a period when Ben[jamin L.] Hooks [educator, attorney, clergyman] who was former executive director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], had a church in Memphis. He was very active in Memphis.  Another lawyer called A. W. Willis [attorney] and another one named [Russell] Sugarmon [attorney] those are the three lawyers that were trying to agitate for change in Memphis, but otherwise there was nothing there except preachers and teachers and white people and black people.
Story_ID: 3058
Speaker 1: What made you then to decide to get active on campus [LeMoyne College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College]? I mean, what was going--
Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean, I really don't. Looking back in retrospect, I don't know what made me incensed about Walter Chandler [member of the LeMoyne College Board of Trustees], but I was. And then went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], the first year I did what every graduate student does, tried to stay in school--.
Speaker 1: I want to stop you there. I don't even know why you were involved in the student chapter of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I mean why?
Speaker 2: I said I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was that just the popular thing to do?
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to do it. I don't know why. I really don't. I mean, I had my role models, my mother [Mattie Cummings] and [step]father, but that's it, nobody's involved in that kind of activity. I read about the NAACP and I knew the local leadership in the NAACP. I just don't know, I really don't.  I really don't know.
Story_ID: 3059
Speaker 1: Now how did it feel to stand up at that day when you were making the speech before, you know, you said four to five thousand people and even also the fact that your speech [denouncing the racist actions of LeMoyne College Trustee Walter Chandler] appeared in the newspaper the next day, I mean, what did your family say on all that?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of making the speech I was scared to death, I never made a speech like that, but I got through it.  I wrote it myself. I talked to a couple friends of mine and it was sort of a good feeling knowing that I would be asked to be in the same program with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. I mean I really felt great about that 'cause, I mean, I had a lot of respect for Dr. King and a lot of admiration. I had heard him speak once before, that was the second time I heard him speak, so I had a chance to meet him before the program started, you know, he and Ralph Abernathy [civil rights activist, clergyman] and some other people, and sat back in, you know, the holding room and chatted and he was complimentary of me and glad that I was speaking up and speaking out. And then I spoke before he spoke, and I was mesmerized by his speech. Then the next day in the newspapers, you know, I wasn't--the one thing I was not afraid of was my being put out of school, that didn't even bother me. I knew I wasn't going to get put out of school, that's not going to happen to me, so I wasn't afraid of that. And so that just sort of gave me a feeling that I just had accomplished something. And Walter Chandler finally resigned from the [LeMoyne College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] Board of Trustees rather than apologize.
Story_ID: 3060
Speaker 1: Now [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] at that time, wasn't he coming to Memphis [Tennessee] because of labor? Wasn't there--
Speaker 2: No, no, this is long before that.
Speaker 1: This is long before that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're now talking about 1958.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay.
Speaker 2: This is long before '68 [1968], this is ten years before he got killed.
Speaker 1: So what was he doing at that point?
Speaker 2: I think he was speaking; the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had invited him to come, so we had this bus desegregation suit going on and other kind of activity. We had filed suit against the libraries, against, I guess, the public schools, against all the institutions of segregation apartheid. So he was coming to rally, you know, the troops, he was going up from city to city. And to get support for his movement, Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]. You know it'd just been '55 [1955] in December when Rosa Parks [civil rights activist] sat down [protested segregation on city buses in Montgomery, Alabama], so here were are, you know, maybe two and a half years later, in '58 [1958], in the spring.
Speaker 1: But wasn't that around the time, though--I mean he was going around--a lot of issues were based on labor, though, wages.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that came much later.
Speaker 1: Montgomery [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, Montgomery was when the bus boycott.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rosa Parks sat down so we could--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Stand up.
Speaker 1: I know, okay.
Speaker 2: And they'd [participants in the Montgomery bus boycott] walk the streets for over a year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rather than ride the buses and they got a [U.S.] Supreme Court decision in 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was going around, you know, trying to motivate us to stay in the struggle, stay in the movement and to support NAACP's efforts to desegregate Memphis and other cities.
Speaker 1: While we're on King, what was your impression of him as a leader?
Speaker 2: What do you mean what my impression is?
Speaker 1: I'm just saying I know you said you were impressed with him.
Speaker 2: He was fantastic. He was a heck of a orator. I mean being a preacher, he could really, you know, get you moving. Of course he was bright, he was courageous, he sort of symbolized our struggle against oppression and apartheid. And I had an opportunity to get to know him fairly well over a period of time because of my work in the [Civil Rights] Movement and it's really tragic that he got assassinated in '68 [April 4, 1968] because I think his best years were ahead of him.
Speaker 1: Let me get Dr. King's name in there.
Speaker 2: You didn't?
Speaker 1: It was "he and "his" name.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: On Dr. King? Dr. King was a fantastic leader, very charismatic. Yeah, Dr. King was very articulate. He could raise the level of the emotions because he was a Baptist preacher. You know his famous March on Washington [D.C., 1963] speech, 'I Have a Dream.' He could really sort of--Dr. King represented the epitome of struggle against oppression and apartheid.
Story_ID: 3061
Speaker 1: Now you graduate from LeMoyne [College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College] and decide that you want to go onto graduate school and why was that?
Speaker 2: Because I wanted to go to school. I got a fellowship to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], work on my master's degree, so I went. I got some other offers too from other schools, Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], some other places except I wanted to go to a black school.
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about your career at that point?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a research scientist. I didn't want to be a teacher. No offense to teaching, I just didn't want to be a teacher. I wanted to be a research scientist. And I was interrupted in 1960, 1959 by the Civil Rights Movement--it started me thinking differently.
Speaker 1: Okay and would--did school seem not as relevant around that time?
Speaker 2: It was relevant, I just got less and less interested in chemistry and more interested in people.
Speaker 1: Okay and you got involved in what, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC]?
Speaker 2: No, I got involved in the Student Movement in Nashville [Tennessee, civil rights organization] in the fall of 1959. A preacher by the name of Reverend James Lawson, who is now at a church out in Los Angeles [California], started having these non-violent workshops trying to teach us how to be non-violent--and planning our own demonstrations, strange as it may seem, even before Greensboro, [North Carolina] which is February 1st, 1960, and so I got involved with that, Diane Nash [civil rights activist], [Rev.] James Bevel [civil rights activist], [Dr.] Bernard Lafayette [Jr., civil rights activist], [U.S. Representative] John Lewis, who's now the congressman.  We're training to march ourselves downtown, and then February 1st hit in 1960 when four young guys sat in [at a Woolworth's store lunch counter] in Greensboro and then we sat in. And the Saturday after that about 300 of us got arrested and we were involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement trying to desegregate the theatres in downtown and we got beat up and all this kind of stuff. Our attorney's home was bombed, [Z.] Alexander Looby [attorney]. So we just--that happened. Then SNCC got formed in April of 1960. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] sent a call from around the nation for those of us who were students involved with protest to come to Raleigh, North Carolina. Now he had an idea of trying to get us to become a youth arm of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--similar to the youth of arm of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that was the model. But when we got there most of us didn't want to do that. A lady by the name of Ellen Baker [civil rights activist] who was really working for King, she was a director--executive director--and she said, "You all want to remain independent." So we formed the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. I was elected to first chair of SNCC.
Story_ID: 3062
Speaker 1: And so there was some rivalry between the Atlanta [Georgia] [Civil Rights] Movement and the [Nashville] Student Movement in Nashville [Tennessee, student civil rights organization] as to who had the "baddest movement," which is a good rivalry, you know, who was the badder revolutionaries. And we had decided when we went to Raleigh [North Carolina] that somebody from Nashville would be like the chair because we thought we were the toughest and the bad--we had more people anyway and Julian Bond [civil rights activist, politican] was in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Okay and I heard that you--someone else was supposed to be elected--
Speaker 1: Diane Nash [civil rights activist].
Speaker 2: Diane Nash, but she was at the--changing clothes--
Speaker 1: She was doing something. I don't know what she was doing.  She was not there (laughs). We had decided among ourselves that Diane would be our chair. Back in the day, you know, we still thought women were very valuable in terms of leadership, and so that wasn't a barrier.Bbut she was not there and the election's going on and people say "well we've got to do you," 'cause I was sort of like second in command for the Nashville [Student] Movement and so I got elected chair.
Speaker 2: Okay and you getting elected chair catapulted you to what?
Speaker 1: Nothing. (Laughs).  It didn't. Wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Kansas and then back to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]--.
Speaker 1: That's after that, yeah. That's after Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], after I got my master's degree from Fisk.
Speaker 2: I know but where was this as it relates to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 1: In 1960, in the spring of '60 I received my master's degree from Fisk and then I went to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] for a year working on my Ph.D. And I hated Kansas, the Midwest, you know, didn't like it. So I transferred to the University of Tennessee, where I attended for three years on a fellowship working on my Ph.D. I was a year or so away from my Ph.D. when I quit in 1964 to go work full-time for SNCC.
Speaker 2: So all this time you were involved with SNCC though?
Speaker 1: For a time, I worked in the summertime, went to Mississippi, Alabama, and I was still on the coordinating council because I was still, you know, part of the leadership--well, we had a movement in Knoxville [Tennessee], and I couldn't remain chair on the University of Kansas because they wanted a full-time chair and wouldn't want to quit school to do that and so I started working part-time in the summertime going to meetings, you know, every month we met monthly, had a movement in Knoxville 'cause Knoxville was segregated, everything was segregated around the university. Even though the university itself had just opened up I was the only black person in the whole natural science department for three years, the only one, math, science, zoology, biology, physics, chemistry, you name it, I was the only black person there, in there and on the Ph.D. program. So I quit in '64 [1964], I got tired of school and the [Civil Rights] Movement really was calling me to come and work full-time and I worked full-time.
Speaker 2: And tell me for those, you know, people who were not involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement can you just describe the sort of the feeling and the feeling sort of mission?
Speaker 1: We were passionate about it, you know, it was amazing. And we didn't realize the danger we were in. We didn't even think about that. We just wanted to try do all we could to liberate our people, and we worked hard at it. We had some revolutionary kind of tactics. We were the stormtroopers of the movement. We weren't passive. We go into a community and organize a community, develop sit-ins, order registration drives, a lot of people would get arrested, we'd mobilize the community. Out of that movement came Fannie Lou Hamer [civil rights activist] who everybody knows now was just a grassroots kind of person. We ran candidates and mock elections. We did all that kind of thing. And we cared deeply about the struggle and about our people and we showed it.
Story_ID: 3063
Speaker 1: One thing I'm going to ask about this [Civil Rights] Movement and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] versus SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. When we [The HistoryMakers] interviewed Julian Bond [civil rights activist, politician] and he talked about the fact that there was a conflict between the two organizations and you as "young Turks" thought that, you know, that your whole thing was enabling people to help themselves and you were less trying to get people to follow [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] as a leader, is that true?
Speaker 2: Mostly, yeah, oh yeah. We just had different tactics and different ideologies about it. We were less likely to compromise. You know if you're in a situation with a city where you're sitting there and you're demonstrating, most of the time the mayor, who was white, city councilmen would say, "well, let's stop the demonstrations and have a peace treaty and then we'll negotiate as to when we're going to desegregate these lunch counters, or when we're going to allow black folks in Mississippi to register to vote."  We said, "no, we're going to keep demonstrating until you start the process, until you integrate the lunch counters, and open voter registration, and we're going to keep demonstrating," which is a different kind of tactic. "We're going to keep going to jail. We're going to keep agitating, we're going to keep--." The other thing different is that we were connected more to the grassroots. I mean King's organization [SCLC] was a good one. It had as its base preachers 'cause King was a preacher so when you go into Memphis [Tennessee] or to Jackson, Mississippi or some other place, his first level of contact were with these preachers. And our level of contact were with the people in the community. We had these rallies at the Masonic Hall. We had rallies at churches and et cetera. But that's the big difference, and we were less likely to compromise. We were the storm troopers. We believe in "freedom right now, not next week."
Speaker 1: So in many ways do you think if you look at the South African apartheid movement did you play the same role as the youth there in some respects?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I mean, the Sharpsville Massacre [South African police killed sixty apartheid protestors on March 21, 1960] and other places by young people, yeah. They were stormtroopers. And not to say that [South African President] Nelson Mandela and ANC [African National Congress] people weren't, but these young people have same attitude. "We want freedom right now. We don't to wait 'til next week."
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: And King wanted it right now too, but he was willing, in my view, to wait a little bit longer than we were.
Speaker 1: Now you said you decided to do it full-time, now what year is that?
Speaker 2: '64, 1964.
Speaker 1: 1964, okay and where were you located?
Speaker 2: I was in Knoxville [Tennessee] when I quit the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] in the spring, and went to New York [New York] for about three or four months. They had the SNCC office there then I went to Washington [D.C.] in 1965.
Story_ID: 3064
Speaker 1: Well, I went to run the Washington [D.C.] office [of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC]. We had--everybody to the Black Power Movement in 1965 when Stokely Carmichael, Kwame Toure, was advocating Black Power. We had a white director of the Washington office and so Jim Foreman, who was our secretary director--Foreman, not Farmer, Foreman--said "go to Washington and run our office." I went to Washington and ran SNCC office, 'cause Washington was majority a black town and we wanted to have a black person running so I went.
Speaker 2: And what did you, in terms of Washington since it's been your home since that point in time--
Speaker 1: Since '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: Is the beginning, I guess, it was like you found--like a fish you found water there, but what was your impression of Washington when you first came?
Speaker 1: A segregated, sleepy town. Even in '65 [1965] there was a lot of segregation in Washington. Police forces were about 75, 80 percent white in a majority black town. Fire department was the same. City government was white at the top. Downtown was just a little old shabby looking place. There were no new buildings down there. It just looked like a little--it wouldn't be fitting to be the capital of the United States of America. It looked awful and segregation was rampant in Washington.
Story_ID: 3065
Speaker 1: I started working on police brutality, trying to stop that because it was rampant in Washington [D.C.]. Then I started an organization in 1967 called Pride Incorporated along with two other people, Carol Hartman and Mary Treadwell. And it was a youth movement to try to employ young people, to get their head screwed on right and about self-help, and self-reliance, and self-empowerment. And we had about 1,000 young people. We owned a lot of businesses, like service stations and landscaping and gardening, a painting business, a little grocery store. And we employed all these ex-convicts in these businesses 'cause when they got out of jail, they couldn't get a job anywhere so we gave them job and training. Then we had a lot of young people who were in school working, cleaning streets and alleys and learning how to just work and have to have a good sense of themselves. We did a lot of self-motivation kind of stuff trying to increase their self-reliance on themselves and their self-respect for themselves. And I see guys now all over the country, you know, and they say, "oh, we were at Pride, we were at Pride!" And I was there until 1973.
Story_ID: 3066
Speaker 1: But I ran for the school board [Board of Education] of [Washington, D.C.] in '71 [1971]. I was president of the school board from '71 [1971] to '74 [1974]. And then we got the right to vote in Washington--prior to '74 [1974], the Congress of the United States, the President [of the United States], appointed three commissioners that ran the city and appointed City Council, seven people that ran the city, so we couldn't vote. So we got to vote in '74 [1974] for Mayor, City Council, at a school board vote in '68 [1968], but I didn't run. I ran in '71 [1971]. I was president of the school board, and I knew what presidents do. You hire superintendents, you try to improve, you know, the life of young people. I established a very good relationship with the teacher's union when I was president 'cause I would just want to--I felt some alliance with them, to them. Incidentally, the teacher's union in Washington supported every candidacy that I've ever had. They supported me for the school board in '71 [1971], for the City Council in '74 [1974], the mayor for '78 [1978] when most unions were going the other way with another person, they supported me. '82 [1982], '86 [1986], '90 [1990], '92 [1990] when I ran for City Council again, '94 [1994] when I ran for mayor, the teacher's union, which I want to thank them. They've just been there for me because they knew I believed in them and I believe in unions. I'm a strong pro-labor person in terms of rights of union workers to organize themselves and, you know, collectively bargain for themselves. So I was the president of the school board.
Story_ID: 3067
Speaker 1: So '74 [1974] I ran for City Council [of Washington, D.C.]. And on the City Council I really made, I think, my best marks. I was chair to the finance revenue committee, so I did a lot of things around the finances of the city, tax relief for the elderly, homestead exemption for homeowners, establishing an office of aging . We established an arts and culture office. We established an office for Latino affairs. We did all those kind of things from '74 [1974] to '78 [1978]. Again, trying to empower people because I had strong roots into the low income community. Public housing residents loved me and I loved them and trying to enhance their lives. Welfare recipients, trying to enhance their lives, ex-offenders, the gay and lesbian community were my early supporters politically, art and culture. All the people that nobody wanted to be bothered too much, that's what I wanted to be bothered with. And over time, you know, I got involved with the minority business community as well as with the preachers and et cetera. That's why, you know, the miracle in '94 [in 1994, Barry was elected mayor after having served time in prison] happened because I had this strong, strong base. We increased the minority business contracts upon 3 percent of government contract to 45 percent of government contracts. Now that was significant because of my policies. Significant when black people became millionaires and became successful business people because I pushed for qualified African American and Hispanics to get a piece of the federal contracts. It only made sense to me. I think when you get into political power you ought to use that to get economic power because you can, with a stroke of a pen, create--I mean, somebody gets a five million dollar contract or thirty million dollar roads contracts or something like that, they employ a lot of D.C. residents, so you're empowering a whole community by doing that.
Story_ID: 3068
Speaker 1: And also one thing I did when became mayor in '78 [1978], '79 [1979], the top of the [Washington] D.C. government was all white in most departments. The departments were white, the deputies were white, the administrative assistant, just everybody up there was white. So we stared looking for qualified African Americans. And so we appointed women to nontraditional kind of jobs. We appointed African Americans to nontraditional kind of jobs. Usually put African Americans in human resources or human services or job training, but not into the tax and revenue side of it, not into the public works side of it, not into the waste water treatment facility side of it, not into public health, I mean, they don't do that. They didn't do that, I did it.
Story_ID: 3069
Speaker 1: I had been active in school related activities because a lot of our young people came from these schools. I'd go to school and speak to students, around students, because I had about 1,000 young people who were in school. So I'd go to the school, want to see how they're doing, check on these guys, they were all men at that time, and these guys were 14, 15, 16, 17 years old kind of guys, so I'd been around the school system a great deal. I used to go to school board [Board of Education of Washington, D.C.] meetings just to listen to what was going on. I even asked in 1968 to run for the school board when we first got the right to vote for a school board--I didn't want to do that. I didn't trust the system. I thought, you know, to go into politics was a sellout, you know, I really did. I said "I'm not doing that." And so when I went and ran for the school board, which I didn't seek at first. Some people who were on the school board were trying to elect a majority of six people out of eleven to sort of have control of the schools because the previous members had just been awful. And so a couple school board members approached me and said, "can you get a friend, you know, David E. Neely"--Unitarian minister, black guy, a good friend of mine--"can you get him to run for the school board as an at-large member, a city-wide member." I talked to David twice. He said, "I'm not going to do that. I don't want to do that." So it got back to me, "why don't you do it?"  I said, "I don't want to do it."  They said, "well, you've got to do it."  I said, "I don't want to do that, I'm busy." We had Pride [Incorporated, Barry's social work organization] and I'm happy what I'm doing, don't trust the school system. You telling me be on the board anyway, I don't do that. So I said, "well, I'll tell you what, you raise me $10,000 and if Thornell Page can become my campaign manager I'll think about it."  So I went off to Jamaica in '71 [1971] and came back. He said, "well, we got the money and Thornell's agreed, now what about you?" I said, "I'll do it."  So I got drafted to do it.
Speaker 2: So then do you think that started whetting your political--your appetite for politics?
Speaker 1: Yeah, of course.
Speaker 2: Okay. So the movement to the [Washington, D.C.] City Council was a natural transition?
Speaker 1: Oh, of course. I mean, I figured I could do more on the City Council then I could on the Board of Education because City Council approves the budget for the Board of Education.
Story_ID: 3070
Speaker 1: And people said you had a real aptitude for numbers or you have a lot of successes and I'd like you to just talk about that just briefly.
Speaker 2: Well, I've just been blessed with a good memory. And, I guess, it might have started when I was a freshman in college [LeMoyne College, Memphis, Tennessee, now LeMoyne-Owen College]. I was taking a course in freshman chemistry and I didn't know how to balance any equations. I just, you know--balanced equation means the left side got to equal to the right side or when certain chemicals come together they form another chemical, another compound, like when you have sodium and chloride, it forms sodium chloride which is salt. So I didn't know how to do that because you got something that have numbers 'cause they're different charges on each of the atoms--not that's very, you know, technical talk. So I memorized about 300 equations. I just memorized them. Whenever I saw magnesium and chloride or whenever I saw hydrogen and oxygen, whenever I saw other kind of things like hydrogen and sulfate, meaning--and sulfur. And so I think it helped my memory because I had to memorize. Later I learned how to do them after I got more advanced in chemistry. But I have a fantastic memory and not as sharp as it used to be 100 percent, but it's still pretty sharp, so numbers were my thing. Because again I was in science. You know, I was a mathematician in mathematics. I could multiply big numbers in my head without needing a calculator and so I use it as an awesome asset. Some people came to me with numbers that--they gave me one number, but it'd be the right number because I'm gonna remember that number--they can't tell me thirty-five today and forty-five tomorrow unless they tell me why it changed, and so I was good in finances. I knew the city's [Washington, D.C.] finances more than the budget director did 'cause I studied it and I could figure what they were, I could add stuff up. And it helped me to untangle the budget and it also helped me to set priorities myself 'cause budget directors just tell you what, you know, enough to just to keep you involved. So I knew more than they knew, so when they bring numbers to me about programs, I say, "no, why don't we take the money from over here and put it over here." You know, "why don't we take ten million from here and put ten million over here. Take forty from here and put it over there."  So I was able to shape the budget, to make it a human services budget rather than just a bureaucratic service delivery budget, which I mean--that's important, but my goal was to empower the last, the least, and the loss, I did through the budget.
Story_ID: 3071
Speaker 1: Now, you know, you had said when you first, you know, when someone talked to you about running you were like "no, you know, I think politics is bad," but obviously there's a new Marion Barry emerging around this time and so what were we starting to see about your belief in the political system?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not a new--but different, you know. You had war here, to some extent. You got to look at what's the best strategy and the best tactics to empower people, to motivate people, to inspire people, to organize people. And I could do more with a stroke of a pen then I could with knocking down fifteen doors trying to get into the mayor's office. For instance, I advocated and did it every year I was mayor, a summer job for every young person--a meaningful summer job. And we must have put up to 22,000 to work the first three or four summers that I started the program now. I couldn't have gotten that done by protest, but I got it done because I was in charge of the budget, I got the [Washington, D.C. City] Council to support it--there's another example. Same thing was true in minority business--to go up in 3 percent to 45 percent [of minority businesses with federal contracts] couldn't have happened unless I was in that chair [of Washington's finance and revenue committee]. And you see the difference now even in Washington now it's gone back down to 15, 20 percent probably. Half the kids this summer got summer jobs compared to how we did when I was there. And so I learned--I think [U.S. Representative] Julian Bond [civil rights activist, politician] went through the same thing. He was a reluctant runner for the [U.S.] House of Representatives. We had to go out and get his petition signed for him. He said, "I'm not doing anything."  You know, he finally got into it, because we just didn't trust politics as a method and a means to achieve what we wanted to do. 'Cause we had seen politicians being corrupt--at least I had--being dishonest and I didn't want to be like that. But I looked at it and said "I can do it this way." And once I got on the [Washington, D.C.] School Board and I saw the kind of power I had as president of the School Board and the kind of changes I can make, I said, "this is the place to be."
Story_ID: 3072
Speaker 1: Now, let's go to 1977, your incident at--do you know what incident I'm talking about when you took the bullet to the heart--
Speaker 2: Of course I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How could I forget it? God is good. I wouldn't be sitting here if it hadn't been for a good God who protected me. I just would've been dead, in terms of the bullet hitting me in my chest. Two people did get killed that period. Hanafi Muslims [school of Sunni Islam] took over three sites. One was the [Washington, D.C.] City Hall, and I just was going upstairs on the fifth floor to my office, came up the elevator and I hear all this shots all ringing out and I got hit in the chest. I stumbled into the council chambers and I was scared to death. I was afraid not to breathe--I was afraid to breathe--I thought I might breathe and move the bullet. I was afraid not to, 'cause I mean, I'd be dying. So that was a real traumatic experience, but thank God I didn't--but it only went about that far in my chest. It should've gone all the way because it was one of those big double-aught buckshots [shotgun pellet]. People who know anything about guns, know how big those things are, they just hurl through the air. And I was blessed not to be dead.
Speaker 1: Now what was the circumstances behind them trying to take over? These were the Black Muslims--
Speaker 2: No, Hanafi Muslims.
Speaker 1: Hanafi, and was the--
Speaker 2: They're another branch of [Sunni] Muslims in America, you know, you got the Sunni Muslims--I don't know enough about all of the Muslims.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean, you got the Nation of Islam, then you got Elijah [Muhammad] and Wallace Dean [Muhammad] 's branch. They [the Hanafi] were upset about something [a sectarian dispute], I can't even remember now. They were upset about something that didn't have anything to do with city government. They took over B'nai B'rith, which is a civil rights organization for the Jewish community, took over the Islamic Center, which is a big center where all the Muslims come together of all faith and all countries, and City Hall. I don't know why they took over City Hall. We didn't have anything to do with that. They were just angry and, as I said, two people got killed and about half a dozen people got maimed because they shot somebody in the arm and some guy was paralyzed.  It was awful.
Speaker 1: So now when this happened [March 9, 1977], what happened to you after that part, you were a hero, right?
Speaker 2: I was on the [Washington, D.C.] City Council then.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: And somebody made the dumbest statement that Marion Barry will do anything to elected. I said, "you fool you, who wants to do that?" But I came out of the hospital and I stayed away from the office seven to ten days and went back to work.
Story_ID: 3073
Speaker 1: I read that the 'Washington Post' who has been your nemesis over the more recent years really was, you know, very much promoted you.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah they did. Oh, yeah. In '74 [1974] when I was [Washington, D.C.] City Council. All my work I did in the City Council, if you read all that stuff I did. They were writing good stories, et cetera. They endorsed me in 1978 against the establishment. The establishment was going with [Mayor] Walter Washington and Sterling Tucker, they endorsed me. They endorsed me again in '82 [1982]. They endorsed me in '86 [1986], and then it started getting negative after that (laughs).
Story_ID: 3074
Speaker 1: Now tell me how did it come about that you decided to run for mayor [of Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I wanted more power to help more people. And we have a strong mayor form of government, not individual, but a strong mayor structurally. And the [Washington, D.C. City] Council--I was one of thirteen and had to negotiate with the mayor on what we got done, or had to, you know, get the legislation passed against his wishes, and so I knew the power the mayor had. I could do far more as mayor then as members of the [City] Council. I didn't have anything where I needed to compromise with my colleagues about nothing. I'm the mayor, you know, and I was the bottom line from the executive branch of government. That's how we were able to get so much done. We rebuilt downtown Washington [D.C.]. Like I said, there was only one new building on Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.] and when we got through there were over twenty million square feet of new office space, the third largest in America right behind New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois]. We did the minority business piece, we built a convention center, we got young people jobs, we put black people in positions in the administration to get things done, we improved delivery of services in part of the city nobody cared about out there--where I live now. We did all of that, and so I saw that as a way I could get it done. My whole vision had been to empower people, even when we--the Civil Rights Movement was empowerment. Getting folks ready to vote was empowerment. Breaking down the lunch counter was empowerment. So empowerment and motivation and organizing had been my life's work, so being mayor gave me an excellent opportunity to do that which I wanted to do and I did it, did it very well too.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that your first time, your first try, you ran--your first run for mayor you won?
Speaker 2: Yeah, against all odds. I wasn't supposed to win, I was supposed to come in third.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that happened?
Speaker 2: I out-organized everybody else, out-campaigned everybody else, and had a message that struck the hearts of a lot of people. I put all these various disparate groups together.
Speaker 1: We're going to hear that, it's the garage door.
Speaker 2: (Pause).
Speaker 1: I put together a coalition of teachers, and art and culture and people, gay and lesbian community, welfare recipients, public housing tenants, sort of liberal white people, minority business people. I put together little pieces that would've by themselves couldn't have got anybody elected, but together they did. And so when we went to the 'Washington Post' [newspaper] we had a lot of constituencies that they influenced the polls, like the art and culture community--these are mostly white people. Gay and lesbian community, mostly white people. And then we had the, you know, ex-offenders and that was mostly black people. And so the '[Washington] Post' was sort of fascinated by this coalition. I was bright, you know, and brash, you know, I'm a new person on the scene, a lot of energy, and a lot of new ideas about what needed to get done. Not them tired old ideas that other people were talking about. I was, what, forty-two, I guess, years of age at that time, 42, 43 and had a lot of energy, a lot of good ideas. So I'd organize. I'd campaign. I'm campaigning 14, 16 hours a day then. Didn't get so much sleep, I guess. I'm in these bars at night at ten, eleven o'clock at night [P.M.] trying to get votes. I'm in these clubs getting votes. I'm up in the morning at the bus stops at 6:00 [A.M.] getting votes. So I just out-worked them, out-thought them, and out-campaigned them, simple as that.
Speaker 2: And when you won, can you describe how that felt?
Speaker 1: Euphoria. Excited. To go out and beat the odds. I mean, I beat them all my life so it wasn't anything new about that, but we could be dodged about not, you know, about going to college, be dodged about, you know, finishing my master's degree [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and staying in that all white school [University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee] for three years and against all odds--I've been beating the odds all the time, all the time, all the time. So when we won, obviously we were just a lot of euphoria. We were excited. We knew we were going to win, we had a feel for it. We just had a sense we were going to win, you know. Everybody was shocked. We weren't shocked by it. We thought we were going to win, just from the sense of the people in the streets and et cetera. And during the day going around to the polling places, you know, you can get a sense of where people are in the whole process. Excitement, and to some extent amazement.
Speaker 2: So who were some of the key people who played a role in your, you know, in that campaign?
Speaker 1: There were so many--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's okay. It's all right.
Speaker 1: I don't want to start names because I might leave somebody out.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, we won't even go there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 3075
Speaker 1: How do you want to cover your whole ten years as Mayor [of Washington, D.C.]. How do you want to cover that?
Speaker 2: That I did a great job of empowering people and particularly showing the love both ways for the last, the lost, and the least, that I gave people a sense of hope, those who had no hope and those who didn't feel they could achieve much, a sense of achievement, a sense of strength, a sense of "somebodyness," a sense of themselves that they could rise above whatever circumstances they had going for them. Whatever it was they were going to rise above it. It's not that you get knocked down, that you get up that's important. That kind of sense I gave people. There was a tangibles of having rebuilt downtown Washington [D.C.], having created a strong black middle class because of the [government] contracted jobs that they got. And also support for causes that were hard to do, like the gay and lesbian community support or ex-offenders hard to do. But that was to help all, and just--I just helped a lot of people and empowered a lot of people, not just temporarily but permanently empowered them. Empowered public housing residents because Cammie Gray got a contract for me to manage our own 400-some units, unheard of in the country, and so now that movement now had spread all over the country where almost every city now you have some tenant management of their properties. That's the permanent kind of empowerment in terms of that whole kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Well, I have several questions. Is your view of politics one generally of empowerment?
Speaker 2: That's my view, yeah.
Speaker 1: That is your view?
Speaker 2: If you're not going to empower anybody, why are you there?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And outside of empowering yourself, you know. I'm talking about empowering others.
Story_ID: 3076
Speaker 1: And when you first took office [as Mayor of Washington, D.C.] or even when you were campaigning, wasn't the established black community--weren't they very cold to you at that point?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Of course. At the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and why did they view you, you think?
Speaker 2: That I was a young radical, Dashiki wearing, bush wearin', crazy man. You know I ain't kicking down doors, fighting police, just radical. Too much for them to take at the time.
Speaker 1: And they still--
Speaker 2: In fact it's ironic because not only was the black middle class not so supportive because these other people were very establishment. [Mayor] Walter Washington and Sterling Tucker, but the low income community was not as supportive as--they finally became supportive, you know, 80, 90 percent. I was at 25, 30 percent. But once people saw me in action, the black middle class saw me standing up for minority business people, and putting African American professionals in key positions, they said, "oh" (nods head). So now I have some of the strongest support in the African American middle class community, very strong support. In fact when I ran in '94 [1994], the former Mayor [of Washington, D.C.] Sharon Pratt Kelly came from that community. I mean, she was from the middle class community. She was a lawyer, she was a professor, and she came from that community. But I got more votes, a lot more votes than she got from that community, then she got.
Story_ID: 3077
Speaker 1: And you had run the [Washington, D.C. City] Council, you knew the budget, you knew that whole process, I mean the only thing about the early years, what were surprises to you, you know, about--it's different being a, you know, flame for--
Speaker 2: Not much. Not much.
Speaker 1: Not many surprises?
Speaker 2: I mean, the job was harder than I thought it was, but then it didn't surprise me. It just happened to be that it was harder than I thought.
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: You know, just hard, just hard. Ever yday there's something, some problem. I had saying that "if ain't one thing it's another, but its's always something." Every morning there's always something that you've got to tackle, some problem you've got to solve. Somebody messed up down there in bureaucracy somewhere. Somebody didn't fix the problem, it suddenly erupts, you know. A water main breaks, I mean, just every day, every day there's a problem.
Speaker 1: And did you ever lie--lay sleepless nights worrying about problems?
Speaker 2: No, no. I learned that there are some things you can't control. If you can't control it don't worry about it. Like take the 'Washington Post'. After they started becoming so negative about me I used to get all upset (puts head in hands). I used to buy the paper at 10:30 at night [P.M.] to try to see what's in the paper and I get upset because they wrote something negative. And then I started getting it in the morning at my house and I got upset going to the office, so I stopped reading the damn paper. And I realize I can't control what they're writing about me. I maybe influence them, but I can't. I can't control it so don't worry about it. That was my whole attitude about a lot of things. Now I thought about them, but I just didn't get all bogged down into it. You know, plus the fact I just developed over time a sort of spirituality and a peacefulness about myself. That laying in bed all night worrying about it even if you can control it, ain't going to solve it until the next morning you get up and do something about it. No, I didn't toss and turn. I didn't do it.
Story_ID: 3078
Speaker 1: You know the press will get you to believe that I was trying to get everybody to like me, that was not the case. Part of my strategy was going to the enemy camp, you know, somebody talk about me bad I go right there, you know, and try to confront them, like the Palisades [white, affluent neighborhood in Washington, D.C.] thing I was reading in that book there. I walked right into the enemy's territory [Barry marched in a Palisades Independence Day Parade parade]. They were shocked and surprised--they didn't know how to deal with it. I'm waving at them, you know, a few names being called, you know, and I said "made up for that." And so that's what that was all about. It was a tactic to try to salvage, to some extent, opposition. The other thing--which I was a little surprised about but not too much--was the attitude of the white people. When I started doing all these things for black people white people started (gestures downward with hand) racking it down, less and less support, less and less support. I had 46 percent of the white vote in '78 [1978 Washington D.C. mayoral election] and now I'm lucky if I get 15 percent. But looking back at doesn't really surprise me but I was just amazed at how deep, you know, this racism is and this discrimination is and how I'm standing up for the black community does not mean I don't support the white community.
Story_ID: 3079
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, I know you've talked about the coalitions you've built [as Mayor of Washington, D.C.] and I know you've talked about, you know, being able to go into enemy camp and the things that you did for the black community. They're probably, when you look around the country, probably the person closest to you would that've been [Detroit, Michigan Mayor] Coleman Young? I mean, you had [Gary, Indiana] Mayor [Dick] Hatcher and Gary, but I don't think that happened--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think Dick Hatcher was sort of my mentor in terms of the politics of being mayor. Coleman Young. I think the politician who probably influenced me the most would've been [U.S. Representative] Adam Clayton Powell [Jr., politican, civil rights activist], to his audacity and his sagacity and what he tried to do to empower people.
Speaker 1: Did you ever consult with him or you just influenced as--
Speaker 2: I knew him.
Speaker 1: --oh.
Speaker 2: Back in Washington [D.C.] I got to meet him, yeah. And in fact I was in his office the day that the [U.S.] Congress expelled him [for misuse of funds in 1967, of which he was later vindicated], sitting right there talking to him and went out with him when he went out and made his speech on the cabinet steps. So we just talked from time to time. I admired him a great deal, still do admire him.
Speaker 1: And why did you think he was such a great person?
Speaker 2: Because God gave him a gift of oratory, and his following and being active in the church he became a preacher and somehow or another he became our leader in the social service area. He stayed in the [U.S.] Congress. He got to be chair of the Education Labor Committee, passed more legislation during his time than in the history of the Congress in that area. So, I guess, it was a gift of God. I think God gives some of us special gifts then we use them wisely, unwisely.
Speaker 1: Now Mayor Hatcher got elected before you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry for these questions.  And [Cleveland, Ohio Mayor] Carl Stokes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Coleman Young.
Speaker 2: Okay, how would you compare those cities to what happened in D.C.?
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: I'm just saying in terms of development. I mean, what and--
Speaker 1: On the negative side they all lost population. I mean people, both middle-class blacks, and white people moved out and almost crippled the city economically because the tax payers were eroded. Then on the other hand they all came back, expect in Gary, they didn't come back. I mean, Gary just got to be--they didn't even have a department store downtown at one point, but the rest of them came back.
Speaker 2: You as black mayors at that time there was a very small number. You had sort of a special bond, I would take, that--
Speaker 1: Less than 100 of us, yeah, and now there's about 485 black mayors.
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: Four hundred and eighty-five.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God.
Speaker 1: All over the place and mayors of non-majority black cities too, like Denver [Colorado]. We had New York [New York]. We had Los Angeles [California] and Minneapolis [Minnesota]. We had Seattle [Washington]. We've had several other places.
Story_ID: 3080
Speaker 1: Are there things you would've liked to have done differently in hindsight [as Mayor of Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Several things, one is that I should've imposed, strike it to [Washington, D.C. City] Council and myself, to impose a housing tax on all the downtown development, say a dollar or two dollars a square foot, take that money and put it into a housing trust fund so we could've renovated a lot more houses for low income people. As downtown was developing everybody got left out of it except the developers. There's not one major office building downtown that was black owned.  I regret that. I think that I should've pressed hard to get several office buildings developed by African Americans and Hispanics. That didn't happen. I probably should've done a lot more around the imagery of Washington. I mean, not just my image, but he image of Washington was so negative during various periods of time, that it was the crime capital of the world. We had that go by and I'd tackle it and beat it down when our crime rate was a lot lower--crime is awful wherever it is, but a lot lower than New Orleans [Louisiana] and Newark [New Jersey] and a lot of places and also people mix up the national Washington with the local Washington. They see all this stuff that goes on nationally and they put us in it and so I should've done a lot more of trying to develop a more positive image about the local Washington. And thereby in fact that more people to come to Washington to assist our economy. And I probably should've paid more attention to the white community in terms of their needs and concerns than I did.
Speaker 1: Well it was hard, you were sort of "king of the jungle," right?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: (Laughs) I'm sorry. I don't know where that came from (laughs).
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I'm sorry, but I'm just saying you didn't really have to?
Speaker 2: Well, I should've though, just for the sake of community.
Story_ID: 3081
Speaker 1: Washington, you know, because there's, you know, it's the federal government, it's the seat of federal government, and then there's, you know, Washington D.C., do you think that the two will ever sort of meet?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because the mission of the two are much different. I mean, the national government has a certain role that it will always have in national affairs and the local government is going to be like the little brother and never going to be as big as the national Washington because we're not the [U.S.] Congress, we're not the [U.S.] Senate, and no, I think that will always going to be that. But I think we can improve the image of local Washington to a point where people see Washington as blossoming and then the place to come and visit or the place that you want to live. And it's beginning to happen too. More and more are moving back into the city now. We have reversed the outward flow. There used to be a time when 2 or 3 percent of the people will be leaving every year going somewhere else, but now there's 2 or 3 percent growth, so we have sort of stabilized the city in terms of its population and on the move now.
Story_ID: 3082
Speaker 1: And do you think at some point that you took too much for granted?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: I'm just--you know, you were--well, I'm just saying that being Mayor [of Washington, D.C.] became--what am I trying to say? That you took being mayor for granted?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: That you sort of stopped working?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Never stopped working. I worked just as hard the last four years [1995-1999] I did the first four years [1979-1983] putting in the time and energy. No. And was productive.
Speaker 1: Okay, then let me ask this question then--
Speaker 2: I mean for some people I could do no right, so therefore, you know, you may read about all the kind of things that may--or not happened--or happened that doesn't mean I'm not working. Even my critics admit that I'm a hard worker and a smart worker too.
Story_ID: 3083
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to say about your administration [as Mayor of Washington, D.C.] before I move into other things?
Speaker 2: No, I think we covered the waterfront.
Speaker 1: You've covered the waterfront? There are no other highlights, people that you, you know, or any down points? I mean, there are all kinds of things, like there's the Ivanhoe Donaldson, you know, thing [Donaldson pleaded guilty to embezzlement charges in 1985].
Speaker 2: That was just an isolated incident. Out of 35,000 employees you had about a half a dozen that did something they shouldn't have done, out of 35,000.
Speaker 1: But he was someone very close to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Hurt, obviously disappointed, but I moved on after it happened, I couldn't do anything about it.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what happened?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know. He would never tell me what happened, so I don't even know. I know what they said happened, but I don't know--he took some money fraudulently, you know, gave some phony contracts to several friends of him that did no work on it, didn't do any work, but I don't know. He won't tell me. We're friends today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, half a dozen people all wrong, but half a dozen out of 35,000, that's a miracle. Should've had more with the opportunities that are there to do wrong. That's a, to me, a fantastic group of people who didn't do wrong.
Story_ID: 3084
Speaker 1: Let's go into the things that were more scandalous in your--you know, I mean I have to.
Speaker 2: (Laughs). That's fine with me.
Speaker 1: Okay. You know, I don't know if it started, but the first incident I read about was, you know, 1983, the This Is It [Washington, D.C.] scandal [Barry was accused of using cocaine at the This Is It night club, no charges were filed] you know, I mean, and everything hinged on either sex, drugs, or women.  It wasn't a scandal it was just a controversial incident. I went to a club I shouldn't have gone into and it went downhill from there. Allegations after allegations after--I mean, but when the final analysis, when it was all said and done, none of that proved to be true. I mean, there were no cocaine use or no sex, there was nothing when it finally washed out, you know, behind all the headlines. I wouldn't call it a scandal just a major controversy.
Speaker 2: Okay, I mean there was a twenty-three year old [fashion] model, Grace Shell--
Speaker 1: Again, one little incident out of a thousand.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was one incident. If you look at 365 days of the week, look at all the things--I mean in a year--that I do, one little incident.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: That was a blip on the radar screen for about two days.
Speaker 2: That no one's going to discount Marion Barry--no one's going to discount what you did for black people and I think that a lot of times when you look around mayors around the country that it is clear that you helped, in terms of black empowerment. And I think that is really a very strong part of your legacy. So no one's going to, you know, challenge you on that, but, you know, I'm struck by the fact--and, you know, I don't want to belabor this--but even, you know, when it came--the whole thing of you losing--you know, when you had to leave office after the Vista [International] Hotel [Washington, D.C.] incident, you know, International Hotel incident, you know and I think back about your growing up and how you were, you know, somewhat of a nerd and somewhere along this--well, you were, you know, you said that. You said it, you know, or you were a slow starter.
Speaker 1: I agree with you. I'm not having a problem with that.
Speaker 2: Okay and so, you know, I'm wondering if I can get any sort of self-analysis here to the extent that I'm sure that, you know, you've been reflective. You know, any self-analysis about, you know, those incidents in your life that basically caused you to lose the job that most loved?
Speaker 1: Well, the Vista certainly did, that was a scandal. But that was a more of a personal tragedy, I think, then anything else. I got caught up in alcohol and drugs. The good news is that that was ten years ago and I've come back from death, political death, probably mental death, to being spiritually strong now, personally strong, emotionally strong, politically strong, and that happened. That was a snapshot of the whole picture, but it was not the picture. On the other hand, the [federal] government was wrong--even the jury said that--to, you know, how they went about it. And so that was a phase of my life I don't want to ever do again. On the other hand, you know, it could've been a lot worse in terms of what happened.
Speaker 2: Okay and why do you think that death or that part of her--
Speaker 1: Incidentally, I believe, you know--I wouldn't have done this for the city--but if had run in 1990 I would've run the election again. 'Cause people understood the totality of my service. You know, they understood what the government did, all that money they spent, twenty-five, thirty million dollars trying to catch me. And I decided not to run for the good of the city and for myself. I mean, I didn't want to go through that, but then I came back in '92 [1992] and ran for [Washington, D.C.] City Council and got the 80 percent of the vote. Then ran for the mayor again in '94 [1994] against two strong candidates and got 47 percent of the vote in the primary. That says something about the nature of my service and how people--they didn't condone that [Barry's drug arrest] at all, but that wasn't the total Marion Barry. And I think what happens in life, you hit some home runs, you hit some singles, you hit some doubles and triples then you strike out. But it's the total score you look at not just the fact that you struck out four times, that you hit five home runs, you hit eight triples, you hit eight doubles, ten singles, it's the composite of your service or yourself. And we all have some character defects of some kind. Sometimes they bring us down, sometimes they don't. Even though the Greek tragedies in terms of the Greek tragedies when all these leadership people had these frailties, and these human frailties brought them down. We still have those kind of things happening in our lives, frailties that, as I said earlier, sometime bring you down, sometimes don't.
Story_ID: 3085
Speaker 1: In that period when you were incarcerated for the six months [October 1990 to April 1991], did it cause--were there things that went through your head or that you thought about or if you said that if given a chance again you would do?
Speaker 2: Well, in strange ways, six months was a blessing. It gave me a chance to slow down, think, meditate, read, and get out of the fray. So in a way it was a blessing.  It really was. It's unfortunate that had to be the blessing, but that was the blessing for me. It made me stronger. It made me more reflective. It made me more aware of my human frailties and, therefore, do something about them.
Speaker 1: And when you came back out, were you nervous at all, you know, when you were released, were you nervous--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: About how people were going to perceive you?
Speaker 2: I mean I had been having radio programs in prison, this radio station WOL [Word of Life Christian radio network] allowed me to call in for a half hour, forty-five minutes about once a week, and the people would react, you know, and speak back and forth about me, so I knew that there was a strong base of support. My pastor would come to visit me and he had planned this big caravan to come up and get me with five buses and all this other kind of stuff, so when I saw those buses and all those people and the love I felt from them made me think that that love would be also in the community, which it was.
Speaker 1: And did you make any pact with yourself at that point, you know, about what you wanted to do when you came out?
Speaker 2: No. No, I didn't know what I wanted to do. I prayed, and God gave me the answer to run for [Washington, D.C.] City Council.
Speaker 1: You know, this is what--you know in many ways you know a lot of people if they were mayor, would be hard to be City Council again, but what made you--
Speaker 2: Lack of ego. I mean, you know, I want to serve wherever I can best serve. And I when I came out--the City Council--there where I was living with not being served very well, so I decided to get busy and run so I can serve them much better and then, you know, I prayed on it and it happened. So I don't see any up and down in it, it's just service. It's like in the church sometime people don't want to be the usher, they don't want to do other kind of mundane kind of things. When I was in prison, they assigned me the kitchen, which is supposedly the worst place you can work in prison. I made it the best place you can work, because it was serving others. Everyday I'm serving up three or four hundred meals, you know, giving people double portions if they wanted it, you know, that kind of thing. So I made it one of service as opposed to one of oblivion that you're just over there in the drudgery.  And at prison people were shocked. They thought I'd be protesting, didn't want to go over there, you know, I'd be dragging and not participating and not doing my job. I did my job very well.  And when I was in dishwashing machine, I was the best one that they were doing. When I was on the counter I served well, so I made it one of service. You know, I'd take lemons and make lemonade out of them. You know, I'd take stumbling blocks and turn them into stepping stones, this is my philosophy.
Story_ID: 3086
Speaker 1: Now when you were elected this time around, Mayor [of Washington, D.C. in 1994], how did that feel?
Speaker 2: Again, it was just euphoria. It gave me a good feeling about the people of Washington having faith in me. And again, the ability to serve. That God me a second chance. And I believe in a God of second chances and third chances and fifth chances, that's what I believe in.
Speaker 1: Now you ran again in--no, you stepped down in '98 [1998], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, decided to retire.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, I had sixteen years, that was enough, and I just really wanted to just sort of step back for a while. I mean I was probably physically and emotionally tired. The job was tough, very, very tough, Republican [U.S.] Congress, couldn't get anything done, control board and I decided it wasn't fun anymore. And I've always said if I stopped not being fun and doing good at the same time, that's when I'd stop doing it. Being mayor, I mean for those years, was just--I don't mean fun in the frivolous sense of fun, but it was just a great pleasure to do it and you felt good about it, and I achieved a lot. And so I decided enough is enough, enough is enough. Forty years of service was enough.
Speaker 1: Did you--but there was a call at that time for you to also to step down and--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Call by whom? Nobody called, that was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, what about someone like Rock Newman?
Speaker 2: Well, Rock Newman used to be a friend. He decided that we had a different point of view. If I had run in 1990, I would've won the election, everybody says that. The 'Washington Post' [newspaper] said that. And for them to say it that means it must be true. So it wasn't fear of losing. There were no major--even the 'Washington Post' didn't have an editorial saying "step down, move out of the way." They didn't have that. There was no hue and cry from the community. It was voluntary on my part.
Speaker 1: And Andrew Brimmer was also a thorn in your side?
Speaker 2: Of course he was. He was part of the Control Board [of Washington, D.C.]. He was the Chair of the Control Board. The Control Board was the enemy of the people, so if he's chair of it and the Control Board is enemy of the people then he's the enemy of the people, it's simple as that.
Story_ID: 3087
Speaker 1: Washington D.C. is a place you love?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay, it is home for you. I would say it's probably, you have an affinity to Memphis [Tennessee] where you got your start, but it [Washington] is the place that has made you and so my question for you is, you know looking forward, is there life for Marion Barry outside of politics?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm enjoying it now. I'm doing investment banking and doing some other things and working with young people in the community. I'm having a ball.
Speaker 1: And what do you want to do now from this point on for the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: I don't know yet. I'm going to do something about violence and reduction of violence, but I'm not, you know, I've not got a big ole plan. I got to work, 'cause my early retirement doesn't support my lifestyle. But I'm going to do a lot in trying to help pull together groups that are working to reduce violence, those who are working on rape, those who are working on child abuse, those who are working on spouse abuse and road rage and homicide and assaults, that whole area. I'm going to put a lot of energy into that.
Speaker 1: And do you believe that Washington will still be the platform that you need to operate in and serve?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna live in Washington. There's not any other place I'd like to live--maybe San Francisco [California] but that's about it. I'm going to be in Washington until I die.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I love Washington, it's a great place to live, work and do business. Plus Washington's been good to me. I mean, the citizens of Washington have been extremely good to me and I try to be good to them too.
Story_ID: 3088
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about blacks and politics. You know some people, you take someone like [Rev.] Jesse Jackson with his Operation PUSH who used to be Operation Breadbasket. That his, you know, he now says--you know, and a lot of people at the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement believed that the front, that the war or the battle had to occur in the political arena. There's a new movement that says that that's somewhat pass. That the move has to occur in the economic arena and not the political arena, and I'm wondering what your thoughts are about that?
Speaker 2: I don't think that's the move now. I mean, most black people and some white people would advocate political empowerment as a way of getting economic power. I think what you hear is that more and more we're talking about economic power and about trying to build a strong economic base, you know, for this four hundred billion dollars that we spend every year, but I don't lessening of our resolve to go into politics. I haven't heard that. In fact, I hear just the reverse, people urged the people to run, run, run, run. You know, and we got caliber of people and different background, they didn't come out of the Civil Rights Movement so some of their views and their philosophy might not be mine. But no, I haven't heard that at all, not in any major way, just the reverse.
Story_ID: 3089
Speaker 1: Your hopes for the black community, what are they?
Speaker 2: That we continue to empower ourselves, that we uplift ourselves, that we get more actively involved with politics and go into businesses for ourselves, and that we just have a--that we combat this whole crime thing in our communities, whole gang-banging thing in our community. There's major drug selling in our community. And it's really become more healthy community, a more empowered community, and a much more sensitive community, and a much more involved community, and a much more fighting community. You know, they're still having problems in our community that can only be solved by standing up, and fighting, and fussing and acting and doing things. That's what we need to do. On the other hand, the black community has come a long way since slavery, you know. You talk about the black family and that kind of thing. But it hasn't been that long, you know, maybe 130 years, that black people couldn't even marry each other. Couldn't read legitmately without fear of being punished. So we've come a long ways as a community, and we're a strong community.
Speaker 1: What about those people who would say that the Civil Rights Movement sent us backwards instead of forwards?
Speaker 2: I haven't heard that, so they must be backwards themselves.
Speaker 1: What about those who say that it was better when the community was sort of self-contained and people, you know, it's all dispersed. What about those who talk about the psychological health of our community?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a brain drain. We've had a professional drain. When I was growing up, you know, I grew up in a very poor community [in Memphis, Tennessee]. Mrs. Jones, the teacher, lived down the street from me, you know, and Dr. Brown, the physician, lived two or three blocks over. We had more role models but right now, a lot of the professionals have left the black community and gone out to the suburbs--they're trying to escape; can't escape--and left us brain poor and image poor and role model poor. So kids who grow up in public housing now, they don't see anything but people like themselves. Where I live, I live in a low-income community. I mean I'm not low income. I'm middle income. They may not want to be mayor, but they can see somebody being successful. That's missing in our community in a large extent. On the other hand, a significant number--in Washington [D.C.], anyway--the young black professionals are moving back into Washington. So hopefully, they'll begin to exude professionalism, and other young black people who don't have it can see it and try to get it legitimately.
Speaker 1: So you don't really have--you feel pretty good about the future of the black community. You don't--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You have no concerns?
Speaker 2: That's different. Now, you're saying "no concerns."
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Of course, there are concerns. I mean just reverse of what I talked about is a concern, you know, the continued killing of our young men out there, the failure of our education system to motivate and educate a significant number of young black people, particularly a lot of young black men. You know, the crime and other kind of negative factors, the teenage pregnancy, you know, the HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] problem, all that's in there. I'm concerned, but I'm not traumatized and think that nothing good's going to happen.
Story_ID: 3090
Speaker 1: And if you could have been any other thing besides a politician, what would you--would have wanted to be--
Speaker 2: I can't think of it.
Speaker 1: No research scientist.
Speaker 2: No. No research scientist. That's the wrong track. I would have been bored to death doing that. I'd have been good at it if I had done it, because I try to be good at everything I do--I'm not being egotistical, I'm just like that, and I believe in excellence and you being the very best that you can in whatever you do.
Story_ID: 3091
Speaker 1: Then, Marion Barry, what about those people who said, you know, that you have been an embarrassment?
Speaker 2: There are some people that have and I was--in terms of what happened in the Vista [International Hotel, Washington D.C.] and a couple other instance, but not an embarrassment overall, though. I can't agree with that. I don't understand what they mean by being an embarrassment. I wasn't a buffoon. You know, I wasn't the babbling idiot. You know, I carried myself in a way a mayor ought to carry themselves. I tried to dress properly, you know, and look like somebody who was on the way, going somewhere positive.
Story_ID: 3092
Speaker 1: With President [Bill] Clinton, with what happened with him and the Monica Lewinsky affair, what were your sort of sense and sort of feeling? Were you identifying? Were you sympathetic? Were you--
Speaker 2: No, I think the Republicans went too far. Some of what he did was certainly not defensible. Even he said he can't defend it. But I think the Republicans went too far. That's why a lot of black people still like Clinton, because he done so much for them, the same kind of knowledge of where his whole record is what you look at, both personal and public. And so a lot of black people saw what happened as being inappropriate, indefensible, but it wasn't the only thing that to judge a President by. That was just one little snapshot.
Story_ID: 3093
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: We talked about that already.
Speaker 1: No, we've not talked about it.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, we did, too. No, we did talk about that.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) No, we didn't. The answer to the question has never come out.
Speaker 2: It has to have, I said to you--I mean I'll say it again, that I empowered people, motivated people, and we talked about Washington [D.C.] being rebuilt downtown--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Then what do you want to be remembered--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The legacy of your mayoral--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I'm talking about your legacy.
Speaker 2: They're interwoven. I mean forty years of public service, they've got to be interwoven. I mean I'm not a preacher, I'm not a teacher, I'm not this and not that in a traditional sense. My legacy is in my work. My work is my legacy. All right? That's what I've been doing for forty years, sixty-seven hours a week.
Story_ID: 3094
Speaker 1: We have people who are as light the white keys on a piano, and some as black as the black keys on the piano, ivory and ebony. So it's not just skin color, it's ideology. It's being proud of your ancestry, being connected to Africa as our ancestral homeland. It's being someone who recognizes the struggles of our ancestors, on whose shoulders we stand now as opposed to just happen to happened somewhere. It's an ideology. It's a philosophy. And it's also a willingness to help other black people, not the burning bridge that brought you across, but strengthen the bridge that brought you across.You know, as you move up the ladder of success, bring somebody with you. That's what it means to me.
Story_ID: 3095
Speaker 1: And what do you think the beauty of black people are? What do you think our uniqueness--each race has its own uniqueness. What do you think ours is?
Speaker 2: We're tenacious. We're survivors. We're smart.  We're forgers--we want to forge ahead. We know how to get things done. But mostly, we're just tenacious. I mean for Harriet Tubman to do what she did was not only smart but tenacious to bring 300 slaves out of--and never one caught. And what Frederick Douglass did, what others did, what Nat Turner did and what [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] did, all the leadership, all the preachers, all the teachers shows that we are very tenacious. We're not like weeping willows--we're like oak trees.
Story_ID: 3096
Speaker 1: I'm for reparations. I'm for debt relief for Africa, too.  You know. The debt's strangling these countries.
Speaker 2: May I just ask you a specific thing with reparations? There are many people who are proposing different types, whether it's just a monument for African Americans or whether it's actual restitution.
Speaker 1: Money.
Speaker 2: When you say you're for reparations, I just--
Speaker 1: Restitution. I mean a monument doesn't mean a damn thing. Not that--no offense to you. We're talking about money. We didn't even get our forty acres and a mule. Let's just get that. I'd be happy. Let's get that, my forty acres--and my mule, even though mules can't reproduce themselves, I mean give me a mule anyway. (Laughs).
Story_ID: 3097
Speaker 1: This is sort of self-promoting, but why do you think that the HistoryMakers--a project like this is important?
Speaker 2: What do you mean why is it important? We're not--it's H-I-S-T-O-R-Y. A lot of time it's "his story," not "history." And we've not been in the textbooks. We've not been in history. We've not been recognized properly. And we're not giving our young people--and old people, too--a sense of being. So this project will enable people to see through all the censors and the filters of the white press and see a person in terms of his total reality. And that's important, that we have that both in schools and churches and anywhere else. It's important white people see this, too, so that they can see of the great contribution and the reality, because most white people and black people only know those of us who are leadership through the newspapers. They have no idea what we really do or how we are or what we think. This project does that.
Story_ID: 3098
Speaker 1: That's in January 1979 during my inauguration parade. That's coming down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. That's my first election as mayor.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry at his mayoral inauguration parade in Washington D.C., January, 1979.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3099
Speaker 1: I think that was in '94 with my mother. She's I guess getting ready to go somewhere outside. She has a coat on, so. I think it was 1994.
Speaker 2: And give her name again.
Speaker 1: Her name is Mattie Cummings.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry's mother, Mattie Cummings, 1994.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3100
Speaker 1: One of my campaign shirts. It may have been '92 [1992] or '94 [1994], but my colors were green and white. So even though it's dark right there, that's green on a white t-shirt. I thought it was a nice sort of novel picture of somebody's baby, and they put the T-shirt over the top of it to express the baby's support for me.
Speaker 2: [A young Marion Barry supporter, 1992-1994.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3101
Speaker 1: Every year in Washington [D.C.] on [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] birthday, which is the third Monday in January, we have a parade out in the area where I live, Anacostia. And that's one of the parades. I'm in the parade, and you can see my sign on the side of the car. That's in '93 [1993], 1993. I was elected to the [Washington, D.C.] City Council 8th Ward in September and November of '92 [1992] and the parade was the third Monday in '93 [1993]. So that's what that's about. That's an African hat called a kufi.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry in a Martin Luther King Day parade, Washington, D.C., January, 1993.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3102
Speaker 1: That's from Nigeria, and it must have been '92 [1992], '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: What was the occasion? Do you know?
Speaker 1: I don't know. We were speaking someplace, some rally.
Speaker 2: You said this outfit was Nigerian?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Very colorful.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry at a rally in Nigeria, 1992-1993.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3103
Speaker 1: That was at my council member inauguration. These are some firefighters from Washington, D.C. We took a picture together. That was in January of '93 [1993]. And I got a kente cloth on my formal.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (second from right) with firefighters at his city council inauguration, Washington, D.C., January, 1993.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3104
Speaker 1: Right to the left, that's my son, Christopher [Barry], who's now twenty years of age. And to his right and my right is Morey Dioney, who is a friend of his. And to the left is Curtis Leftwich. These are some of his friends at one of the affairs I had.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry with his son Christopher and his friends, not dated; (L. to R.): Curt Leftwich, Marion Barry, Christopher Barry and Morey Dioney.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3105
Speaker 1: That's January of '93 [1993], after I'd been elected to the [Washington, D.C.] City Council. The guy on the right side of me is Harry Thomas, who was from--my right side, I'm talking, my right side--but Harry Thomas, who represented one of our eight wards. He's now deceased this year [2000]. To the left of me is Frank Smith, another member of the City Council in Ward One, who was in the Civil Rights Movement with me. And to his left is Kevin Chavis, who represents the ward right next to where I represented. He's in Ward Seven. I was in Ward Eight. And we have a shadow Senator, and trying to advocate for home rule, Senator [Florence] Pendleton.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (center with hat) with fellow city council members, Washington, D.C., January, 1993; (L. to R.): Unidentified man, Harry Thomas, Marion Barry, Frank Smith, Kevin Chavis, and U.S. Senator Florence Pendleton.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3106
Speaker 1: I think that's  [M.C.] Hammer [rap artist].
Speaker 2: Yeah, looks like him.
Speaker 1: Yeah. We were at some concert. That's my son [Christopher Barry] in the middle, and that's Hammer on the left.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what year it might be?
Speaker 1: Looking at my son, his height, probably '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (left) with his son Christopher with rap artist M.C. Hammer, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3107
Speaker 1: That's [First Lady] Hillary [Rodham] Clinton in the middle; myself on her left; and my wife, Cora [Masters Barry], on her right. This is probably about '93 [1993], '94 [1994] at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (right), his wife, Cora, and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton at the White House, Washington, D.C., 1994.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3108
Speaker 1: That's [President] Bill Clinton and myself, it looks like about '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: And where was this at?
Speaker 1: In the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: In the White House?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (right) with President Bill Clinton at the White House, Washington, D.C. 1993.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3109
Speaker 1: Probably 1996 or so.
Speaker 2: Anyone of importance?
Speaker 1: No, just local businesspeople.
Speaker 2: Where are you meeting?
Speaker 1: At a breakfast.
Speaker 2: At a breakfast?
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C., yeah, at a hotel.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (right) meeting with local businessmen Washington, D.C., 1996.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3110
Speaker 1: My son's [Christopher Barry] on my left and we're just at some event. They took a picture of it, probably 1995.
Speaker 2: Who made the collage of the--?
Speaker 1: Neighborhood group.
Speaker 2: Neighborhood group?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they gave me a whole photo album of a block party and some other stuff that they had, you know, worked on.
Speaker 2: How old is your son here do you think?
Speaker 1: He was probably seventeen.
Speaker 2: Seventeen?
Speaker 1: Actually, here it says thirteen.
Speaker 2: Probably seventeen, huh? What says thirteen?
Speaker 1: Does it say thirteen on there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it says thirteen.
Speaker 1: Seriously?
Speaker 2: It says "thirteen-year-old son."
Speaker 1: Oh, God.
Speaker 2: Pretty mature there for a--
Speaker 1: I try to judge him by his height, you know. So he's six [feet] three [inches] now. So he was thirteen there.
Speaker 2: [Collage made by a neighborhood group of Marion Barry (left) with his son, Christopher Barry, Washington, D.C., ca. 1995.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3111
Speaker 1: That's my wife on my left-hand side, Cora Masters Barry, and the gentleman to my fore right is Jerry Rawlings, R-A-W-L-I-N-G-S. He's the President of the Nation of Ghana in West Africa. That's his wife next to him. This is 1997 when he came to visit us in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry, Jerry Rawlings, President of Ghana, and their spouses, Washington, D.C., 1997; (L. to R.): Jerry Rawlings, Mrs. Rawlings, Marion Barry and Cora Masters Barry.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3112
Speaker 1: This is an inaugural breakfast I had in 1995, and the gentleman to the far left--my far right--is our chief judge of one of our local courts, Judge Eugene Hamilton.
Speaker 2: He's shaking your hand?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (right) shaking hands with Judge Eugene Hamilton at his mayoral inauguration breakfast, Washington, D.C., 1995.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3113
Speaker 1: This must be '96 [1996]. The National Council of Negro Women was opening their headquarters on Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.], the only African American owned building on Pennsylvania between the White House and the Capitol. And the lady there to my left is Dorothy Height. She is the president and chairman emeritus of the organization, and she's been with the organization since 1937. And I'm giving her a key to the city.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (left) presenting Dorothy Height of the National Council of Negro Women with a key to the city, Washington D.C., 1996.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3114
Speaker 1: Same event. We're at the opening of the headquarters [of the National Council of Negro Women, Inc. in Washington, D.C.]. [First Lady] Hillary [Rodham] Clinton is speaking. And then you see, with the yellow on, Maya Angelou, and myself, my wife Cora [Masters Barry] to my right, and a bunch of other people in the back. Dorothy Height. Next to my wife is Cicely Tyson. You see Maya Angelou. And that's the Howard University [Washington, D.C.] choir in the background. That's Bill Cosby's wife [Camille Cosby] to the left of--Camille--to the left of Hillary.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Height (at podium) speaking at the opening of the National Council of Negro Women headquarters, Washington, D.C., 1996.  Also present on stage are: Cora Masters Barry, Marion Barry, Maya Angelou, First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and Camille Cosby.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3115
Speaker 1: This is '94 at a luncheon that the Embassy of South Africa gave for Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (standing left) and his wife, Cora Masters Barry attend a luncheon at the South African Embassy with Nelson Mandela (seated), Washington, D.C., 1994. From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3116
Speaker 1: January of '93 [1993] in my swearing in as [Washington, D.C. City] Council member from Ward Eight. My mother [Mattie Cummings]--that's hte Judge Luke Moore, who is now deceased, my mother, my son Christopher [Barry], myself, my wife Cora [Masters Barry].
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry is sworn in as a member of the City Council, Washington, D.C., January, 1993; (L. to R.): Judge Luke Moore, Marion Barry's mother, Mattie Cummings, son, Christopher Barry, Marion Barry, and wife, Cora Masters Barry.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3117
Speaker 1: That's Tom Joyner. He has a very popular radio show all over America, and he's interviewing me. It's probably 1996.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry (left) interviewed by radio host Tom Joyner, 1996.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3118
Speaker 1: That's in Africa. That's 1997 in Ivory Coast [Cte d'Ivoire], at a village where they're celebrating my coming.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry being greeted during his visit to the Ivory Coast, 1997.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3119
Speaker 1: This in Guinea, again at a village where they're celebrating me coming.
Speaker 2: Same time?
Speaker 1: Well, I went to Ivory Coast [Cte d'Ivoire] and Guinea same point--same period, '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry being greeted during his visit to Guinea, 1997.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
Story_ID: 3120
Speaker 1: That's some event in '95 [1995]. My mother [Mattie Cummings] is to my left; and my sister, Elizabeth, is to her left--not Elizabeth, Gloria .
Speaker 2: Elizabeth is the oldest?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [Marion Barry speaks while his mother, Mattie Cummings, and sister Gloria look on, 1995.  From the collection of Marion Barry.]
