Story_ID: 667446
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey; observing is Denise Gines.  Sir can you please state your full name and spell for us, please?
Speaker 2: Gregory Thomas Baranco, B-A-R-A-N-C-O [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco].
Speaker 1: And is there a story behind the last name Baranco?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are many stories but you're talking to the wrong Baranco to get that information.  The, the name has a, I think a Spanish origin because we traced it back to the church in Cuba.  And so the baptismal records were there, but the family came over in like 1862, six- right at the Civil War.  And then that was, they came into New Orleans [Louisiana] as support and you know from New Orleans that's where the families really entered the United States.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from there we--B.V. Baranco which is Beverly Victor Baranco [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.], which was my father, but his father was B.V. Baranco [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.].  I had a brother who was the fourth [Beverly V. Baranco, IV] and then his father of course B.V. Baranco, and they were all--my grandfather is an attorney.  He was--at that time most African Americans were in the Republican Party; he was a delegate from South Louisiana.  They, you know, he's a pretty famous guy in his own right.  He started the Peoples Life Insurance Company [Peoples Life Insurance Company of Louisiana] in New Orleans; he brought--he and J.S. Clark [Joseph S. Clark] brought Booker T. Washington to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] around 1903, '4 [1904], '5 [1905] something like that.  And so my father and--was one of eight siblings--three boys, five girls--all of them finished college; and my father's a dentist.  My uncle's a doctor; everybody else was in education.
Speaker 1: Okay well I'm, I'm going to ask you in depth about all that but I, I just wanted to find out about the, the origin of the name.  And--'cause it's not a usual name you hear in the United States, (unclear) French or Spanish, but you think it's probably Spanish?
Speaker 2: Probably Spanish; and the interesting thing is all of the Barancos with one R, B-A-R-A-N-C-O, are African American.  All the Barrancos with two Rs are not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It seems to be a custom down in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah it's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Like I know we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner years ago, and she said that the white folks in Meridian [Mississippi] were Ladniers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the black folks were Ladners.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, so there's one letter difference that ma- yeah. So--sir, so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 10th, 1948; Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation?
Occupation: automobile dealer; Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead is my business.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 3rd of September?  October (laughter) yeah how about that--2016.
Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead in the conference room.
Speaker 1: Okay; Atlanta, Georgia.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 667447
Speaker 1: All right so before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're kind of like a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, that would be catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, I would say Paris [France].
Speaker 1: All right and the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, favorite phrase or saying--all I, I like to say: and if things--if the conditions are right, let's go all in.
Story_ID: 667448
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --mother's side of the family and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but we'll start with your mother's side; can you give us her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Evans, E-V-A-N-S, Edmond, E-D-M-O-N-D [Evelyn Edmond Baranco].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her, well she was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and the date of birth was September 26--I don't know the date.
Speaker 1: Was it in the '20s [1920s] you think, or before?
Speaker 2: Oh it's before the '20s [1920s], I would--let's see I, I may be able to come close.  My dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] was born in 1902, and so my mother was about, so I'd say around 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how what, what were they doing and, and?
Speaker 2: Well my, my mother's side of the family, my mother's mother we just knew as Ma Bell [ph.] and sh- my mother and her brother Maurice both finished school, college.  My mother finished from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Maurice finished from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and 'course he was a football player at Southern.  And there's a, the agricultural center at Southern University is named for Maurice: it's Maurice Edmond agricultural center [Maurice A. Edmond Livestock Arena].  And--
Speaker 1: Did he--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: --did he teach there or did he?
Speaker 2: He, he taught--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he, he had a, the biggest event I guess was a, a livestock show that he did annually.  And it was, it was quite a, quite a deal because everybody raised their, whatever animals you know pigs, cows, chickens whatever he had, and they had a big show.  And they, and they would auction off these animals, but you get a first, second prize for the recognition of who had the best whatever kind of animal it was.  And that was a pretty big deal, and you know they had everything that you can think of on a farm.  And that's, that was the kind of work that he did; and he taught folks how to, to have livestock and how to--the raising, tend them, tend to them and also growing things that would, that a farmer would grow in South Louisiana.
Speaker 1: So this Maurice Edmonds [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Maurice Edmond [Maurice A. Edmond].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Russel Honore [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Russel L. Honore], when we interviewed him he talked about that livestock show and he talked about it--not only would ordinary, you know, community people show up, but the corporate heads would show up--Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] and different companies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody, everybody would--
Speaker 1: --and actually buy livestock.
Speaker 2: --and buy livestock; and so because my parents had eight children, not only did we raise livestock and that was, that what--'cause we lived in the city.  That was at Maurice's house, but we were responsible for this, for the cattle or pig or you know whatever (laughter).  And, and so at the end of the, at the livestock show we would buy a, a pig or a cow or whatever it was for the following year; you would eat on that all year long.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So yeah so quite a, quite an inter- interesting endeavor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any other brothers and sisters that?
Speaker 2: She did, Josie [Josie Edmond] and my mother was the--and, and Maurice were the two that finished college.  The others were working in different--you know Josie ran a restaurant and bar (laughter).  And so, and that was, that was her side of the family.
Story_ID: 667449
Speaker 1: How far do they go back, do, do they go back to any other place other than Louisiana, or?
Speaker 2: No, no, just, just in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your, now did your mother [Evelyn Edmond Baranco] get a chance to go to college to?
Speaker 2: Yes my mother went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and she was really proud of that; Fisk is, is a great institution now, but it was really in its prime then.  And so she was very, very proud of the fact that she was a Fisk graduate.
Speaker 1: What did she major in, or?
Speaker 2: She majored in English.  My mother was, she taught math and English; and then she became a guidance counselor.  She got her master's from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana] and little story to that.  I was, I was the third from the youngest, and my, so my mother went back to school to get her master's degree.  And this class started at six in the evening at Xavier in New Orleans. Well that's a eighty mile drive from Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  So she was teaching school, getting off school and driving to New Orleans, and after class driving back.  So this was pretty tiresome on her, so she needed someone to ride with her, keep her awake, and accompany her on this trip to New Orleans and back--'cause she had to come back the next day to work.  And so since I was the, you know available and I--and, and the male son my, my oldest brother Raphael [Raphael Baranco] is a dentist in Lafayette [Louisiana].  So he was sixteen years old, he was off; my next oldest brother, Beverly [Beverly V. Baranco, IV], would've been five.  But Beverly was bipolar and so Beverly was at home, so that left me so I got to ride back and forth and spend quality time with my mother in the ages of thirteen and fourteen years old, which was invaluable time to have alone.  And, and on that drive, finally one of these times she was little tired coming back, and she said you know, "I, I--we need to stop," and I said, "Well I can drive.  And I know I'm not fifteen, but," you had to be fifteen to get your license, "but if you'll allow me, I'll drive, get us on home," and so finally she acquiesced--I'm pretty good salesperson.  And that's really how I got all of my driving skills (laughter) back, back and forth to New Orleans.
Speaker 1: So could you actually drive when you (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I--that, that was no doubt about it, I was beyond that, she just--you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had, I had to demonstrate it for her, so that, that was about it.
Story_ID: 667450
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell for it for us?
Speaker 2: Beverly Victor Baranco--B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, V-I-C-T-O-R; Baranco, B-A-R-A-N-C-O [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth--you, you said he was born in 1908 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was like--it was 1902, and I think it's January the 6th.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o-two [1902]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay all right; and what can you tell us about his side of the family, how far back can you trace them, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, we can trace that side of the family all the way back to these baptismal records in, in Cuba.  My, my father was B.V. Baranco, his dad was B.V. Baranco, Sr. [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.] as I mentioned, his dad was an attorney.  My father's a dentist; he had five sisters, they were all school teachers in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And two brothers--one is a, a doctor, and the other was a, taught school for a while in New Orleans and then became ill.  So they were very active family, very active in the Catholic churches in the South Louisiana, and very active in politics; art; you know the family was very strong on education, very strong on, on work.  You were expected to, to pursue your education, you were considered to be very, very blessed being in this family.  And, therefore, having you know, beliefs oblige responsibilities to the community; and we had a great community both in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And your, your grandfather was the first Baranco to come to the United States, right?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: He wasn't?
Speaker 2: --his, that would be his father before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when, when you go to the, you know in, in Baton Rouge you can find all the lineage right there in the graveyard, so.
Speaker 1: Okay so the- so you had, your then great-grandfather was the first one--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to come over from Cuba?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So let's see, so when your father--so your father is being raised by a lawyer, right?  Your grandfather was a lawyer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and his, his wife Anna Mi- Miranda Baranco [Anna Miranda Baranco]; and so they were originally in, in, in New Orleans with--the family always been New Orleans and Baton Rouge.  So they had, they had a home in both--my grandfather was in Baton Rouge and then he moved to New Orleans.  'Cause the Peoples Life Insurance Company [Peoples Life Insurance Company of Louisiana] was in New Orleans, all the girls were raised in, in New Orleans.  My dad was actually raised in Baton Rouge, finished from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in dental school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 667451
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, other than the fact that my mother [Evelyn Edmond Baranco]--there was a, a museum exhibit in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] about South Baton Rouge.  And my mother was on the exhibit, the banners that were on every street corner in downtown Baton Rouge talking about this exhibit was a picture of my mother.  So basically, my mother was away at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], when she returned and started teaching, my father [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] you know ran into her or met her.  But obviously she stunned him so much that he, I don't think he ever got over the--he married her and, married all his life, so.
Speaker 1: Did he know her from her picture on the banner, or?
Speaker 2: No, no, this, this, this banner was within the last ten years--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This, this is a recent exhibit talking about South Baton Rouge--the Old South Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and how African Americans had developed the area whe- there--political, social and working connections.  You can imagine the African American community there was a, there were laborers, but there were a lot of skilled workers in South Baton Rouge.  A lot of carpenters, a lot of tradesmen and, and, and bricklaying--all the different trades.  And so, you had a, a working class and a professional class that developed in South Baton Rouge.  They had a, a very interesting relationship with the white community, and so much so that when folks from South Baton Rouge would travel out of town, they would get--in fact the- you know I have seen these letters, they would get a letter from the mayor or whoever in the community of Baton Rouge saying that Larry's a good guy, we know him, and he's one of our citizens.  Please show him all the courtesies, and if there are any issues--so these folks are looking after each other in South Baton Rouge.  And--
Speaker 1: So--okay so, so the black professional class, at least some of them had achieved a status where because of bad race relations there, the white folks could write them a letter to kind of help them get--you know ease their journey (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if, if they were traveling, if they were traveling, if they were going north or west, and you are a, a black family, African American family, you didn't wanna get caught traveling through Mississippi or, or Arkansas or Texas or wherever it was.  So they would actually give them a letter that--I've seen them on this, the city's letterhead saying that that, this person please show them you know, your greatest courtesies, if there are any problems contact me and you know.
Speaker 1: Have you ever, you ever witnessed a situation or heard of a situation where it actually worked?
Speaker 2: Where it actually worked?
Speaker 1: Yeah where somebody was actually, was harassed by the police or some other group on their way someplace?
Speaker 2: Well I, I've heard of different situations, I, I was not involved in them personally.  But there was another dentist in, in South Baton Rouge, Dupie Anderson [ph.] and he was on his way with his family to somewhere on the West Coast.  And there was supposedly an opportunity or situation that arose and it was, it was helpful to him.  Now I don't, you know I wasn't there, so I (laughter) so I don't know, but I, I have seen the letters.  In fact I probably have a, I have probably a picture of one of those letters.
Speaker 1: That would be, it'll be, I, I hope you send it to us.
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That would be--
Speaker 2: --I'll--
Speaker 1: --interesting to see.
Speaker 2: --I'll try to dig it up, abso- absolutely.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 667452
Speaker 1: So your family though from what I've read was part of the professional class in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The black professional class and, and--along with the Clarks and I don't know who all else (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Clarks, J.S. Clark [Joseph S. Clark] was, he was the--well the first Clark that would've been a peer to my grandfather [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.] was, he was principal of a school [Baton Rouge Academy, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; and later became the first president of Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] when it was moved to Baton Rouge.  Then his son became the president and he was a peer of my father [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.].
Speaker 1: So Felton G. Clark [Felton Grandison Clark]?
Speaker 2: Felton G., so they, they worked together and did, not only a lot of education but a lot of development and producing of jobs together on several projects.  So there was a relationship in the, in the black community and in the, and it was a very strong black professional class--both educators and doctors and a- and attorneys in South Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I'm a ask you more about Felton Clark, but later 'cause his, his story's almost Shakespearean, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you can't even--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know make up a story that's more dramatic than Felton G. Clark's; it's a, it's a tragic kind of story in a way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know all the details of it, but I know that, that there are, there was great talent, great stories in, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Yeah we mentioned when I came in, Dr. Valerian Smith, the--
Speaker 2: Valerian Smith was, he was a dentist by profession, but as far as someone that understood the arts and the, and was bringing--basically, we would have Broadway in Baton Rouge (laughter) you know.  Because he, he was, that was what, that was his gift to the community.
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah he, he was a singer and actor--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --designed a house where the stream actually ran through the house, and they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ran through the house; and the- and as unique as that was the skillset of the, the workers and the thinkers in Baton Rouge, that was--Valerian's house was really, really nice.  But it was not the only really, really, really nice house in South Baton Rouge, and you--I've seen pictures and I've been to the houses.  There, there were, even though they were shotgun houses they were fabulously built, I mean pieces of art.  And they reminded me when I, when I think back, you know these mini houses that we're, ever, ever- the rage now, these small houses, that's what they looked like back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 667453
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' talents, their sense of humor, their, their, the things they were interested in, the- the way they walked, the way they talked, the way they looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I would have to say it was a combination of the, of the two.  My dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] was very driven, very, very service minded, and my--very sharp dresser; and always no matter where he was, he had on a suit and tie you know.  He, he always wanted to look the, the most professional that he could, regardless of the situation.  So you know he was in college, you know he boxed and then these type of things.  But his, his, his dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.] was also (laughter) he was an attorney but he was a dentist--well, excuse me barber.  Where my dad also cut hair as a dentist, and so that you know he, he just he was always wanted to be properly dressed and properly atti- attired on the conservative side.  My mother [Evelyn Edmond Baranco] was very practical, she believed that work was a good for everybody; she believed that education was just something you had to do.  All of my sisters were--well one is, one is a dentist, everyone else was school teacher, education, you know it was just expected you were gonna get your college degree.  My brother who is bipolar at that time, you would thi- say retarded, but my, my brother and I grew up together, Beverly [Beverly V. Baranco, IV].  And he was expected to, to (laughter) regardless of how upset he might get or what he--fit he might throw he was expected to do his homework and get his degree (laughter) like everybody else.   And so he did, he got his high school degree and held a job until he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I, I'm a little bit of both; you know you think about the, that Bible story of the tithes--that's kind of my, my parents.  You were, everyone was given what they needed, one guy five galen- talents; the next, two; the next, one.  And when the, when the, when the guy comes back say, "What have you done with the talent I gave you," well that's how we're gonna be held accountable: the guy that had five and made five more, well done.  You know I had two and made two more, well done; the guy that buried those talents and didn't do anything with them in the ground.   You know they threw him, threw him in the street--well that was, that was the household I grew up in.  You were expected to, to perform, and expected to make a difference in, in your community in the neighborhood.  My mother I mentioned was a guidance counselor and she sat me down and I never will forget this conversation where she said you know, you have a responsibility to your friends to, to push them as much as possible.  Because no matter how smart you think they are now, and I was thinking that my, my neighbor was just the smartest guy on earth.  And, and he was, but she said you know, our culture will take that away from him and take that desire to be the best that he can be.  And you got to not only take care of yourself, you got to encourage him.  And that's a, that's a responsibility that you have, 'cause you know better.
Speaker 1: Now you know I never heard--in all the interviews I've done, there's been over a thousand of them, I never heard that kind of conversation between a mother and her son before.  Or, or a father and son--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --that, that you're responsible for your friends.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: I was responsible, and it helped me tremendously in retrospect.  My brother, my oldest brother [Raphael Baranco] was out of the house.  So my sisters and--yeah I mean, I've--as a kid I was probably a terror, I mean I'm the one that broke away.  I'm not a dentist, I'm not a doctor, I'm not even a lawyer you know, so (laughter); and, and my dad said that at my grand opening for my first dealership [Baranco Pontiac, Inc., East Point, Georgia], you know.  But I was always raised with the idea that there were--that you, you had blessings you were to share them.  And you had responsibilities to your, to your community; and that was just the way it was.
Story_ID: 667454
Speaker 1: Now your grandfather Baranco [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.] was one of the founding members of the Odd Fellows [Independent Order of Odd Fellows] or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in, in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, the Odd Fellows, they were involved in--he was involved in politics, he was involved in--as I mentioned he was a barber.  So that was a pretty good profession, that--he got his law degree late in life.  And Peoples Life Insurance Company [Peoples Life Insurance Company of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], he was one of the founders there; he was president of Peoples Life Insurance.  And so in, in my life the translation forward you know my dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] was involved with the life insurance company.  And he and Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] were involved in First Federal Savings and Loan [First Federal Savings and Loan Association].  So along for me, I was chairman of Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia]; and I was, we started a bank first, started the bank [First Southern Bank] that merged with Citizens Trust [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia], it's still running now.  And so these things were not, they were not a big stretch; it was something that you know I learned at home.  And it was just as a, as a responsibility something I should be able to help and provide to the community period.  You know if (laughter), if I were to do anything less, I would've been you know failing because these are things that I knew could be accomplished.  And, and each one of those--they were hurdles but the hurdles had already been jumped.  I was just in the wake, you know; so (laughter), the hurdle wasn't as high for me as it was for my grandfather or for my father.
Story_ID: 667455
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your brothers and sisters; what, you told us something about them, but can you just list them from--your (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, from top to bottom?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well let's start with my youngest sister's Patricia Baranco, Dr. Patricia Baranco--she's a dentist in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]; and she's now working in Lake Charles, Louisiana.  So Patricia is a, was a Fisk graduate and then Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And she was the youngest of eight.  Bette Marie Bland, Bette [Bette Baranco Bland] is in New Jersey now, in Orange; her husband's a judge up there, Richard Bland [Richard L. Bland, Jr.].  Both Bette and Rich are, well Rich is retiring and Bette is retiring from the school system.  She worked as a, a writer, she's the family scribe, historian, she can tell you all kind of things that I don't know anything about (laughter).  But she is, she as I mentioned she just retired and she worked for, for a while as a reporter for the Morning Advocate in Baton Rouge.  And then she worked for The New Yorker for--had some articles that, with them.  Then there's me; and my next would be my brother Beverly [Beverly V. Baranco, IV], and Beverly as I mentioned was bipolar, but we grew up in the same room together.  He was my big brother and I enjoyed our relationship quite a bit because he taught me a lot about people skills and how to get along with folks.  And when I was out of line, he'd let me know it and so we worked really well together.  Next my sister Vivian [Vivian Baranco Robertson], she was a school teacher in, in Baton Rouge, finished from I don't know, I, I Vi- Vivian finished from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] also.  And Vivian's, I don't know whether I wanna admit this or not, but she taught Bobby Jindal, which she was proud of and I despised (unclear) (laughter).  You know anyway (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who became the governor of Louisiana--Republican governor of Louisiana, Bobby Jindal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah but she was, she was proud about Bobby Jindal; and anyway, but she was a great sister and very loyal and supportive of, of me.  And she, she was very, very instrumental in helping me--'cause when I, the joy of my life is [HistoryMaker] Juanita Baranco, my wife.  And when I met Juanita I was in, in school, in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and I was, did not have in mind getting married and being settled for the rest of my life.  And Vivian held me until I came to my senses, so that I, I'm forever grateful to her for, for her.  Vera-Anna [Vera-Anna Baranco], also school teacher, Vera-Anna was very helpful in everything.  She mentored me quite a bit; being the, you know my brother, my older brother was gone, and all I heard about him he was you know he was the golden child.  So I didn't know him and, and we get along great now, but at the time there was this rivalry.  Because he was of course sixteen years older so he was off, but anyway Vera-Anna help, help me understand who he was.  'Cause he was out of the house then in [U.S.] military and going to college, so--by the time I got to remember him.  But anyway so Vera-Anna and she was, bought me--I played the trombone and she bought me my first trombone.  I managed to turn her car, her new car over in the lake, somehow I managed to do that, but she was very trusting and loving and, and didn't hold any of that against me.  Evelyn Louise [Evelyn Baranco Hardin], finished from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]; she was quite a swimmer, we--you know Esther Williams in, in our neighborhood (laughter).  And she married a fellow over in--Virgil Hardin, he was, they met in New Orleans [Louisiana], and so he's a doctor.  And so she's travelled all over the world; and then my brother Ray.  So there are eight of us, there are four of us still living: Patsy, Bette, Raphael [Raphael Baranco] and myself, and the others are deceased.
Story_ID: 667456
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of childhood?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of childhood?  Ride- we, we had a house, had a long hall, hallway, and it had two heaters in the floor.  And my earliest memories were riding down that hallway on my tricycle trying to go full speed and then turn around before I hit the wall, and slide backwards into the wall.  That was, that's my earliest memories of childhood, so (laughter).  And I, I had the you know habit of calling myself Mr. A 'cause that's the first letter in the alphabet--that's all I knew.  I knew it was the first one so that was a start that was enough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mr. A?
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't, I didn't need to know the rest of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway.
Story_ID: 667457
Speaker 1: I mean I had a wonderful childhood, we--there were a lot of things that I learned early because of the family.  My, my family ran an organization called the Good Samaritans [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] where they went to the schools.  Schools gave you know gave them the name of families that needed assistance, so around Thanksgiving they would, they would start in September to collect clothes, food and everything for these families that they had identified, then you go and deliver them.  Well I was young and all this was prepared upstairs in my dad's [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] office, so I went in there, there were tables laid out with clothes and with toys and different ages and numbers.  And I, when I got up there this boy this is absolutely wonderful, I you know really could use that toy and that outfit and this that and the other.  And so you know they ran me out of there so finally my dad said I want you to go on a delivery.  And I never will forget the first delivery they pulled up to the house and they hollered, "Good Samaritans," and the kids would come running out. And so they gave me a bag and said, "You take this bag over there," so I carried the bag; the kids were happy to get the bags.  I had a bag of food to take it in the house, well when I went inside the mother was on the couch, and she had obviously had diabetes or something and was missing a leg, and she told me with tears you know how much she appreciated bringing it in there.  And I--from that point on, I never worried about the, the clothes and the toys as much, 'cause they didn't, didn't mean the same to me that they did to those kids.  And the other lesson I learned was from my brother, I was--brother Beverly [Beverly V. Baranco, IV]--I had, was cutting up over some toy I'd gotten, it was a train.  I was pretty excited about it, I put together and I ig- I'd ignored my brother quite a bit.  So he came in and smashed that train to pieces (laughter) so I said well okay, I got it you know.  So for me I, I never had a, a big connection, I've always felt that whatever it was I needed I could earn and get.  And there's a responsibility that comes with that--there're folks that need it more than you do.
Story_ID: 667458
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like? What--did it have a name?
Speaker 2: Well South Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know we, we lived--our house was a, was a pretty fancy house, it was a brick house.  And the neighborhood was integrated beginning, and there--everybody just lived in there together.  But then segregation became the, the vogue and the white neighbors moved out, and--but the neighborhood was a great neighborhood to grow up in.
Speaker 1: So segregation ca- you saw segregation become more--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --marked I guess?
Speaker 2: Marked; in other words--I was born in '48 [1948] and so initially right after the war [World War II, WWII] everybody was together and it was, and it was really, there wasn't a big division in, in the black and white in the neighborhood.  But as the, I guess the, you know Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and the white folks figured they've, they've--all of sudden it wasn't popular, they shouldn't be in the neighborhood.  So they moved out, and so that was--you know looking back on it, it's really interesting.  At the time, we didn't, we didn't know; all we knew we they were going (laughter).  And, and we had, so probably five, six houses per block, and out of those houses probably four were white families.  The families--both the families right across the street, but all of a sudden they were gone.  So, so be it, but the neighborhood was a great neighborhood.  We, I was you know I was big into toys, my first job was assembling toys for Gottschalks [Gottschalks, Inc.], so--in high school, so I was really good with roller skates and bicycles and then I still ride a bicycle.  I ride probably 100, 150 miles a week now, and it was enjoyable then, it's enjoyable now, so.  That was the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great neighborhood.
Story_ID: 667459
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school probably--well, I guess it was before first grade at, you wouldn't call it kindergarten but my mother [Evelyn Edmond Baranco], everybody, all of my sisters were schoolteachers.  So you know I was at somebody's school and maybe I wasn't in class, but I was at a school.  And all the way up until when my mother got her master's degree I was--at Xavier--at thirteen, fourteen years old I was at a school.  So to some extent I didn't study as hard as I should have, I mean I always made good grades and never failed a grade or anything like that.  And I always said I could, could make an A, but you had to work for an A you know.  And I got enough A's without working so you know (laughter) I just, I just coasted along.  It, it wasn't, it wasn't the best that I could've done.  And, out of high school I took the MCAT for medical school at--I mean out of college, the LSAT for law school, I took them all, and passed them all fine.
Speaker 1: So did you go to Catholic school in grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Catholic school, St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; then I went to Southern Lab [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is a lab school for the Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College]--for the teachers to, to learn.  But it was a really great school.  I went to McKinley [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], thought I wanted to be an athlete, that didn't work out for me too well.  I, I got down there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that the high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah high school.
Speaker 1: McKinley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had guys like--
Speaker 1: What were you trying to play?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was baseball and football--baseball primarily; and we had a young fella by the name of Choo Choo Brooks so whatever it was I was gonna be second to Choo Choo.   And he's, he's over the parks and recreation in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] right now.  The last time he saw me he, "Man, you got that old businessman look," (laughter).  So anyway, but it was a great community, great neighborhood; the, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] was the Baranco-Clark YMCA [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], so.
Speaker 1: Now it's named for your, your--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --grandfather [Beverly V. Baranco, Sr.]; or your father [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.], and--
Speaker 2: And my father, and, and Dr. Clark--Felton [Felton Grandison Clark].
Speaker 1: Felton Clark.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So--and then Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my uncle [Raymond Baranco] was the medical doctor at Southern University from probably 1914 or '15 [1915] on.  And so I could go to Southern and, and, and do whatever and you know had pretty much run of the campus.
Speaker 1: Now Southern is in Scot- this is right out outside of Baton Rouge, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Scotlandville.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's probably ten, fifteen miles away but I was you know I was really good at skates and you know scooters and bicycles and so that was, that was nothing.  I, I, I could travel, so spent a lot of--but school: St. Francis Xavier, Southern Lab, McKinley for one year, Catholic High [Catholic High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], time to integrate Catholic High; and back to Southern Lab for my graduation with my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then off, and college started off at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 667460
Speaker 1: Now well let me go back to your high school for a minute here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: And I--now why did you switch high schools? I mean, that's like, that's like three different ones?
Speaker 2: Well the, McKinley [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was a public school and that was the, the powerhouse in town; Southern--following my class, Southern was you know AA champs in everything.  But I wanted to go to McKinley, I grew up in South Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Southern high [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was on the campus, which was North Baton Rouge, near Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So all of my friends were at McKinley, I wanted to go to McKinley and, and, and do things that wanted to do at McKinley.  And then that was my junior year, and then senior year my dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] and mom [Evelyn Edmond Baranco] and the bishops had you know, "You need to go out here to Catholic High [Catholic High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and integrate Catholic High."  I said well, I'm not worried about Catholic High (laughter) you know but anyway.  So I ended up at Catholic High; and then the last semester I came back from Catholic High to, to Southern Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And that was just because that was my class--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --prior to when I left in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: So nothing happened at the Catholic High that was bad or anything, or?
Speaker 2: Oh it was plenty that happened that was bad; yeah it was terrible (laughter).  In fact I had, in the last year I received a letter from the principal, although he wasn't the principal at the time, of apology.  I, and I was at a, a religious function and a gentleman came up to me, his parents owned the store and another apology.  And you know I understand, but that was, that was then, this is now and it was just a chapter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did they do to you?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or well let me just (unclear)--how many black students intended to integrate Catholic High and then what, how were you treated?
Speaker 2: There were five, I was the last to leave; I didn't graduate from Catholic High, I graduated from Southern Lab.
Speaker 1: Yeah I know.
Speaker 2: But I left you know at the, at, at--
Speaker 1: But you were the only five students at, at Catholic High?
Speaker 2: At Catholic High.
Speaker 1: Is this is all boys school?
Speaker 2: All boys school; and after the first week, I was the one.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Everybody else left?
Speaker 2: Everybody else left.  They were--it was beyond rude, it was at the point of being violent; you know, somebody tried to run over me with a car, you know (laughter).  The, but I was, you know I was pretty rough and tumble, so it (shakes head) you know, but the teacher, guy by the name of Kennedy [ph.] you know was a history teacher.  He came in, he said you know he would start the classes, today's class and, "Attendance for all you know young white men, we're gonna make you guys into men," you know.
Speaker 1: That's what, what he, he said?
Speaker 2: That's, that's how he'd start the class so (laughter)--it's at a Catholic school, I'm saying to myself, wow.  But it, it--you know I felt, it was a little bit of anger and disappointment, but then you know it was little bit sad.  'Cause these were people that I, I knew and some of the kids I'd known before through sports or something else.  And now all of a sudden they, they either would not step up and, and would not speak to you, or they were you know trying to show how racist they could be.  And so that, that was surprising, disappointing, a little sad, but I, I was, a pretty rambunctious type of kid; I wasn't one that would be run over.  And I was smart enough not to get in any trouble, you know I never got arrested or anything like that.  But I would, I would figure out how to stand up for myself.
Speaker 1: Now in--so who's decision was it--I mean did, did you ask to, to go back to Southern--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --to graduate with your--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Yeah I, I did, I--well I, I had enough.
Speaker 1: Did your parents have any idea how bad it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah they knew, that's why they let me go back to Southern (laughter) you know because they, because it was one of those things where you know you say what happened.  And then, and you're, and my dad would get upset and he'd go down to the school.  And they'd say well you know, "We're sorry, it's not gonna happen--," and then they do it again you know (laughter).  And, and then they would you know they'd say things like--well you know I didn't respond well you know 'cause I would, somebody stepped on my milk in the hall.  I'm sitting out there trying to eat lunch you know and they step on my milk 'cause I get up and figure out how to do something back you know.  So next thing you know I, I'm the guy that's in trouble, I'd say, "Well I, you know I didn't start this," (laughter), "I'm just trying to--."
Story_ID: 667461
Speaker 1: You know Southern high [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was--you know one of our upperclassmen was Rap Brown, I knew him well when he was in Atlanta [Georgia], knew him well at home.
Speaker 2: So H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] himself?
Speaker 1: Ye- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --yes (laughter) so, so we, we had a you know--
Speaker 2: Now he's a Muslim. I can't think of his name now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But he's here in Atlanta?
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: Or he was here?
Speaker 1: No he's, he's in jail.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think in--
Speaker 2: But he was here before he--?
Speaker 1: --in the Carolina yeah, before they moved into Carolina; and he's--yeah I don't know all the details.  I know he, he built a very active Muslim community in southwest Atlanta.  And something happened and you know it supposedly it, he was responsible for killing of a policeman [Ricky Kinchen], so--but on the other hand I know there was a whole lot of harassment.  And I'm not defending what he did that--not at all, I'm just saying that there's more to the story and I don't know it all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I, I knew him.
Speaker 2: What, what was he like then?
Speaker 1: He was--when you say then, you're talking about in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or back home?
Speaker 2: --no in high, in high school.
Speaker 1: In high school, he was just a, a proud young man; he didn't want you to take his nerve, he would stand up for himself, and he would stand up for you.  So and, and he found this way to express his leadership in the Civil Rights Movement.  'Course you're talking about '65 [1965] you know '66 [1966], '67 [1967], and there was unrest on campus [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  In Baton Rouge [Louisiana], it was a, my--they had rented a building to the Muslim community on, on, in South Baton Rouge.  And there was a big standoff in the community over this and these guys that you know they'd been off to war in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  They'd come back and then they were treated in a way that was very disrespectful and next thing you know they would stand up across the street with guns in their hands.  And it was a big showdown on 13th Street in Baton Rouge, and it, it didn't turn out well.
Speaker 2: This was in nineteen sixty--?
Speaker 1: In the 1960s, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 667462
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or, or mentors when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Every one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, I was very, very fortunate.   Miss Hurston [ph.] was the principal, and I knew all the teachers: Miss Wright [ph.], her son Billy [Billy Wright (ph.)] was in the, in the class.  You know Miss Smith [ph.]; all, we had, we had great teachers and then people that really cared and--about the nurturing and the, the direction and the thought process of the kids.  And you know if anything I could be responsible in not taking care of all that the, all of the opportunities that I had or taking full advantage of them.  Because the teachers were, in my opinion were, were fantastic.  At that time, the best teachers were at these schools and so I--either St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], they were primarily nuns.  Or at the Southern Lab [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], they were teachers that could teach other teachers, so they were leaders in their own right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I--but to pick out one, that would be difficult for me because I had, I had good teachers.  I, I don't know of (gesture) bad teachers at instructional capacity in trying to get the message over that I had in, in high school.  Now I might've had teachers that I liked more than one, you know, one more than the other, but as far as delivering the academic standards and, and, and making it possible and have an interest in my learning, I had great teachers.
Story_ID: 667463
Speaker 1: Now what were you, did you think a- what were your thoughts about a career when you were in high school?  Were you thinking about (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was going into medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was already decided, I knew--at that time, I think black dentists, they had to do their own lab work.  So that means you know bridges, fillings, the gold fillings that were waxed in and then spin in a centrifuge and made into a cast, into a filling.  The polishing, the--all of these things my dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] had to do them or he had to teach his children how to do them.  And then he could inspect; and so it was something that you learned, but (background noise), so I knew a lot about dental work.  I knew a lot about medicine, but it was, that was kind of the family business, so you're either going to talk about school, or you're gonna talk about the, the dental practice.  And so that's, that's what I knew.  So my brother's [Raphael Baranco] a dentist, my sister's [Patricia Baranco] a dentist, all the children knew something about dental work.  We knew something about the practice of medicine.  My, my--I tell a story, my dad was going to New Orleans [Louisiana] and had a flat tire, and had to change the tire, had a heart attack at fifty-four years old.  His brother was kind of behind him, got to him gave him an aspirin and got him to New Orleans--his brother the doctor--and my dad lived to be ninety-two.  And so--and he put him on the regimen and told him, he said, "You need to get out of your car, and you need to walk."  So my dad would walk back and forth to church every morning for six o'clock Mass at the cathedral.  Now we had churches that were within two blocks, St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], three blocks.  But he would walk that mile and a half one way so his walking three miles a day, lived to be ninety-two.  So my uncle Raymond [Raymond Baranco] knew a little something about medicine, 'cause he, he got him back to where he was 100 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so you were gonna major in premed at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I, I started in premed at Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1965?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], all right.
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], and I actually started at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], worked Hurricane Betsy, so I worked Hurricane Betsy.  When I got down there we had a hurricane so had to get people out of--New Orleans is under water, under sea level.  And there was a lot of water and so basically we had a boat and you had to go, people--get people out of their houses.  And we were young, so that's what we did.
Story_ID: 667464
Speaker 1: But you know my decision to go into business was, I--my first car, I bought a Chevrolet convertible.  But before that I, I--as I mentioned, I assembled toys and gotten a bicycle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the- these are jobs you had in school?
Speaker 1: These are jobs that I had at--Gottschalks [Gottschalks, Inc.] and then, but worked in Gottschalks, high school and college from assembling toys to sales.  And then in college I started, when I got married I sat down with my new bride [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] and we planned our lives.  And I said, "Well I'd like to give the automobile business a chance and I would like to go--." "Well how you gonna do that and, and finish school?"  "Well I, I'll go to the Ford place [Ford Motor Company] and get a job there," and so we decided which dealership.
Story_ID: 667465
Speaker 1: So you started at, at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1965, right; and was, was Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] still the president then?
Speaker 2: I started at Southern in nineteen sixty- I believe '6 [1966]; I started Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] at '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Oh okay, I got--all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and so--
Speaker 1: So, now you start Tulane, did you intend to finish at Tulane when you started, or did you intend to do all four years at Tulane?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I, thought so but I was kind of going along with the program, and--
Speaker 1: Why--well Tulane is a, is a good school, it's right, right there--
Speaker 2: It's a very good school.
Speaker 1: --too, but, but why Tulane instead of Southern, well--why?
Speaker 2: Just because the, the pursuit was med school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Southern didn't have a med school, and so Tulane did [Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And 'cause of that exposure and so started off at Tulane, and ran into a little headwind the second semester.  We were the second class to integrate Tulane undergrad, and I was not, I just wasn't as forgiving as I should've been.
Speaker 1: So they, they really weren't for you being on campus.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: The students weren't, so--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you, once again you're in a situation where you're catching hell.
Speaker 2: Well it, it wasn't as bad as high school [Catholic High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; it, it--
Speaker 1: It shouldn't be.
Speaker 2: Yeah it, it, it was (laughter) it was better, but I, I--so anyway, in the middle of second semester I left Tulane.
Speaker 1: You're getting ready to say I did something; and what, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I--I really can't discuss it it's, it's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's, it's one of those things you--.
Speaker 1: Well, something happened that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tested your tolerance and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and I, I--
Speaker 1: --the lid blew off.
Speaker 2: --I responded and of course they sus- suspended me for the rest of the semester, so I could've returned, but I chose not to return.
Speaker 1: Okay and your, your parents [Evelyn Edmond Baranco and Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] understood?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 667466
Speaker 1: Well my parents understood, but we had a, a bigger crisis than that going on.  My mother [Evelyn Edmond Baranco] had contracted cancer in January of that year, so--this is probably February.  And so I really, if it had nothing to do with her contracting cancer, but in retrospect is one of the greatest gifts I ever received was to be there with her, 'cause she passed that summer.  So that, that was pretty special to me; and my family most nights we, when you're at home we said, said the rosary together--that's a Catholic prayer.  It's about fifteen minutes' worth of prayer; and when, the night that she passed, I was, I'd gotten in relatively late, they hadn't said the rosary yet.  So it's about ten o'clock we gathered around the bed and we're saying the rosary.  And I was my, the family was there, my father [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] was there, I--but I was next to my mother, I was holding her hand.  And when she opened her eyes and, and we were saying the ro- saying this prayer and she looked around the room and passed.  So that, that opportunity for me to be there then was, was something really special to me.  And I, when I realized--'cause I was pacing her breathing, when I realized that she couldn't keep up that rate of breathing that you know I alerted everybody in the room.  And but anyway she, she passed that evening that was, that was pretty special.  And, and I, I would've been home from school but because I was able to be home earlier, I had spent more time with her.  So that was, that was one of the--I, I've just had a lot of gifts in my life that was special.
Story_ID: 667467
Speaker 1: In '66 [1966] you start in the fall at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Start at Southern; and of course I was the, I was a child of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] so everyone--and, and Southern was always there for me.  When I went back to Southern, literally the, the community, the school put their arms around me, and had a great time (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: I know in the out- the outline they spent a lot of time on the story of Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] which I, I've heard--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --several different times.  Was he the president when you got there, was he still serving or--
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: --had he stepped back?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I think, I think Leon Netterville [G. Leon Netterville] followed Felton Clark; and I think Netterville was the president when I, when I was there--I would have to look up the years.  But I knew Dr. Clark, I knew Dr. Netterville; I mean I just, I knew everybody there, and so.
Speaker 1: Well that's, that's why I'm, I'm gonna ask you to reflect back on it and, and what were your thoughts in those days about what happened to Felton Clark?  'Cause I know it started with the cri- the city crisis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well I really--I guess this, all of this happened, it was probably '66 [1966], '65 [1965] and there were, it was just a lot going on in, in the country at that time.  And of course it reflected on Southern's campus; we were, we were students.  And, and then we were marching, the students were marching down to the state capitol [Louisiana State Capitol, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], both students from Southern and those who had, they were, at that, they were just integrating LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] at that time also.  So that, that added a little more fuel to the fire.  But I really don't have a lot to say about it.  I mean I, I don't, I, I was not a, I needed to be more of a peacemaker, but I was not part of the peaceful crowd (laughter), so anyway.
Speaker 1: Well, you know just, just a story for those who are watching this and want to look it up at some point.  Felton Clark, the president forbade students from participating in the sit-ins.  I think this is in, this is like March '61 [1961], '62 [1962].  And [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey told the story when we interviewed him and his brother [HistoryMaker Walter Bailey, Jr.] told the story and there are others that have contributed to this.  But the crisis was that the state of course it runs Southern University (unclear) it's black (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The State of Louisiana runs it, it's right across the street from LSU (laughter) you can see the campus right--you know but they, they said look you better not let the students go in and sit-in.  And if you do, you know, there'll be--
Speaker 2: They'll cut the funding.
Speaker 1: --yeah, cut the funding, and they had, had him between a rock and a hard place, and--because the whole community there in Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] depended, and many of the people in Baton Rouge depended on Southern (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Depend on Southern University--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --for their income.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Well now Southern and LSU are on opposite sides of the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah; LSU's on the--LSU is south of the city, Southern is north--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the city.  So they, they're separated but they're both there, they're both in my opinion great institutions.  My wife [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] finished undergrad and law school [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] from LSU.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and now I know a lot about LSU because South Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was--there's the city, then South Baton Rouge was predominantly African American; then LSU.  And on the, the north side you had the Exxon chemical company [Baton Rouge Refinery]; and then Southern, then Baton Rouge was kind in the, the middle.  But it, it was a very difficult time, because as young people we were not willing to put up with this iron fist.  But we knew that the state controlled the money for Southern, and so it was a situation.  We were fighting, we were demonstrating, we were, we were really you know at the forefront, but the administration was trying to quiet that down.  So at, that was when they decided to march down to the capitol to get the demonstrations off of the campus.  Because they were--you know these folks were shooting with real bullets, and we, there were a couple of lives lost.
Speaker 1: Was it the Louisiana National Guard?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is while you were in school, or?
Speaker 2: This is while, yeah no that's while I was at, while I was in school yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah so; and it, it, it was just '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966]--those, those were the big years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Was there a black organization that was formed that you were in?
Speaker 2: No, there were organizations in town, I was not part of one of the formal organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you were a participant?
Speaker 2: I was a participant (laughter) yeah.  I was, but anyway, I, I, I managed to get through it and I was glad to get through it.  And I, I you know I--we're still close a group as a community; that high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and college community, we're still close.
Story_ID: 667468
Speaker 1: You met your wife [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] around this time too, right?
Speaker 2: I met my wife--yes, when I left New Orleans [Louisiana] I met my wife and she was at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and there were six or seven young ladies that were inte- that was the second year of integration at LSU.  So I, I'd come home and I'd asked a friend of mine to, let's get them all together and tell them that everything's o- gonna be okay.  Whatever they're up against you know basically we can handle it.  And so I, I met her and, and literally the first night I met her, although I had a lot of other things going on, we pretty much realized that we were gonna be together the rest of our lives.  And it's, that's just the way it has worked out (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: Okay well you said earlier now you, you had second thoughts, but your sister [Vivian Baranco Robertson] kind of made sure you stayed (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I was, I was you know eighteen years old and so I was you know big man on whatever campus there was in my mind.  And you know I had I worked on cars all the time, so I had access to transportation, I had--you know I had a, just I had a lot going for me.  And was fairly popular and, and, and there were a lot of other ladies you know so, but this was the one.  So she had, she had decided and I, I almost ran her off, but my sister convinced me that I, I, should do better (laughter).  So anyway it all, it all worked out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right and, then so when did you all get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in 19--must be '69 [1969], the summer of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so then the courtship lasted a while even after--
Speaker 2: July the, July the 5th so, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you all went together about, what three, four years?
Speaker 2: Well about two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Two years, um-hm yeah so; and that was, and that was the best thing that ever happened to me. Because that, that focused my energy on, on you know being an adult, being responsible and not you know single black male you know, so (laughter).  Yeah, and it--it helped me an awful lot.  So another one of my blessings, you know I'm just picking them up by the ton (laughter).
Story_ID: 667469
Speaker 1: It seemed like a risk at the time but it's--?
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it wasn't, wasn't any risk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew exactly what I was doing.  And we sat down literally the first weekend of marriage and planned our entire lives.  That she [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] would--I would get a job, where I'd get a job I, that I'd get a job selling automobiles.  And mind you, there'd never been an African American sold automobiles inside a dealership in Baton Rouge, Louisiana in '69 [1969].  There was, we had one guy, Mr. Patterson [ph.], he sold cars, but not inside the dealership, he came to your home.
Speaker 1: Is that how you got your first car?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did, did you get your first car from him?
Speaker 2: No, I got my, my sister bought her car from Mr. Patterson; I, I found my car, it was a project car and I literally found it, it was on the street.  And the guy had a for sale sign and, and I approached him, convinced my dad [Beverly V. Baranco, Jr.] that that he should help me with half of it.  And I had the other half and it was 550 some odd dollars; and I bought it and rebuilt it and raced it.  And drove it and loved it, you know it was great.
Speaker 1: This is like a '59 [1959] Chevy [Chevrolet] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-nine [1959] Chevy convertible, 348, three deuces, three speed.  Yeah, how you know all of that?
Speaker 1: It's red interior, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right, red interior.  In fact my employees gave me a, a replica--it wasn't a convertible, didn't have the 348, but, they, they came real close (laughter).  So I, I still have it, it's a great car.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 667470
Speaker 1: Now you spent some time in a, in Detroit [Michigan]--is this when you go to Detroit to--?
Speaker 2: I, I, went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you decide?
Speaker 2: Went to Detroit right after I got married [to HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, was this when you went to Detroit--
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: --to this internship where you?
Speaker 2: No, the internship was--yes that, that summer at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] there were--interviewing, Ford Motor Company was interviewing for engineers.  So I read that Ford was interviewing and I knew I was getting married and I needed to get a job.  So I went to an engineering interview and convinced the young man by the name of Ken Washington [ph.] that I should get a, work for Ford that summer.  So they, he said, "Well we're interviewing for engineers, you're not an engineer.  So if--here's my card write me and I'll see if there's something that you can do."  So I wrote him and the gentleman that was heading this program for Ford was Harvey Proctor.  And that was, the Rouge plant at that time was the largest building in the world.
Speaker 1: So River Rouge [Ford River Rouge Complex, Dearborn, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: River Rouge, so they were assembling Mustangs [Ford Mustang], they had a stamping plant and I went up there and I would, my initial assignment was I was gonna substitute for people on vacation.  And that way I'd get to see a lot and I was excited about that.  We had gotten, we got married.  I mean I came home from the job and got married on July 5th; and we flew right back.  So, the work was exciting; and I pointed out to them, whenever there was a fire, I noticed, and we, we didn't have a lot of fires, but everybody would step back and let the fire grow and call the fire department.  The fire department would come inside the plant and drive up to the fire and put the fire out.  Well by the time the fire truck got there, there was a lot of damage, but they didn't have fire extinguishers.  So I went--there was a union, and the employee--the department that Harvey Proctor was over was employee relations or something like that.  And so I convinced him that he needed put fire extinguishers out there for the employees just you know let them put the fire out.  'Cause they could put, they didn't wanna not work.  So I put a proposal together for him and, and they said well okay.  There're three different kind of fire extinguishers.  There's you know to put down, put out oil fires, different types of fires, so I had to do all that study; figure out the budget, go out and, and bought a couple thousand fire extinguishers, they gave me a couple union guys and a cart.  And we installed fire extinguishers for the rest of my time there.  When I finished, Ford offered me a job that--but I had to return to Louisiana 'cause I wanted to finish school.  And I came back and went to this particular dealership, got a job, and then Ford offered me a job upon graduation.  But I couldn't take the pay cut; I was married then, so I stayed in the retail side, which was a great decision.
Story_ID: 667471
Speaker 1: You got a retail job here in Baton--in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: --in what?  In, in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Right, right, working for Audubon Ford.  I had purchased suits from Gottschalks [Gottschalks, Inc.], which is the department store I was working for.  And I just went back every day and--'til I got this job, and finally a fellow by the name of Rick Landing [ph.]--he hired me.  And I began to work there and learned the business from Rick.  And then when Rick and Marcel [ph.] they, they left, quit, Gwin Montgomery who was a dealer called me.  And I thought he was, I thought they had discovered some of the things I was doing like moving doors around, deliver, fix cars for customers and this, that and the other.  And but he called me in and asked me if I could run the dealership until he could do a search for new manager.  And that's how I got promoted into management.
Speaker 1: So how long did that take, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That took about a year.
Speaker 1: About a year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Mumbles).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is still 1969?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 667472
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you learned how to fly a plane in '69 [1969] too.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well I, I, well I just always liked things that move, so I--we had two airports, now we only have one.  We had, we have Ryan [Ryan Field; Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is a city airport; then we have downtown airport [East Baton Rouge Parish Airport, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So downtown airport I just would spend the time my spare time I had at the airport.  And wanted to learn about planes and why they flew and how they flew and so forth and so on.  And there were two gentlemen that were kind of mentors to me, Ruffin Paul.  Ruffin was over the, the buildings on Southern's campus [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; and David Lovely [David Lovely, Jr.], he was a principal.  And so Ruffin and David, I ran into them and they wanted to learn to fly, they were both in their probably fifties at the time.  And of course their eyesight wasn't as good as it needed to be; my eyesight was perfect.  And so basically they carried me along and they were taking the lessons, and I learned most of what I learn about flying from them.  And I started flying; I got my license, I--when I worked for the dealership, Mr. Montgomery [Gwin Montgomery] he, you know they wanted to go to the football games.  And his daughter was a, barrel racer, and wanted to go to the races and all those things, so I flew them around.  And so I flew the, at that time the, we had a gentleman that was running for governor, I flew part time for them.  So I, I almost, I had an offer to go to work for Piedmont Airlines [Piedmont Airlines, Inc.], that was an airline over in the Carolinas at the time.  But I decided to pursue the automobile business.  But and, so aviation, I stopped flying when I left the dealership that I worked for--Audubon Ford [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And when I came up here and opened the business [Baranco Automotive Group] that's when I stopped flying; and then I bought an airplane about four or five years later.  And I flew it up until the mid-'90s [1990s], but--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Aviation--my, my daughter, I, she went down and learned the--she took her lessons from Chief Anderson [Charles Alfred Anderson].
Speaker 1: Oh from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee yeah (laughter) so you know I; and when I went down there I, I sent her, she was thirteen, fourteen years old, she couldn't solo.  But he taught her how to fly. It was a two week program down there so my daughter Evelyn [Evelyn Baranco Pryor], she's a, an internal doctor, an internist with JenCare [JenCare Senior Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia] here in town.  But I went down there saw the airplane he was flying her around in and it scared me to death (laughter).  I said, "Chief--," but you know it was, this the guy who taught himself how to fly.  So he, he knew a lot about air--it was safe.  But yeah he would tell them he said, "You know when you land, don't bruise," it was, the plane was (Unclear), LL and he called them (Unclear), said, "don't bruise her feet when you land; hold off and just let her settle to the ground."  But he was, he was a great, great aviator.
Story_ID: 667473
Speaker 1: So at the time that--during this time you're learning how to fly a plane, you're, you're in sales in an auto dealership in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and you're finishing school too, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right.
Speaker 1: Going to school; and you had, you had, your daughter was born in 1970?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, Evelyn [Evelyn Baranco Pryor].
Speaker 2: Evelyn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's my aviator, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right so, so you're at--is this Audubon Ford [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Audubon Ford.
Speaker 1: In, in Baton Rouge, named after John James Audubon I guess?
Speaker 2: Audubon, the flowers, the, the park [Audubon Park, New Orleans, Louisiana]--yeah.
Speaker 1: The naturalist?
Speaker 2: Naturalist.
Speaker 1: Okay and now, so you were excited about staying in the auto retail business; and what attracted you to it?  I mean did you, you know 'cause we don't--you know those of, of us on the other side of the counter don't even know what's going on in (unclear).  Now you're in there and you said hey, I'm staying here, and people inviting you to do other things, and--, "No, I'm staying."  Now what was it that kept you there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the cars, the, you know something mechanical that, that could really perform and the, the speed involved, the style.  Just--and the people; people needed, people need cars to get back and for to work to be mobile.  And if you have a car you have a certain amount of freedom.  That's the American deal.  And so you know I, I'm a capitalist; I realize that real estate is good investment.  I realize that, you know people ought to have the opportunity to buy a home, but you can't drive your home to work; you need a car (laughter).  So you know for me it was a way to--it was something that I was excited about and I got to help a whole lot of folks get into cars.  As a side note, at that time when I got promoted, my first promotion was into finance manager.  And it was really hard getting African Americans financed, but there was a bank at the time, Louisiana National Bank [Louisiana National Bank of Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And we were over on Foster Drive, which wasn't the best part of town, this Ford dealership--there were two.  One was out on Florida Boulevard, which is where it needed to be; one was on Foster Drive, which was kind of a really--a challenge.  And the community around it was not the wealthiest, these were working class folk.  So Louisiana National Bank decided to open up a loan office and because it was predominantly an African American neighborhood, they took a young banker by the name of Russell Dunn; and they, they put Russell in charge of the office.  Well I had met Russell at McKinley [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; we knew of each other, I didn't know him well.  So I went to Russell, and I said, "Russell I know people, and if you'll buy these deals that I send you, I'll make sure they pay.  And 'cause I'll do a good job of screening them."  This was before fax machines, before any of that.  So I sent these deals to Russell, Russell bought them; his business really blossomed, our business blossomed.  I had a great relation with Ford Motor Credit [Ford Motor Credit Company, LLC], in fact I was the pilot for Ford Motor Credit really you know (laughter).  And Russell, when I left town, Russell had opened up a, a branch right of off Southern's campus [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and he was doing extremely well.  When I left town of course his source of funds went away, so Russell ended up coming to work for me in sales up here.  (Audio disturbance) Worked his way all the way to running the dealership and learned the business here; and he's downstairs now, he's, he sold his business, and now he's working for us at Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 667474
Speaker 1: Why do you think--is it a cultural reason that you are more effective in bringing in--you, you brought in black customers to this dealership [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia]?  I mean did, did you think the, I mean does be all white people to figure who could pay and who couldn't at the?
Speaker 2: Well it's just a matter of--Larry [Larry Crowe], you can tell the legitimacy of a person after you have spent fifteen minutes with them talking about their background, building a relationship you know this you know that; your, who're your parents, where you work, where you went to school, where you're working, what are you doing, you can figure that out.  And it's, it's not a black or white thing, it's just that black folks who are prejudged--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they would, they were not--
Speaker 1: Well it is a black and white thing on that level--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --where they're judging people without even knowing them?
Speaker 2: --I mean, but, but if you take the prejudging out, you can make that credit determination based on character, you know, the three Cs of credit: your credit history, your character and your collateral.  Well character is a, is one third of it.  And so with most a- most black folks you would, that, they never got to the character part.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the judgment was made.  So but I--and the, the same thing applied to the, to the white clientele, I was, I was a finance manager period.  You know so I was, I was the--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you could han- you could figure that out--
Speaker 2: Yeah figure (laughter)--so--
Speaker 1: --on any level.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right.  And so the business blossomed, I got promoted; I ended up in, in with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company].  A gentleman walked in by the name of George Habersetzer, after George came in the front door and said he was looking for me and, and wanted to help me get a dealership. I, at, at first I wasn't really interested because I was happy in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  But I did want to own a dealership; and so eventually we got together, and I ended up in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 667475
Speaker 1: So General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] offered you a dealership here in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: General Mo- yes we, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 19--what is this, this is?
Speaker 2: This is in 19--well that's 1978.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes because I, I, I left Audubon Ford [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and went to work with General Motors in what's called the General Motors minority dealer program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And General Motors had designed a, basically a two year program where you would train in a dealership and then work in, in the classroom.  And back and forth, so you would have classroom instruction, then--you know maybe for three weeks; and then you go into the dealership.  Or classroom instruction might be a week, and then you go to the dealership for three weeks.  Depending on what area of the dealership you were studying, so we were exposed to the entire dealership it was a great program.  General Motors made investment, they designed the training, and that program now is taught through the National Automobile Dealers Association.  So I've, I've got employees that have been through that same program.  Now the dealer pays, and the employee goes and studies for a week and then comes back and works in that department.  So whether it be parts department, service department, business office, finance--they work their way around the entire dealership.
Speaker 1: And then, then they know how everything works?
Speaker 2: Then they are exposed to how everything works; and after that, there's a, a great deal of screening going in.  And they do an assessment, pre-former to the type of your, you know to study your risk of success, and they'll point out your strengths and your weaknesses.  And so it, I, it was a great program and it still exists now with NADA.
Story_ID: 667476
Speaker 1: After that program, I worked for Woodfin-Smith Pontiac [Woodfin-Smith Pontiac, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana], because I was looking for a dealership.  And we looked all over the country for a dealership, in Omaha [Nebraska] and Baldwyn, Mississippi and wherever.  And so when Atlanta [Georgia] came up that was the place to be, and it was no hesitation on my part and my wife's [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] part that we move to Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Okay so the, this dealership, this Pontiac dealership [Smith-Johnson Pontiac, East Point, Georgia], the two owners were getting ready (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Woodfin-Smith, they were--
Speaker 2: --Woodfin-Smith, they were getting ready to retire, right?
Speaker 1: Getting ready to retire--Mr., Mr. Woodfin we- already, well, retired; Mr. Smith was there and so I, I bought it from--actually I bought it from Ira Woodfin [sic.].  And so--
Speaker 2: Yeah were they black?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I'm asking for the record that's all.
Speaker 1: No (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: No, no, we, there were very few black dealers in the South.  And we had, at that time there was one dealership that was in the--Chevrolet dealership that, that was here.  And it, well two and the Lincoln Mercury dealership, Terry Brantley [Booker Brantley, Jr.], and Terry had the Lincoln Mercury store [Greenbriar Lincoln Mercury Sales, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  So when I arrived I went to see Terry--I, in fact I worked that Friday and then drove literally all night to Atlanta.  Got here Saturday morning, I went to see Terry to tell him I was buying this dealership.  And we--it was East Point [Georgia] on Main Street, across the street was a railroad track.  The dealership, the reason that Mr. Woodfin sold that dealership to me was 'cause I didn't know anybody and I needed all of his employees.  And so when we sat down everybody was trying to buy his store, nobody was trying to pay him what it was worth because they were going to have to relocate it.  But I, I agreed, they wanted to relocate it, to buy it; and I, and I needed all of his employees.  And that was important to him, that's why he sold me the business.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right now was it hard for you to, to find the financing to buy it, or?
Speaker 1: No, I had a relationship because of George Habersetzer with Motors Holding [Motors Holding Division], which was the finance arm of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. They finance dealerships for their dealers.  So Motors Holding had already prescreened me and I'd been through the program, so the dealership was in- you know a small investment comparatively.  And it was, it was big for me and I, I took the money I had and then I borrowed some money from my customer that later became an employee that I had helped in the past, just advisory to him.  And put the money up I needed, basically was three hundred and fifty thousand [dollars], I put up thirty-five thousand, and that was how I, I bought the dealership.
Speaker 2: Okay so this is 1978?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 667477
Speaker 1: What was the population in East Point [Georgia] like then and--I mean and was the dealership on, on a main thoroughfare, or?
Speaker 2: It was on Main Street in East Point but it was not a main thoroughfare, there was nothing across the street but railroad track.  Fort McPherson [East Point, Georgia] was to the north of the dealership.  They had two dealerships, a Chevrolet and the Pontiac [Smith-Johnson Pontiac, East Point, Georgia].  And both of them--was Goldsmith Chevrolet [East Point, Georgia], both of them were, were ready to leave and General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] said, said that they must leave.  'Cause they, it was no way for them to support themselves in selling their cars where they were located.  So I, I agreed to move, I agreed to, to buy it, I agreed to, to that I--you know I needed the employees.  So immediately I addressed the employees that, that Saturday and--'cause the dealer hadn't, didn't want to share that with them.  A couple of them knew, but I addressed the employees and said you know I need everybody here, we're gonna have a great business you know and, and it, it's gonna work out well.  And most of the employees accepted that; you know after a week or so we, we begin to get along and--because they didn't, they didn't know me and, and it was gonna be a challenge for them.  Because they, you know they wanted to know whether they were gonna have a job, and could I really run this place.  And it turned out really well for everybody, had a couple of employees that left, but that was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So were these mostly white employees?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess--I guess so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  We had no African Americans in, in sales, no African Americans in--technicians; we, the African Americans were the porters or clean up guys, and that was it.  And so now this dealership that you're in it's, it's as diverse as any I think on earth, we have every nationality represented.  We have not only African Americans but you know Asians, Hispanics, white folks--we got everybody.  It's a, it's a UN [United Nations] out there and it's and it's fabulous because of it.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you moved the--you moved to Decatur [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: I moved--
Speaker 1: You moved the dealership to Decatur in?
Speaker 2: I moved the dealership to Decatur, probably in 1980 I opened up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, this is Baranco Pontiac [Baranco Pontiac, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 667478
Speaker 1: Now did your wife play a role in the running of the business?
Speaker 2: Not at that time--my wife, when we decided to move she had just finished law school at LSU [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  She took a job with the district attorney's office in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and probably worked on that job for maybe two months before we decided to move to Atlanta [Georgia].  So we came to Atlanta, and she needed to take the board for, to be able to practice law in Georgia.  Which there are two separate standards of law between Louisiana and really the rest of the country.  And so she passed the Georgia bar and went to work for the attorney general's office.  She worked for the attorney general's office probably somewhere two, three, four years.  And after work at the attorney general off- well she was helping me and all along the plan was that she would be active in the dealership.  And so probably, oh I guess in the--well it's, it's quite a while because it must've been in, in the '90s [1990s] she was involved with the businesses from an advisory standpoint while she was working at the attorney general's office.  And there came an opportunity where the gentleman that was running our Acura store [Baranco Acura, Morrow, Georgia] was not doing the job that should be done.  And she wanted an opportunity to run it, I supported her in it and it turned out to be our most successful store at the time.  And we had a Pontiac store [Baranco Pontiac, Inc., Decatur, Georgia], we had a Lincoln Mercury store [Baranco Lincoln Mercury, Inc., Duluth, Georgia], and we had the Acura store at the time.   And our, so it opened an Acura store [Acura of Tallahassee] in Tallahassee [Florida] that was being operated by Russell Dunn, the fellow that came from the bank in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So but anyway she is, she--Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] got involved with the Acura store and ran the Acura store until 2007.  And that's when we sold the Acura store; so we sold the Acura and the Lincoln Mercury store in 2007, and focused on the Mercedes store [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 667479
Speaker 1: In the interim like a- like you helped start, well you bought an airplane--that's one thing, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In 1984.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and so used this plane to, to fly to--?
Speaker 2: Everywhere (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: At that time I was very active with the dealer association, I was--you know I was the founding president of General Motors Minority Dealers Association.  It was first the black dealer association then minority dealer association; got involved with the National Association of Minority Automobile Dealers.  Was president of the local dealer--Metro Atlanta Automobile Dealers Association; NADA [National Automobile Dealers Association], which is national association, automobile dealers.  So these are predominantly minority associations and the majority associations.  And they were in Washington--in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and so forth, and I was flying a lot and flying to auctions, flying to dealerships to advise dealers on, on operational issues.  And so the airplane was very helpful; and it's a seven passenger plane, so I could take my managers, I, I'd take different mangers out when I'd go to visit a dealership.  I could spend time with the dealer and they could take a look at the operation also; we could learn from each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it, it was very, very helpful.
Story_ID: 667480
Speaker 1: Well 1984, I--I take it you were making good money--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to afford a plane, to be able to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well I, I was very, very fortunate.  I had a, a gentleman--when I started I knew a lot about finance and how to get things financed.  And when I started the East Point [Smith-Johnson Pontiac; Baranco Pontiac, Inc.], I one of the things I noticed was that a customer would--and this happened, and it also happened in Tallahassee [Florida]; most stores.  In East Point [Georgia], customers would come in and they would apply to buy a car and I couldn't get them financed.  And then they'd go and they'd end up buying a car somewhere else and it would get financed.  So it occurred to me that I was being redlined; in other words if you bought a car--if you had great credit you could buy a car from me.
Speaker 1: But?
Speaker 2: But if you had marginal credit you could buy a car from somewhere else but you couldn't buy one from me, 'cause I couldn't get you financed.  And my primary source--'cause I didn't know anybody up here--was General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company].  So I complained to General Motors and complained and they said, "Oh no that's not true that would not happen, we would not do it."  So, a customer comes in so I said well okay, I'm not gonna call this customer in.  I talked to the dealer, my adjacent dealer down at Southlake by the name of Wayne Hughes.  White dealer, good guy, I said, "Wayne," told him what was happening to me, I said, "Wayne, I need you to call this deal in.  I'm gonna bring the application to you and I'll--as soon as you call it in you, you let me know."  So Wayne called the deal in and then after he called it in, I called it in.  Well Wayne got approved; I got rejected from the same GMAC office [General Motors Acceptance Corporation; Ally Financial Inc.].  So I took that information, go to Detroit [Michigan] and sat down there and told them what had happened.  And so they said, well you know it can't be, I said yeah it is, so they said, "What do you want?"  "I want to be transferred out to Decatur [Georgia]," was--because they had two branches.  And in Decatur was a fella by the name of Bob Spivey [ph.] and, and when I had complained to the manager about them doing this, he said no.  So they invited me out to lunch, he had too much to drink--we were down at The Commerce Club [Atlanta, Georgia], (air quotes) the big club in town.  He had it, he was the, the lead guy he had the branch manager in Decatur and his assistant branch manager from Atlanta [Georgia].  So after too many drinks he'd begin to explain to me that--he used the N word, there's no way that I could manage a dealership; it was too complicated.  And that I was just making excuses about not, you know about whether or not my deals were bought.  So we left that meeting and Mr. Spivey called me on the phone and said, "Look that's not the way I am, that's not how we operate."  Said, "I apologize that that happened, it was too much liquor," he said, "yeah I'd love to help you but I can't, because you're in that branch."  I said, "Well suppose I get transferred to your branch," he said, "Well I'll help you." He said, "They told me my job was to help make the dealer successful."  I said okay, so I came back, that's when I called the dealer Wayne, called the dealer myself, got it rejected; went to Detroit.  I said, "This is what I want: I wanna be transferred to Decatur, just any--," well I didn't say Decatur, I said I wanna be transferred.  There were only two branches in metro Atlanta, so that meant Decatur was the only choice.  I got transferred.
Story_ID: 667481
Speaker 1: And Bob Spivey [ph.]--I knew a lot about financing; Bob Spivey was a genius.  I worked with Bob Spivey, taught me everything there was to know about finance.  Later on, I founded First Southern Bank, and I went to Bob and I said, "Bob I need you to come be my senior loan officer 'til we get this bank rolling."  So he, we talked about it back and forth, anyway he retired from GMAC [General Motors Acceptance Corporation; Ally Financial Inc.], came to work for me five years.  And built First Southern Bank, we were the, one of the fastest growing banks in the nation, state.  And that management team, when we merged with Citizens Trust [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia] ended up running--the president of First Southern became the president of Citizens Trust: Jim Young [James E. Young].  And, but Bob Spivey helped make that happen with First Southern in setting our loan department up in the first place.
Story_ID: 667482
Speaker 1: Lot of interesting things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah these things happen in--
Speaker 1: Yeah and--
Speaker 2: --through relationships I guess?
Speaker 1: At--in the relationship and if you can't, if you can't get your, your, your customers financed, you can't succeed in the automobile business.  And if you cannot get access to capital as a businessperson you can't succeed as a, as a businessperson.  So, but automobile dealers, you have two levels of financing: one for the operator, then one for the customers, and you need both of them to work.  And I've been fortunate in, and any successful dealer has been fortunate in getting both of those to work.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So now even, you even helped a friend of yours get a Pontiac dealership [Hardnett Pontiac, Inc., Morrow, Georgia] too, right, here?  This is Ed Hardnett?
Speaker 1: Yeah I've had--Ed worked for me, he came from Louisiana and I--worked for me and then became a dealer.  I've had twenty-seven, twenty-eight former employees that have become operators themselves.  And so Ed, I hired Ed in sales in Louisiana at Audubon [Audubon Ford, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; and then he eventually came to Atlanta [Georgia] and, and worked through management and became a dealer.  I, and--on the south side of Atlanta, but the same was with Russell Dunn and I've had twenty-eight employees that have worked at the dealership, learn the business.  And once you learn the business and there's an opportunity for you to go into business for yourself.  So they've, they've been in business and it is a challenge; and the, the greatest advantage that I have is knowing that you, and believing--you have to, you have to know the business.  You have to build the people, but there's gonna come a time when everything's gonna turn against you.  And you're gonna be knocked down, you've got to get back up.  And if you get back up one more time than you get knocked down, you succeed.
Story_ID: 667483
Speaker 1: Have you been knocked down very many times?
Speaker 2: All, all the time (laughter) all the time--that you know not, it's, it's less now because the, the community has embraced me, my family, the dealership [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia].  And the community has taken ownership in, in, in our business, so it's less frequent now.  And so I haven't had a, you know what I would judge as a knockdown in a year and a half.  But there was a time when it was you know it was all the time.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And but you have to, you have to be confident, learn from that situation; and you have to--must, you have to get back up, you have to get back in it.  And you have to communicate.
Speaker 1: Can you give me a--for instance of the time you got knocked down?
Speaker 2: Yeah I can give you a lot of them (laughter) the, the, the situation with the, the financing was one.  There was another situation, we had a store in Tallahassee [Florida]--it's another financing situation.  So maybe I won't--won't repeat that one.  But quickly there was a lady a--educated, came into buy an Acura down in Tallahassee in--Acura of Tallahassee.  I built dealership from ground up.  And we sold the car and she left to, went to the bank she said she was gonna go to the bank to get her financing.  She went to the bank and the bank, banker told her, said, "Well you know we'll finance you but we want you to buy the car from a local dealer."  So (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: She wouldn't, she wouldn't accept that and so she went and, and you know made it public and complained.  And so then the newspapers got a hold of it, now all of a sudden I'm the black dealer from Atlanta [Georgia], when before I was--it was just Acura of Tallahassee.  Well when that happened, I, I won over a little more of the, of the black community and I lost a percentage of the white community.  But the white community, that percentage was a larger number.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) See?  So, so then I, I sold that store and I sold it to the gentleman that had some other stores in town.  And I, and I, you know, I consolidated back in Atlanta, I could've succeeded long term down there.  But it would've taken hands on and getting into that fight, and you have to pick your battles.  The--probably the most recent knockdown, I had a, the president of a major manufacturer to come in my office, shake my hand and offer me a store.  And I agreed to take it, and I did everything there was to make that happen.  You know year, year and a half passed and then I said well, when am I gonna open this store, when am I gonna open this store?  And, so then they called me up to the, to the headquarters and asked me a bunch of questions; and when I said I, it's gonna take three years to open the store in the right place.  They said that's not acceptable, and I wanted to say what--you, you shook my hand and told me that's my store.  And so, but any excuse will do, and I didn't get that store.  So you know, but that was just the most recent.  You get that and, but you have to--there, there is many people--there, there are communities of people that are wanting to be of help that maybe they can't step up because of circumstances.  Maybe they say a boss, maybe it's the politics, maybe--all this kind of stuff.  But you know you're gonna, you're gonna get, there's help, but you got to lead the help.  You've got to communicate it and you've got get up, you gotta go after it.  So that's been my experience.  So I, I prepare to be knocked down physically, mentally, financially; I prepare to get floored, I also prepare to get up.
Story_ID: 667484
Speaker 1: Now one time you ha- you, at maximum you acquired like fifteen dealerships, was that it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --the, the most I ever had was five.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I thought you said when we came I--that's what I thought you had--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --then I thought you had more.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: But okay but five is a, is it, is it harder managing five than one?
Speaker 2: Yes it is and it really doesn't matter--the, the larger the dealership, the larger the success and the larger the failure.  Bigger (unclear)--bigger they are the harder they fall you know.  But managing, if it's a smaller dealership you're doing everything; if you're, as the dealership grows, you can hire specialists in new car, used car.  And so you build a team around you, and you get the right team then it's, it's, it's, it really isn't that tough if, when--because they've got to have confidence in you, once you build that trust, and it takes a while to put that team together.  It isn't just, you know we're gonna hire these folks and they gonna come and they gonna work together, it's gonna be all roses.
Speaker 1: Now is there a fundamental difference between the kind of dealership you run and, and the success--I mean the, the liabil- I mean the possibility for the, the business to be, to be successful?  I mean for instance you start off which with a Pontiac dealership [Smith-Johnson Pontiac; Baranco Pontiac, Inc.], would you rather have, know what you know now, would you rather have five Pontiac dealerships or one Mercedes-Benz dealership or, or--
Speaker 2: Well I, I, made that decision to have one Mercedes-Benz [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: It's, it's worth more than--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --five Pontiacs?
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, what you have, you, you've got the brand and, and, and General Motors [General Motors Company] is a good brand.  But General Motors had too many dealerships, and--they had you know Chevrolet, Saturn, Hummer; and I was on, I was on a team that created Saturn.  Hummer, Saab--they had, they were competing with themselves.
Story_ID: 667485
Speaker 1: The team that created Saturn--what happened, what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the Saturn planning and development team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We studied franchising from every angle and put together the, the best practices as far as how to run a dealership.  The fairness of the practices, the, the design of the facility; we had, we spent a lot of time doing that.  And the idea was to, to Saturn-ize General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]--to help them understand how to be better.  But the folks, the line people, the management in General Motors they were not interested in hearing, having some group of dealers and a few managers go out and figure out how to tell them how to do their business.  So it never went over.  Saturn was never given the product to compete; they had the systems, the processes, but not the product.   So Saturn basically had two, maybe three cars; whereas you look at Chevrolet, it's got thirty models or fifteen you know.  So for that reason, that's why Saturn didn't succeed.
Story_ID: 667486
Speaker 1: The first thing you want is, you want a good brand and General Motors [General Motors Company] has, has skinnied down, they now have really three brands: Chevrolet, Buick, GMC and Cadillac, so--instead of all those brands competing with each other.
Speaker 2: Yeah which were basically--it was argued that they were basically the same anyway?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Pontiac, at one time they discovered Pontiac engines were in the Chevy or something--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the same engine, really, except it had Pontiac stamped on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah it--but, but you were supposed somehow pay more for one than the other; and you know I've, I'm not gonna, I think they're much, much improved than they were before.  You know there's an argument that could be made that it could be Chevrolet in Cadillac.  But I'm not gonna get into that argument (laughter) I'm not, I'm not gonna, not gonna get into that.  So you know you want the right brand and it and, and there are a lot of great brands out there.  Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] happened to have invented the car, the airbag, the ABS [anti-lock braking system], the diesel; the engineers, they know how to build great cars.  So that was Mer- the reason for choosing Mercedes, but you want the location to be right.  You want the neighborhood, the community to be able to afford the cars and be able to appreciate the cars.
Speaker 2: Yeah if you had Mercedes of, of East Point [Georgia], it wouldn't work.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's--all right.
Speaker 1: But Merce- you want Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia], then it's your, your people and you have to make sure your processes are right.  And you align those things up, you got a home run.  That's when you go in--when the conditions are right, you go all in.  Now this, this dealership, and I was, I was successful right away.  But I was successful on a different level than what this dealership operates.  This dealership, the average dealership probably is sixty employees; we have 201.  The average dealership probably have sales around thirty million [dollars] a year; we have, it was 219 last year.  The, so this dealership is above anybody's reasonable average; and I, you know it's important--what I'm doing now is I'm building the next generation to succeed in this dealership, both employees and family.  And you know because I'm, I'm sixty-eight years old so I've got to be thinking ahead, but we're excited about the opportunities we have.  We're about to remodel the dealership, Mercedes-Benz USA [Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC] has just moved to Atlanta [Georgia].  You know the city is, is vibrant and growing, we only have to solve one or two more problems, we can grow big time, and I wanna be part of those solutions, so.
Speaker 2: And Atlanta seems to be booming in a way--I mean we were discussing it in other interviews it's kind of becoming a, a black Hollywood in some ways with the industry coming in, and you got athletes here and all major sports; you've got, got people that can afford a Mercedes-Benz.
Speaker 1: Yeah absolutely the city is, the city is growing and the city we, we have much more opportunity in front of us.  We have a tremendous past, but we have much more opportunity in front of us than we have behind us.  Atlanta can, can really go to the next level; and it's, it's about the community coming together and getting through the, the two challenges.  Really integrating the money and making sure that everybody is, has what they need to succeed financially, education wise and opportunity wise.  And the traffic; and we solve those two things then Atlanta's gonna blow up (laughter) yeah.  It, it's a great city, it's great to be a part of it.
Story_ID: 667487
Speaker 1: Yeah we were just discussing off camera the importance to the community of that Pontiac dealership [Baranco Pontiac, Inc.] in Decatur [Georgia] when it opened up; and it was men- mentioned by Denise [Denise Gines] off camera that it was, it was the design of the building was exciting to people.
Speaker 2: Well it was campus layout, in other words a dealership has separate departments, separate profit centers if you have it.  You've got a new car, a used car, a service, a parts but they're all kind of connected, in- interconnected.  And they're all dependent on each other, but they all could be operated as independent dealerships.  So most dealerships they, the design is where you--everything is inside one box and they work together well like that.  But at that time I, I wanted a campus layout 'cause I wanted something that was really big.  And I wanted something that kept this cost down by allowing us to heat and cool the building strictly by design.  So we used a passive solar design, and what that means is that the, the sun comes up in the East and sets in the West.  So you wanna open it--in the winter you wanna open it, and you want the sun to come in the East and to warm the building.  So you put a brick wall in there called a trombe wall to absorb the heat, and then heat the building through the rest of the day.  Well the sun goes up, so you want a roof that reflects, and during the, during the summer it goes straight up, and during the winter the sun goes to the South.  So you wanna open it so that, to the East and to the South so it gets all of that sun during the day, and keeps it warm in the evening.  And during the winter, the sun comes straight up, you wanna have a reflective roof so it doesn't absorb that, that heat.  So there were a lot of things that we put into the facility by design to make it unique and special.
Story_ID: 667488
Speaker 1: And the other thing that was going on was south DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] was going through a transition, white flight if you have it.  And we wanted to anchor the community in a big way, and there was a school right across the expressway from the dealership [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia]: Towers High School [Decatur, Georgia].  So we noticed when we moved in that we had a lot of vandalism.  So went over to the school and Mrs. Baranco ended up serving on the, on the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], the state board of education [Georgia Department of Education], the board of regents [Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia].  But we went to the schools, Towers and the south DeKalb and got involved in the schools.  Had the kids working over the schools, the vandalism went away 'cause they took ownership of the business.  They learned the business and, and, and begin to go through.  Denise [Denise Gines] mentioned the women involved in the business; we've always had women involved in the business.  And right now we've got five, six ladies that are in sales, we have ladies in management, ladies--we've had three ladies that have been general managers, where they've been running the stores; and of course Mrs. Baranco was a dealer and is a dealer here.  I am, I am equal partner to Mrs. Juanita Baranco [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco]; and in fact I'm unequal partner, I'm the minority partner to this deal (laughter) you know.  In, because she, her, her input's so valuable.  But because of that inclusion, because of that strength, that core strength in taking advantage of all the intellectual capital in the building to run the best business we can, we've you know risen to the top of the market.  So we, you know last three years for Mercedes-Benz [Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC], we've been the top of the market.  And in fact the top of the luxury market in metro Atlanta [Georgia].  So it's, there's no reason and people say, well what is, what's the difference what's the, the strength you have?  We have great policies.  But we have great people and we have a great connection to our customer base, the customers--I mentioned financing.  I'm in a position now where we're, we're gonna do a dealership down in Covington, Louisiana.  And I've got everybody who wants to finance in that city; we're gonna get it done.  But when we financed this facility, which was a $30 million facility, four of our customers under the flag of Easlan Capital [Easlan Capital of Atlanta, Inc.] came together and financed the facility.
Story_ID: 667489
Speaker 1: Your dealership is--are you the only Mercedes dealership in this ci- area really at this point, or are there others (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, well no there, there's six dealerships--
Speaker 1: Six okay.
Speaker 2: --six, six Mercedes-Benz dealerships are in metro Atlanta [Georgia].  Four of them are independently owned.  They're owned--Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia], there are three that are owned by the Ellis family, RBM [RBM of Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], RBM North [RBM of Atlanta - North, Inc.; RBM of Alpharetta, Inc. Alpharetta, Georgia], and ACC [Atlanta Classic Cars, Atlanta, Georgia].  And then there's AutoNation [AutoNation, Inc.], a public company owns one [Mercedes-Benz of Marietta] in Marietta [Georgia]; and Berkshire Hathaway [Berkshire Hathaway Inc.], Warren Buffet's, owns one in south Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I got some really great competitors, just you know, it's, it's a great team and, and we really are a great team.  We're competitors but we're all working together.
Speaker 1: Okay now in the country how many black Mercedes dealerships are there?
Speaker 2: There're, there're five and this was the, the first single point Mercedes-Benz dealership; Bob Ross [Bob Ross Buick-Mercedes-GMC Inc., Centerville, Ohio] was the first Mercedes-Benz dealership.  But it was Buick, Mercedes-Benz, which is a dual and so we're the first and we were of the five, four of those were new points.  In other words there was not a Mercedes-Benz dealership here when we opened this up.  And so the one in Orlando [Florida] the same, the one in Detroit [Michigan] the same, there's one out west also.
Speaker 1: Los Angeles [California], or?
Speaker 2: No it's not in Los Angeles, I, it's--I, I, I don't know exactly where, it's, it's a smaller store, but it's, it's out west.  I think it's in, in Flagstaff, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not sure about that.
Story_ID: 667490
Speaker 1: Tell me about Sandstone Shores [DeKalb County, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Sandstone Shores is a, a real estate development, homes on the minimum two acre lots.  Sandstone Shores was twenty-six homes, and Sandstone Estates [Lithonia, Georgia] is forty-seven; and there's a, about an eighty, ninety acre lake in between the two.  It was developed by--I was a lead developer along with my neighbors, so there were four of us that developed the east side.  And I just wanted a first-class residential neighborhood in south DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia].  As I mentioned everybody was leaving south DeKalb and so the issue was financing: could you get it financed that type of development?  And so at the time the, the banks were not ready to finance that type of development in south DeKalb.  So we, we put it together, we pre-sold half of the homes and had--took those folks and got them financed.  And, and then finished--got the money and finished the development.  And we were fine with Sandstone Shores, but then our children decided they wanted to live out there.  And they grew up and had the capacity to buy, so we developed Sandstone Estates (laughter) and so it, it is a community.  The community started in 1989 so it's, it's not a brand new community but it's a great community, because you've got, they're all professional people.  We have a strong neighborhood association, both sides.  Every morning there's activities that start at six o'clock in the morning.  So if you wanna go out and walk with the guys and do three miles at six o'clock and have a board meeting you know before you get to work you can do that.  Or, or you can play tennis in the evening or whatever (laughter).  It's just a great community.
Story_ID: 667491
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young black entrepreneurs today that want to start--want--want to get into the auto business, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well I, the automobile business but any business: figure out what it is that you love to do.  Because if you're just gonna be competitive at it, you're not gonna win; you've got to be passionate about it, you have to be all in.  And when you figure out what that is, go to work in that field and study it, be a student of the business.  Learn it; learn it from s- from top to bottom; and when you figure out how to help, if I figure out how to help Larry succeed in his business, and there's nothing wrong with me helping Larry.  Larry's gonna pay me for my labor some way or another, and then if, if then this whe- you'll know the right time to go off and do it on your own.  And when the opportunity comes, you need to be ready, but you have to be prepared before you take that step.  You know and I candidly was very, very nervous about getting out there and getting the business, although I'd run somebody else's business [Audubon Ford, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  But you know after I'd made a couple phone calls and realized that I was doing better than the guy I was calling up, you know I realized that I was going along pretty well.  So my advice is first, figure out what it is you love to do, and then put yourself all in.  Secondly, you know, realize that you know people are important and you know, it's that, I guess it's that saying you know if you wanna go, go fast go alone.  If you wanna go far you know go with a community, and you know build it yourself, build a community around your people that are interested in the success just as you are.  And help them be successful in your business or in their own, because it, because you will--and always plan that succession.  So and then you have to be ready for the hit; I don't know where it's coming, when it's coming, but it's gonna come.  And you need to be prepared.
Story_ID: 667492
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that we realize that we can just as with--in politics, in education, in business we can.  And the better we do the better the entire community, not just the African American community.  But if we allow cultural inbred racism to take our nerve, to take our courage, to convince us that it's too tough or that we can't, then we don't.  So my optimism is that we can--I know we can.  My concern is that the obstacles, the systemic racism that's still there convinces us that we can't.
Story_ID: 667493
Speaker 1: There was something I read, a quote of yours about being a, a black Mercedes dealership [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia], and you said that if you could tell a black one from, from a white one--?
Speaker 2: I'm done (laughter).  Yeah in fact I don't, I don't want you to think of it as a white Mercedes-Benz dealership.  I want you to think it as the best and so you--the customers out there right now, they're not coming here 'cause of black or white.  I got as many Trump [Donald John Trump] stickers as Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] stickers you know out there but you know (laughter).  They come here 'cause it's, it's the best place to buy an automobile period, you know.  And it just happens to be the best brand available, Mercedes-Benz you know.  I, and I have to, I have to convince people to, that they can afford a Mercedes-Benz, they just come in and see, just come in and compare.  But we, our, our business, the growth is, is organic, it's word of mouth, it's, it's customers selling customers.  We have as many customers sell cars as we do.  I mean they literally drag their neighbors in and say, yeah you've got to come see this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we, we're not, we're not there yet; we're about to remodel this, this dealership.  You come here a year from now you won't recognize it.
Story_ID: 667494
Speaker 1: Tell me about your children--now you have children, right?
Speaker 2: I have four children.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what are they doing now?
Speaker 2: My oldest [Evelyn Baranco Pryor] is a medical doctor and so she's en- enjoying that, it's a sense of service.  You know she works too hard but she's enjoying it, so we're all happy for her.  My next is Grene [Grene Baranco], she handles our social media--social media is, that's the way we market at this dealership [Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia].  And we're thrilled to have her, she's been through that General--you know that NADA, National Automobile Dealers Association dealer development program.  And she's integral to the success here.  My next daughter is Janelle [Janelle Baranco], Janelle was working here in our business office.  And as an office manager for our smart car division; and she has, she is now at a Chevrolet dealership [Rick Hendrick Chevrolet, Duluth, Georgia] in sales.  She want to learn sales outside of the business, 'cause she learned everything there was to know here.  And so we're hoping that you know after a year or so, after we get this thing opened down in Louisiana that she'll want to go down there.  And she, she wants to you have to, we just have to get to that point, and I don't wanna count my chickens before they hatch.  So, and my son Greg [Gregory Baranco, Jr.] is, he's finishing up over at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], he left school and went out and did all the entrepreneurial things he wanna do.  And so now he's kind of interested in either automobile business or some kind of finance related business so, he'll finish up this year.
Story_ID: 667495
Speaker 1: What you just said about your children's jobs reminded me of the changing nature of having a, a car these days, especially a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz].  A friend of mine just bought a new one last year and, and there's I mean a social media person for cars.  Now this is, this is I mean it--she has, I mean her, she talks to this Mercedes, but she and she's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --she ask, I mean she'll call the--from her car (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You just tell it, you say call, call Larry--
Speaker 1: --to Mercedes headquarters you know--
Speaker 2: Call--absolutely.
Speaker 1: --or--and they talk to her about any number of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --of things that I wouldn't think to talk to anybody about in a car, but 'cause I've never had car that had that kind of relationship with me.  But so one, how is tech- technology and culture changing the car dealer business?
Speaker 2: It is, it is gonna be phenomenal the next four or five years.  The autonomous car is--that technology is here now.  The question is how does that technology work with the, the technology of the car that the human's driving?  And so you'll have autonomous cars, self-driving cars; and you'll have humans driving cars.  Well with the autonomous car, you know it's--you, you can control a car where it really won't have an accident.  And when they're all autonomous, the, all these accidents are gonna go away.  And--
Speaker 1: But the--
Speaker 2: But, but the transition is the challenge.  But if you think about, think about your doing math with pencil and paper and my doing math with a calculator, a computer, that's, that's the degree of difference.  And it's, it's larger than that, because this, this car is really gonna drive itself.  And there are, we have cars now that 80 percent of the driving the car will do.  And it'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These are Mercedes now that you?
Speaker 2: Yeah they're right down there, the (unclear)--the new E-Class [Mercedes-Benz E-Class], the new S [Mercedes-Benz S-Class]--all the latest models are at that point.  The propulsion systems, we're fossil fuel driven now or diesel or gas.  And they're, they're much more efficient than they have been in the past.  We're really depending on fossil fuels.  But the environment, it isn't quite the best thing for the environment.  Well in an electric car, that's where everybody's going now, and you think about the electric car, but the, the electricity, unless it's hydroelectric created by water, if it's created any other way it's still fossil fuel.  Well you hate to use the word silver bullet, but there's hydrogen power where the hydrogen is taken from the air.  It's compressed, it's used to run an electric engine; and then it emits water vapor.  And so those cars--and Mercedes, Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation] and Honda [Honda Motor Corporation] and Hyundai [Hyundai Motor Company] have those cars available now.  There are seventeen stations in California now; Japan is putting in several stations, they're doing the infrastructure.  We are not up to date with really readily to changes--that means gas stations are going out.  So if I was in the, in the crash parts business or in the gas station business, I'd be concerned.  And, but all this is gonna change, gonna save thousands of lives, because these cars are not gonna have these accidents that are killing people needlessly every day.
Story_ID: 667496
Speaker 1: The one last question is a compound question.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that you think we need to talk about before I ask my last one?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I can think of. I don't know anything about interviewing but I (laughter)--yeah I, I'm just am, am--I'm a very blessed person, very fortunate.  I, I was lucky enough to marry a wonderful woman [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco]; I'm in a great community.  I--Louisiana was a great community and Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] a great community.  I got great customers and employees around me so, my guardian angel, when I die she's gonna get full retirement (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Well the last question's compound question.
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what do you consider to be your legacy, and then how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well my legacy is that that I was somebody that, that came from a situation that was positive, I had all the positive advantages.  And, therefore, had a positive outcome; and what has happened for me could happen for any and everybody if we were to invest in them.  So we spend an awful lot of money on prisons you know, fifty thousand dollars a year per person.  Why not spend that money on not needing the prison, we've just got to start early.  And I'm an example of what happens when you start early.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All right, thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
