Story_ID: 34129
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing are Bernard Tate, Public Affairs of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny Willis, Department of Public Affairs Officer, Army Corps of Engineers, and Major Jeff Hall, who's Aide to General Bostick.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Thomas Paul Bostick, T-H-O-M-A-S P-A-U-L B-O-S-T-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 23 September, 1956, Fukuoka, Japan.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Fookioka for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, F-U-O--no, F-U--Fu Ku, K-U-- Ku, O-K-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and so what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the Commander of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Chief of Engineers.
Speaker 1: All right and sir what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--let me see my watch here; 9 August.
Speaker 1: Nine August uhh--
Speaker 2: Of 2013.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my headquarters, the U.S. Army Headquarters in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 34130
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask--sort of the ice-breaker.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food, I'd say rice.
Speaker 1: Okay; favorite color.
Speaker 2: Engineer red.
Speaker 1: All right; favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: I like all times of the year, probably when hunting season--in the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay; favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Monterey, California.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: One of the ones I often use is 'Upon the fields of friendly strife are soon the seeds that are planted other fields on other days will bear the fruits of victory.'  It's a MacArthur saying that kinda focuses on team work in sports and that's been a big part of my life, building teams in athletics.
Story_ID: 34131
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separately from your father's side of the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 1: --then I'll ask about his side, then we'll put 'em together.  So can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Fumiko Mary Bostick, F-U-M-I-K-O, Fumiko, Mary, M-A-R-Y Bostick, B-O-S-T-I-C-K.  Her maiden name was Taira, T-A-I-R-A.
Speaker 1: T-A-I-R-A, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on the 9th of February, 1930 and she was born on a small island, a mommy (ph.) island; it's part of the big island of Kyushu.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is one of the islands in the Japanese (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, the southern island--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the southern big island is Kyushu.  A mommy island is a small island that's between Kyushu and Okinawa.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Kooshoo for us?
Speaker 2: I could, but I might get it wrong (laughter), it's K-Y-S-H-U.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: S-H-U.
Speaker 1: Right, all right, thank you.  Now--first of all, how far back can you trace your mother's side, and what can you tell us about her side of the family?
Speaker 2: My mom--I can trace it back to her mother and father.  Her father was a fisherman and was very successful until World War II and then really lost everything in the war, and then it became very, very difficult for my mom, the rest of her siblings and their family.  She had one other sister and about six brothers in all different types of professions, from nursing to local fisherman; one works as an educator and--I've been back to Japan several times and I talk to some of my--my aunt and some of my uncles; they're all--speak Japanese knowingly so I usually go through my cousin Taroono (ph.) and she helps me communicate with the family members.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used to speak Japanese when I was a youngster but have lost much of that over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you still know some?
Speaker 2: I can count (unclear--speaking Japanese); I know directions.  My grandmother stayed with us for a while so I remember saying "Oh yes Amen-A-Sy (ph.)," which is "Good night," to the grandmother and the typical phrases to get around Japan; I know some of those, but I have lost most of the communication skills.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there haven't been any family traditions that have passed down about the ancestry of your mother's side of the family and what they were doing historically?
Speaker 2: When my mom married my dad and she came to the United States and then my father was in the military as well, so we moved all over and--starting in Germany, which made it very difficult for her in another country trying to learn English in a community that spoke German, and then trying to teach her children Japanese so she could not keep up with that.  And then she did not go back to Japan for about thirty years, so we, we really didn't have contact with my mother's side of the family except when my father was stationed at Okinawa [Japan] and my grandmother came over and stayed with us for one of the summers I was in junior high school.
Story_ID: 34132
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I think I'm asking this because--I know we always ask this question, but another thing is often African Americans can't go beyond a generation, you know, in terms of ancestry, for one reason or another because of the struggles we've been through.  I didn't know--I thought that perhaps in Japan, you know, there was a--from what I understand, Shinto is a--I guess a reverence of ancestors going back.  Does she--do they--does your mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.  And I would, I would imagine if I went back and, and spoke to my relatives there that they'd probably have that information, but it's not something that we've ever pursued from, from our family so my sense is that it is probably there and they have that information and could provide it, but it's not something that I know of right now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I think that the break in contact with my mom [Fumiko Mary Bostick] leaving Japan and really not having a chance to go back primarily because of money, and when she did go back it was because her, her mother was passing.  It made it difficult to stay in touch with some of those traditions that we might otherwise have grown up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So her father was a fisherman, right?
Speaker 2: He was a fisherman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know the kind of fish he was going after, by any chance?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know; I just know he was a fisherman, he was quite successful, and lost everything during the war; I don't know how he lost it but I know he lost, lost everything and, and they were, they were really poor from that point on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and just really subsiding on fishering (ph.) the fish that they caught and the food that they, they could grow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your grandmother work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: She did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I know this would probably be a challenge with the spellings, but can you give us their names?
Speaker 2: I could give it to you later (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I, I don't have it--I have, I have it written down--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I can pass that on to you.
Story_ID: 34133
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what's your mother's story in terms of--was she able to--so she was raised on this island, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what stories did she tell you of growing up and did she have a chance to go to school and finish?
Speaker 2: She went to high school, both my mom and dad finished high school and she would say this island--I looked it up on the Internet, a mommy Island, it's a real nice place, it's very small, tourists go there but there's not a whole lot of jobs, so she would say that a lot of the males would gamble and they'd drink, and they'd fish and there was not a whole lot of economy there so after my mother graduated, she was looking for an opportunity to go out on her own and obtain a job, so she got on a boat and went over to Okinawa [Japan] and started looking for, for a job there and that's how she and my father met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: Well she, she never really did (laughter), and it's a long and interesting story.  My mom--my, my dad worked in Motor Pool and he eventually became a motor sergeant and he needed someone to drive one of the trucks so he advertised for that--the army advertised for it and my mom saw the advertisement and she came in and she said she'd like to apply to be that driver and my dad said "Okay, well fill out this paperwork," which she did, and then he said "Well, let's go out and see how you drive."  And they got outside and my mom looked at him and says "Well, I don't know how to drive" (laughter), and my dad said "Well, why are applying for this job if you don't know how to drive?"  And she says "Well, I want a job and I thought maybe you could teach me how to drive."  And the irony of that story is she never learned to drive; she had six children; all through her life she caught buses and taxis and other transportation.  They married but she never learned to drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she didn't get that job (laughter), but they got married.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 34134
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  So--well let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: His name is Sidney, S-I-D-N-E-Y Christopher, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E-R Bostick, B-O-S-T-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 28th, 1930 and that's in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, same question.  How far back can you trace your father's side of the family and what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: Grandparents.  His father, James Bostick, came over from Barbados and arrived in New York and his name was actually spelled without the K, so just B-O-S-T-I-C; somewhere between then and when he applied for citizenship he added the K, so our name became Bostic with a K, and he worked in Brooklyn; he was a handyman, his mother--my father's mother was Irene Bostick and my father did not really get to know my parents, or the grandparents, very well and we never got to know 'em because they passed early.  My father was one of five boys, he was the eldest--or the youngest--he was the youngest of the five boys and I said he was born in 1930; his mother passed in 1938 and his father passed in 1939, so he was eight years old and he was an orphan at eight as was the rest of the siblings.  So he would always remind me how hard he worked growing up in Brooklyn carrying and delivering ice and other jobs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So was he raised by an orphanage or by other relatives?
Speaker 2: He went from foster home to foster home, and the boys all went to different foster homes so he spent most of his life working and he still went to high school and graduated from high school but--and I don't know all the different jobs he did but I know one of them was he carried a lotta ice up and down the hotels and the different places and he was a really good athlete and a great runner, an almost Olympic level kind of runner and he--I don't think he really knew he was that good a runner, but he knew he, he wanted to get out of New York and he wanted to be on his own and he wanted to have a meaningful job so he joined the army when he was seventeen [years old].  He was with one of his foster parents or just an aunt; he used to call her Aunt Mudgie (ph.).  I don't know how to spell it and I don't know her last name but he used to talk to me about referring to Aunt Mudgie.  She had this sign that--to allow him to go into the army at seventeen [years old] and then he ran for the army, you know, once they took him through basic training and some other things, they he was pretty fast and he ran the 10,000 meter steeplechase and he would race that race and somehow he ended up in Okinawa [Japan] after competition early on and I, I don't really know when he stopped running and why, but he was a really good runner.
Story_ID: 34135
Speaker 1: This is something now, we had to almost pause--this is--10,000 meter steeplechase is a race that--there weren't a lotta black Americans running--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the early days of the Olympics like Jesse Owens and others who were running sprints (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well he didn't get to the Olympics but he was, he was a, he was a great athlete and some of those skills, athletic skills, were passed down.  I think one of my brothers is really, was really very fast, I mean he--my brother Michael, and it's ironic 'cause he's an artist, he's not really an athlete but he had this gift for running and he was in the--probably in the top ten in the country in the hundred meter dash and he, he went from running short distances to running long distances, but when I was on the football team in Okinawa [Japan]--and I played football all my life, and they found out about my brother and they brought him on to the football team as a senior and they just had him run kickoffs; they gave him number 22, "Bullet" Bob Hayes' number, because he was so fast (laugher) but he didn't know the first thing about how to carry a football; he carried it like a baby (laughter), he carried it like this (DEMONSTRATION), and just start running straight, so he didn't do much on the football field but he had these natural gifts, and I think that, that was from my dad and I'm, I'm pretty athletic and I've got another brother that's very athletic and I think some of that is from my, from my father.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That 10,000 meter steeplechase is an endurance test; it's not just about being fast, you have to--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's probably living in New York City and running those--(laughter) running up and down those hotel stairs carrying that ice.  Yeah, he was real thin, in good shape, so he was built for that sorta thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know much about it; I really don't know much about what he did, what he raced; he used to talk about it from time to time and the joke was he, he, he, he was running and running and running, he got to Okinawa, met my mom, stopped running, had six kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so he joined the army in 1947 and he's 17, right?  So this is right after World War II and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: ((Simultaneous)--And it was right near the--so he was still in a segregated army.  Truman in '48' [1948], the Presidential Order which helped to desegregate the military, but he went through that--those hard days when it was still segregated.  But he was just so happy to have a job, be outta New York, be on his own, and to be married that, that he, he was very, very happy.
Story_ID: 34136
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: When I, I went back and took a look at my dad's request to marrying and having been a commander in Europe, and I also married in Germany; my wife [Renee Bostick] is an American school teacher over there but when you marry overseas, you have, you have to get permission from your commander and then you have to go through the Embassy to get permission.  In the German government, you have to marry in the city on one day and then you can marry in the church on the other day, and the soldiers said it was so hard that they would just go to Amsterdam or somewhere and just marry on a weekend.  So I realized how hard that was and I wanted to make sure that when I was getting married overseas I went through the process; the process was very hard.  But I wanted to find out how my dad went through it, so I went and looked up some records and my dad had to go through the same process; he had to request to marry and my sister shared with me the recommendation on his request to marry, and the request to marry--there was a colonel that had to submit his recommendation and he recommended disapproval based on the ethnological, psychological and cultural differences between the two individuals.  Now, based on that disapproval, I don't know how my mom and dad were married but, but some, somewhere after that disapproval, he was married and the rest is history so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered how they were able to do it.  Well, the army was being desegregated but of course the segregation is based on black and white, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I don't know what they meant by ethnological, psychological; I can see maybe cultural, but they obviously did pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they engage with other people, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I take after both of them; I think I'm evenly balanced with both of them.  My mother--first, both of 'em were very reserved and very respectful of authority, of government, of their parents; they were very respectful of their--I think my mother and the Japanese culture grows up that way, but my dad was very much the same and--so if you look at all of our siblings, we're very reserved and respectful of our parents and have the same expectation for our children and live by the law, and the kids never got in trouble and never did things that the parents had to worry about, so they--I'm similar in both respects.  My mom is very persistent--was very persistent and she--and even though she was very quiet, she was a task master, she was demanding, but she took care of the children; she stayed home.  She worked once or twice at the local fish market helping to cut fish and clean fish, but pretty much for most of her life, she was taking care of the children.  But neither one of them could help us with homework so we were, for the most part, on our own academically, but they made sure that they provided for us with food and clothes and values, and all the things that we needed to be successful in our early life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you name your siblings for us beginning with the oldest, and put yourself in order for us?
Speaker 2: Right.  My oldest brother is Michael Bostick, and then I'm the second.  We had a brother that was born prematurely, Marty, that passed away, that I really don't know about, and my sister Catherine (ph.), and then my brother Anthony, and then my youngest brother Peter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you and all your brothers and sisters have Anglicized names?  Are there any Japanese names in the family?
Speaker 2: No Japanese names.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Michael Christopher Bostick, Catherine Ann Bostick, Anthony Christopher Bostick, and Peter James Bostick; we're Catholics and we were raised as Catholics.  I don't know how my mom chose the names, but those are all names that many Catholics will choose--the Saints--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the interesting thing like my oldest brother and my second youngest brother, so Michael and Anthony were both born on the 4th of December, obviously many years apart.
Story_ID: 34137
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory--the first thing that you remember.
Speaker 2: The first thing that I remember.  I remember really a couple of things from my very young days, but--I mean I was still walking at that time, so I remember when I was a kind of rough and tumble kinda guy.  My brother locked me out--we were at Fort Lewis [Washington] and my brother locked me out of the house and there was a--and he pushed me outside the dining room area and he closed the door and it was one of the glass doors, you know, the double-sided glass doors where you can slide open.  So I went back about 50 feet and I took off running and I lowered my head and I went through that glass door and it just completely shattered, and I got through it without a cut (laughter).  I was always kind of a football player type of guy, rough and tumble even as a youngster, so I remember that really well and that kinda stuck with me.  The other thing that I've never forgotten, my dad--obviously we didn't have a lotta money and--in our family, but we never really noticed it and my dad always took care of us, and in Germany I remember we would always go to the castles and the castles were free.  And again, we didn't know whether they cost money or free, but I--we'd go to the castles and we'd run around the castles all throughout Germany, but that's how we spent our free time in Germany and I remember that we would--we'd always eat these hot dogs and they were Bratwurst, but to me they were hot dogs.  Looks like he needs to take a break here.  But to me they were hot dogs and, and it's all we ate, and I got to where I didn't like hot dogs anymore.  And I remember--I was teaching a class at [United States Military at] West Point and we're teaching the class on hoop stress and longitudinal stress and if you heat a hot dog up, it will, it will fail due to hoop stress and that means around the perimeter it'll, it'll fail and then a line'll show up and that's, that's hoop stress versus longitudinal stress, means the ends would pop off.  So to teach the class and award the class if they did well, we'd pull out hot dogs.  There were always a lotta hot dogs left over so I, I got to where I could eat hot dogs again.  After that, then I went to Germany and I realized there was a lotta good German food, and I called my mom up and I said "Mom, you know there's a lotta good German food over hear."  I always thought German food was just those, those hot dogs and when I was getting assigned to Germany, I really thought it was gonna be bad (laughter) in terms of what to eat.  And she said "Tom, we had five children, and your dad was a--an NCO" [non-commissioned officer].  He said "We never ate in a restaurant in six years that we were assigned over there."  She said "The only time we ever went out to eat, there was a Chinese restaurant."  My mom wanted to get as close as she could to something she liked and so we went to a Chinese restaurant in the two tours that we were there, and every other time we stopped at the Schnell (ph.) Embass (ph.), and the Schnell Embass would have these bratwurst and French fries, and that's, that's what we'd eat when we travelled to the castles and, and the other thing I remember from my childhood days is my dad was stationed at Fort Bragg, and one weekend he said "We're going to go to Myrtle Beach [North Carolina], South Carolina."  We had heard all about Myrtle Beach, our friends would go down to Myrtle Beach and we were really excited and so we drove down there, we had all five children in the back seat, my mom and dad up front, and we had a fun time driving from Fort Bragg to Myrtle Beach and my dad drove from hotel to hotel and you'd go in and say "I need a room; I have five children" and my mom--and, and he couldn't get a place anywhere down there.  And then after he came out of the last hotel, he asked my mom to go in and ask the same question, and my mom came back and she said she got a room.  He said "You got room for all of us?"  And she said "Yes."  He said "Okay, well get in the car."  And she said "Well what are we doing?"  And he said "We're goin' back to Fort Bragg."  And all the kids started screaming, we're like "Dad, mom's got a room."  He said "No, we're goin' home to Fort Bragg, we're going home."  And I really didn't know what was goin' on (laughter) at the time but I, I later figured it out; I mean he was just so devastated that, you know, he couldn't go in there and--on his own get a room, and, and, and that's when I first realized there was different levels of how people saw folks of color.
Story_ID: 34138
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you grew up in the military, right?
Speaker 2: I did, basically.
Speaker 1: Your dad was a career--
Speaker 2: He was in the army all his--for 26-1/2 years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember when I was young, I watched my dad go off to war and, and then go to the field, and he seemed to be always gone, and it seemed always hard work, yeah, because when he wasn't in the field, he was working; he was a mechanic so he--and he enjoyed working on cars and trucks and, and, and I grew not to like that stuff (laughter).  He'd try to get me out to work on cars and we'd drop engines and we'd take tires off and, and it wasn't my favorite thing to do and he'd always come home and say "I got a new--I have a new car" (laughter).  It was a real old car; it was just new to the family, and for us to work on.  So--and then watched him work, and I, I just said "I don't wanna do that."  When I was young, I, I didn't--I just didn't see the military as something that I wanted to do; so now that I've been in for 35 years now--and so it seems like he got out early, at 26-1/2 but, but he served and he served in combat; he was in the Korean War and the Vietnam War and I'm real proud of him and my mom for having gone through all of that together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was in Korea and Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have long tours in both wars?
Speaker 2: I, I don't really know; I don't know much about Korea, the, the Vietnam was a year tour, and he may have had two tours, I, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he would have served in Korea--did he serve before you were--yeah, that was before you were born in the war, actually, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he stationed back in Korea after the Korean War?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But Vietnam--would this have been in the early '60's [1960's]?  I guess when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--like a little kid.
Speaker 2: I was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still have a letter that he wrote to me, and he was in the First Infantry Division and when I was young, I was always rambunctious and playing sports and playing games, and frankly didn't care a whole lot about school.  And I remember I was, I think in fifth grade and we're in Salina, Kansas; my dad was in Vietnam and I was, I was asked to come see the principal and--because I was gonna get held back a grade, and my mom was gonna go with me, or she had to go with me so she was holding my hand I remember, and I looked up at her and I said--you know, I was thinking like an engineer, I think even back then and I said "You know mom, 12 years of school is a long time."  And she said "Yes," and I said "I don't know if I can make it through 12 years without failing at least one grade, and it seems like this is kinda in the middle, so if I fail this one then I'll get started and I'll be good for the rest of the time" (laughter).  So she, she wrote my dad and my dad sent this letter to me and said "You need to be taking care of things back there."  And he set the record straight in, in that letter and he said he was really disappointed and, and then he came home and he gave me a briefcase that he said I was gonna carry--a leather briefcase.  He said "You're gonna carry this to school every day."  I'm, I'm in like sixth grade (laughter).  Gave me some pens and some paper, and I earned like straight A's from then on; I completely changed between sixth and seventh grade and my dad just--and that's all he said, that's all he did; he then never really checked my grades, worked on me with homework, he just set the right expectation and my mom set the right expectation and then things turned for me--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --and I was able to focus on--and I was pretty good at math and science and that sorta thing, so I could do it fairly--and, and enjoy it.
Story_ID: 34139
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you kinda walk us through the places you were stationed when you were growing up?  I know you went to school in Germany, you finished high school in Japan, right?
Speaker 2: I actually finished high school in California and so--
Speaker 1: Did you?  Let's start at the beginning and try to walk us through where you were.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, and I'll have a tough time with the chronology, but, but I'll walk, walk it as best I can.  From Japan, I believe the next assignment for us was to go--actually, my dad was going to Germany to get things set up and, and we were all in Brooklyn and I lived with my Uncle Bubbie (ph.) and Aunt Ceeda (ph.), my--one of my brothers' brothers, Bubbie.  And we were there for about a year and--could I tell a little story, a kind of a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Sure.
Speaker 2: --tangent thing that I think's important to understand about our family?  My dad was a really proud man and I think he's probably an E-5; we had five children, he had gone to Germany to kinda get things settled.  My Uncle Bubbie said we would stay with them, so we stayed and we lived in his house on 85 Sterling Street, and it was a lotta fun; I got to know my cousin Claudia and Neal, and we would practice our times tables together and, and really enjoyed living in Brooklyn.  And then my dad and mom must have said something and we moved out and, and we moved out and I never really saw Uncle Bubbie and Aunt Ceeda again-- for a long, long time. And when I was a cadet at [United States Military Academy at] West Point --so I was like pre-school (laughter), I think, when I was, I was there in Brooklyn as a youngster living with my Uncle Bubbie, and then I was a cadet at West Point and everyone would go home to their relatives during the breaks, and I really didn't have any relatives except in California; that's where my mom and dad lived, and I really couldn't go to California on a weekend so I said "Wow, I've got an uncle that lives in Brooklyn so I'm gonna find out where he is and go look him up and call him and tell him I'm comin'."
Story_ID: 34140
Speaker 1: So, anyway, we--I took about four cadets and we went down to Brooklyn and I--I hadn't seen him since I was a preschooler, and we showed up on his steps and he opened his arms, he and Aunt Ceeda, and you know four cadets can eat a family outta house and home, so that's what we proceeded to do, and we, we'd kinda go there regularly and I started the relationship back up, and then there were weddings of my, my siblings and Uncle Bubbie, Aunt Ceeda and others would come out to California and, and then years later when I was a Major General and my Uncle Bubbie was in failing health, I went by to see him and I, I remember sitting on his bed and I said "You know Uncle Bubbie, I always wanted to ask you why didn't I see you all those years?  What happened?"  And he said "Well, you know your dad broke contact with us."  And I said "What do you mean?  Why would he do that?  We all got along."  He said "Well, your dad was a proud, proud soldier and he didn't like me taking care of then family, so he told your mom to move out and she moved out and she went to an apartment and I used to come by and I'd check on her from time to time and I came by one night and you guys were eating dinner and the five kids were sittin' around the table and dinner was a bowl of dry Cheerios, and I said Fumiko--he said 'Fumiko, why are the children eatin' dry Cheerios for dinner?' and she says 'that's what I can afford and that's what they like.'"  So Uncle Bubbie got to my brother and read him the Riot Act as the older brother to the younger brother, and my dad got mad and he broke contact and we never saw my uncle and he said "And we never re-connected 'til you called me from [United States Military Academy at] West Point," and then we forgot about all of those years and we all got together again.
Speaker 2: So you sort of brought 'em back together again.
Speaker 1: Brought 'em back together, brought 'em back together and unwittingly; I didn't know any of that.  And my dad and mom never talked about anything; they were really reserved.  They didn't talk about anything; my dad never talked about the war, we just talked about our family, so we were a family, and everything revolved around our family, and, and that's why I don't know a lot about--until I connected with my father's side, I didn't know much about him, I didn't know much about my mom--not because they didn't want to, it's just--we were focused I think more on just getting through each day and week and month and year, and keeping the kids moving along.
Story_ID: 34141
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we--and then my dad was able to get permission for us to go over to Germany, so--
Speaker 1: This is after the Brooklyn stay at Uncle Bubbie's?
Speaker 2: After the Brooklyn stay, so--
Speaker 1: So you go to Germany and now what part of Germany were you?
Speaker 2: We were in Augsburg, it's in Southern Germany, so we were in--we were there two tours so I remember we were in Augsburg for three years, or my dad was there for three years, we were probably there maybe two, two and a-half, and then we went to Baumholder on the second tour, and when--or maybe vice versa, I don't know the sequence but I do remember that I went to Smith Elementary School in Baumholder and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Is this the beginning of elementary school or--
Speaker 2: The beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is this the first grade?
Speaker 2: I was in second grade.
Speaker 1: Second grade.
Speaker 2: I was in second grade at Smith Elementary; I remember that because when I was a Major, and I was stationed at Baumholder, my dad had a stroke and I went in and he couldn't talk and he was paralyzed on one side, so I went in and I told him "Dad, I'm goin' back to Germany" and a big smile came to his face.  And I said "I'm going to Baumholder," and then he started crying (laughter).  And I said "Dad, don't worry, it's gotten a lot better since, you know, you were there and we were there."  Because Baumholder--like many major training areas, people didn't like to go to Baumholder because it's always cold and Vealfleckin (ph.) was the same place; that was my first assignment, or the same situation.  A lotta folks don't like to go to the major training areas because the sense is you're leaving your family, you're going there for 30 days of training and it's day and night, but I found Baumholder to be a great place to live.  And then my son went to Smith Elementary School; same grade, second grade.  Different teacher but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so we had two tours there in Germany, and then we had--we were at Fort Bragg at some point, and I, I don't remember what grade I was in then; I had to be young because I was in elementary.  I went to Irwin Elementary School in Fort Bragg [North Carolina], and I remember that trip down to South Carolina, so I was young enough to remember things, but still in elementary school.  And one of my dad's last assignments was in Fort Ord, California so I was in high school in Fort Ord, California.
Speaker 1: Now somewhere between Fort Bragg, you were in Kansas, right?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, when my dad was--yeah, we went to Kansas--
Speaker 1: Was that Fort Riley, did you say?
Speaker 2: Fort Riley, Kansas; and my dad was in (unclear), and what they did back then is when the division deployed, they moved the waiting wives out of quarters and we went to a place called Salina, Kansas and, and we all lived there in Salina; in fact--and that's where I was in trouble in the fifth grade or so.  I, I remember that well because that experience, and it's another childhood experience I remember because that's when I first realized my brother was really a good artist because he said he wanted me to do some artwork with him one day.  And I said "Why is that?"  And he goes "Well, there's this art contest on T.V., Channel 5, and you have to--anybody can do it but, you know, it's a cartoon show, you know, it's for kids watching a cartoon show."  And he was two years older than me so he said "I don't want people to know that I'm watching cartoons" (laughter), so he's like seventh grade, I'm fifth grade, and--but you had to draw Channel 5 and you had to do some background things and he said "So what we're gonna do is I'm gonna do most of the work, you're gonna do the background, we're putting your name on it" (laughter) so that's what we did.  And then we sent it in, and the day that they were gonna announce it, we had all the kids from the block in Salina, Kansas sitting in front of the T.V., and they, they announced the number--third run--number--the Bronze Star Medal Winner and the Silver Medal Winner in second place, and they said "And first place from Salina, Kansas is Tom Bostick" and said "Tom, we'll be sending you a skateboard, a football, a Frisbee (laughter), so we got this big box of toys and we shared it with everybody on the block, but my brother went on to be--he's just a great, great artist; he's got a lotta skills but that, that's--we're at Fort Riley [Kansas]at that time and then moved to Salina, Kansas just to wait for my dad to come home.  He came home and then--again, I don't have the sequence of where we went from time to time; I don't remember that, but I do know that I ended up in junior high school in Okinawa [Japan].
Story_ID: 34142
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to Naha Middle School and, and then I went to Kubasaki High School.  In Naha Middle School--I was in the Boy Scouts at that time, and I had started playing athletics pretty seriously, you know, and like all young kids, you wanna be a professional athlete and I thought that's what I was gonna do, and I was a multi-sport athlete and--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your--did you have any sports heroes in those days?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  You know, my heroes at that time were kinda local, you know, watching the guys that were doing well as seniors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: I don't know that we watched much T.V. at the time, so--you know, you'd hear about guys like Bob Jones of Dallas, an Olympic sprinter champion and others, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Bob Hayes, you mean?
Speaker 2: Oh, Bob Hayes, yeah, Bob Hayes, Bob Hayes, Number 22--and other; so I don't recall too many sports heroes at the time, but I just knew that it was something that I liked, I enjoyed, I was pretty good at.  And then one morning when I was on a Boy Scout camp-out, I was looking for wood and I found this tree and it had a big branch that I could see was dead, and I was gonna climb up the tree and break that branch off to build firewood, and I always got up early--still do; so I was up at like 5 o'clock and all the other Boy Scouts were sleeping, I was trying to get this fire going so we could cook and I said that's too dangerous; I'm not gonna do that 'cause it was like a cliff on the (unclear) so I walked around, I kept looking for firewood and I couldn't find much.  I came back to that dead branch and I said I'm gonna give it a shot.  So I put  my arm around the tree and I jumped up there and I grabbed it and I heard it crack, and then I heard the tree trunk crack (laughter), and then I went down this, this hill like this (DEMONSTRATION) and my left leg hit here (DEMONSTRATION), and just snapped in two; this lower left tibia just snapped in two, and I sat there it seemed like an eternity (laughter) calling for help 'cause it was so early and, and then finally when the guys woke up, they, they, they took me to the hospital.  Of course my dad was--he didn't get upset too often but--he always thought I had the talent to play ball and, and he wasn't a big Boy Scout guy so he was just very frustrated that, that this had happened to me.  So I was in a cast for--now that was President's Day weekend in February, I don't know what year.
Speaker 1: What grade were you in?  Was it the seventh grade, eighth grade?
Speaker 2: I had to be seventh or eighth grade.
Speaker 1: This is in uhh--
Speaker 2: In Okinawa [Japan].
Speaker 1: In Okinawa, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still have my football trophies from that time and--that my mom kept; I was just back home cleaning her garage and I found some of these trophies she held on to.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: Back then I was a running back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I ended up being outta commission for like a year or two; back then it took a long time for--it seemed to take a long time for bones to heal and I wore one of those long-legged cast from President's Day weekend in February until the Fourth of July.  I was in a long-legged cast (laughter).  So when I got outta there, I could hardly walk so I'd missed the next football season.
Speaker 1: Your leg would have atrophied (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It atrophied big time.  And, and I've kinda felt the effects of that, that injury throughout my subsequent athletic career.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you're in a growth period at that period of time.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 34143
Speaker 1: So, so we--I did tenth grade in Kubasaki and then went to California, and our home was in Marina, California right there in the Monterey Bay area, and I finished 11th and 12th grade at Seaside High School and graduated from there.  My dad--when I was accepted to [United States Military Academy at] West Point and was getting ready to go to West Point, my dad had a third tour to go to--back to Germany, so my mom had my brother in college; my brother was at UC Santa Barbara, I was getting ready to head off to West Point, my sister was in high school, and my younger brothers were in middle school getting ready to go to high school, and my mom put her foot down and she said "You just can't go back to Germany" and, and he said "Okay, I'll go, I'll go myself" and at least he wanted to try to get the thirty years.  And he drove to about Ohio; I think he got to about the middle of the country somewhere (laughter), and then he did a U-turn, went back and he retired.  He just didn't wanna be by himself and leave the family behind; he was always a family guy, and, and then I continued with the family tradition of serving.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me just ask you some questions about school.  Were there any special teachers along the way in any of the schools you attended up through--well let's just deal with grade school through middle school first, and then I'll ask you about high school.
Speaker 1: The, the one I remember--I left out a place.  We lived at Fort Pope at Louisiana.
Speaker 2: What time period was that?
Speaker 1: I know I've said I'm in elementary school (laughter), I was in elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in third grade; I think I was in third grade there; third grade, Miss Vernon; I'll have to go back and get the, the chronology because I don't--I'm having a hard time keeping track of it.  But I was in elementary school, and there was a teacher named Miss Vernon and I really liked her and I think she liked me; she used to--I'd go up to her house sometimes and--with some other kids, and I remember some real good times with, with her in Leesville; we lived in Leesville.  I also remember we had a two bedroom house with five kids (laughter), so my mom and dad lived in a room and we were all piled up in the other room, and we had fun; we enjoyed all the crawdads and the turtles and the snakes and, you know, we just--I, I really--we enjoyed Louisiana, but my, my dad didn't like it and I never knew why but he--I then understood it was pretty hard on them just to find a place to live and then to have all his kids, and there wasn't on-post housing for us so we had to find a place he could afford off-post, and I remember that he--and other childhood memories, my brother Anthony always had pets; he, he, he, he, he, he collected pets.  He had rabbits, he had, you know, snakes and guinea pigs and, you know, anything he could get his hands on he had around the house.  And I had a cat, and somehow my brother was closing one of these record player tops and the cat was in there, and, and my brother somehow killed the cat.  So I, I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Was it like one of these component record players?
Speaker 1: Right.  So I was, I was really mad at him and I wasn't a real fighter but my dad said I could beat him up (laughter), so I beat my brother up and--this is Anthony; and Anthony is not a veterinarian, so he kinda--he went with his passion (laughter); he always liked animals.
Story_ID: 34144
Speaker 1: The other thing that's ironic about this is I taught Anthony to wrestle because when I was Okinawa [Japan], I competed--one of the things I wanted to do was play basketball but I was cut from the basketball team because I never played basketball in my life, so I tried out, I was cut, and I went to wrestling team and I became a pretty good wrestler so I started training my two younger brothers to wrestle.  My dad was upset because he wanted them to play basketball but I, I trained them both to be wrestlers and, and then I came back from [United States Military Academy at] West Point and I was wrestling there and I, I, I'd wrestle with my brother and, and my brother Pete ended up stop wrestling, my brother Anthony went on to be an NCAA wrestling champion at a Division Two school at Humboldt [State University], so I could not come close to beating him (laugher) when he got into high school; once he got into high school and college, I, I, you know--one of the funny things we laugh about today is going back to the day that one day my dad said "Go ahead and beat him up for killing your cat."  But, but Miss Irwin--Vernon, Miss Vernon was a great teacher that I remember from my younger days; and then from high school, I had several and Mr. Lewis taught me algebra and geometry. You know I always liked math and I took Spanish for three years and Mr. Costas (ph.) was my Spanish teacher.  And my, my favorite teacher was Mr. Babcock (ph.), and Mr. Babcock taught me woodworking and my--I really thought that I was gonna be a carpenter in life and that was kinda what I planned to do in--
Speaker 2: Now is this in--at the high school level?
Speaker 1: When I was in high school.
Speaker 2: You actually thought you were gonna be a carpenter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I thought I was gonna be a carpenter.  In fact, last night I was down--and Todd (unclear), my deputy does a lotta carpentry and in his basement he's got the most organized woodworking shop I've ever seen, and I told him the story about how I thought I was gonna be a carpenter.  I was building stuff and making money off things that I would build in, in high school, and, and I remember building this, this desk--this corner table for Dave and Pam Miller, another favorite set of teachers; she taught home economics and he was one of our football coaches, but he wanted me to build a corner table for him, so I'd built that, and I saw him years later and it was still holding up--yeah; well, and then I built a book case for my mother, which I just saw in the garage and I'm gonna mail it back to my house.  But when I was thinking about what to do for college, I saw my brother go off to UC Santa Barbara to study art, and my dad, you know, being a hard-core soldier, I, I don't think he thought art was the right profession to go in, but that was my brother's gift so that's what he wanted to do.  But what I also noticed is that, that there wasn't a lotta money and my parents didn't talk about money or argue about money, but we, we knew that there was not much money; Mike needed a lotta help to get through school, and I said I didn't wanna be in that position; I, I wanted to--I wanna get a scholarship that I have to worry--I didn't have to worry about anything.  So for West Point, I found out that you needed to have a nomination from a congressman and--
Story_ID: 34145
Speaker 1: So, let me just--so at this point now you're making good grades.  How good are your grades at this point?
Speaker 2: When I was at, when I was at--ahh, let me back up; when I was at--you know, this kinda puts it in perspective on how things changed for me.  I was basically straight A's; I might have had one or two B's in all of high school so I was 3.9 something; we didn't have A pluses or anything like that so, so I was doing pretty well, and I did well on the SAT's; I don't know what my--I know I was in like the 90th percentile on the math, I wasn't very strong on the English side but--the verbal side, but, but I was really strong in math so--I thought I was competitive to, to, to go to one of the academies and--
Speaker 1: But were you taking like a high school ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: No, back then ROTC was hated; I mean you just, you know this was Vietnam era so (laughter) nobody wore uniforms, nobody--nobody got near the ROTC Department.  When I became the head of Recruiting Command, I thought 'boy, has the world really changed that now I go into these high schools and folks are fighting to get into JROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps]; they love being on the marching--the JRTC Marching Drill Team and, and it's a neat thing about American that regardless of where they stand on the war, they stand behind soldiers, which was not always the case.  And I'll tell you a story about that and my experience at [United States Military Academy at] West Point, but--so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But your grades were good and--
Speaker 2: My grades were good and I was captain of the wrestling team, captain of the--or President of the Spanish Club, I was doing things in the community, I was working three jobs to play sports, and I was a three-sport athlete.  My dad said I could play one sport; you pick it and he won't help me with one sport, and I asked him why and he said "'Cause I can buy one pair of shoes; you pick the sport that you wanna play, and I'll buy those shoes and help you get through it."  So I said "Football," so he bought me a pair of cleats and I said "But I'm gonna wrestle and I'm gonna play baseball, and then I'm gonna work as hard as I need to."  So I, I took on--I had three jobs in high school; two that I liked, and one that I hated.  The one I hated, my mom got for me; she had a Japanese friend that ran a hotel and they needed somebody to be the handyman and basically clean up the yards and shrubbery and that sorta thing.  So I was out on Saturdays for eight hours, just on my hands and knees, kinda garden work and mowing the lawn and trimming the edges of shrubs and stuff.  So to this day, I don't like doing that (laughter).  My wife [Renee Bostick] loves garden work and loves outdoor work and I, I, I don't like doing that.  But my other two jobs, I worked in the Fort Ord [Monterey Bay, California] Commissary bagging groceries, and I worked at the Officer's Club waiting on tables, so--bussing tables--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I think the, the neat thing about that, you got to interact with people and see people as opposed to being by myself.
Story_ID: 34146
Speaker 1: Okay, so there you are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm in high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, in high school, and you just established all the things you were doing.
Speaker 2: I played football; I was a--kind of a defensive end monster, rover, and I was a wrestler--the captain of the wrestling team, and I was a catcher on the baseball team.  And our football team was really good, I mean we were state champions; we had two All-Americans in the back field (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Would we know 'em now?
Speaker 2: You would not know them now, but we sent people to the pros probably every third year or so.  You know Coach Rivera, Ron Rivera?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Ron Rivera went to Seaside High School; his dad was a warrant officer.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was a--Ron Rivera was a coach of West Virginia, right?  Is that it, or--
Speaker 2: No, Ron Rivera played linebacker next to Singletary--
Speaker 1: The Bears, right--
Speaker 2: --the Bears, and then--he was number 59, and then he went to--he's coaching one of the pro teams; I don't know which one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right; you're right.
Speaker 2: He was down in San Diego, so--is it the Panthers?  I, I don't know; I don't know, but he used to coach one of the pro teams.
Speaker 1: I remember him outta Chicago, yeah.
Speaker 2: Herman Edwards came from Monterey Bay.  Of all the guys that came outta Monterey, most of 'em were unsung heroes that then went on and did great things, like--Herman Edwards is another one; he didn't get drafted by anyone for college, went to San Diego State [University] I believe, walked onto the Eagles, and like seven-time Pro Bowl.  We had a guy, Lee Charles McDaniels--Lee Charles was probably 155 pounds soak and wet, and we played together and he played cornerback and--another guy not recruited by anyone, and so he went down--walked onto San Diego and, and he played there, starred there, and didn't get picked up by any pro team.  So he came out, walked on, and asked Joe Gibbs for an opportunity to walk onto the Red Skins and he walked on and--really nobody knows Lee Charles because he played behind Daryl Craine, and Daryl (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's the greatest of all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and Daryl played for an eternity (laughter); Daryl never got hurt; so, so Lee Charles played behind Daryl and--the year they went to the Super Bowl, so he, he got a Super Bowl ring.  And then he got traded to the Giants the year the Giants went to the Super Bowl (laughter), so he got a second Super Bowl ring.  So Lee Charles is back, coaching in California and, and he, like I said, he's about 5 foot 7, 5-8 maybe; not a big guy, but he was fast as lightning, I mean he could strike and he was just what a cornerback was.  But we had a lotta guys that were like that, they, they dream big and they'd go out and, and they never quit, they were persistent and that bunch of guys for me was a lotta fun to play with.  They were also really tough; Seaside High School.  Seaside High, at the time I was there, was like the number one crime city, small town crime city in California.  It was--some of my class mates went to prison, some of 'em are dead because of gang violence; it was--I, I remember going in to go see the football coach on a first day that I came in from Okinawa [Japan], and they were walking me around and Coach Hartman was in there and one of the defensive ends was on--sitting across from him and I saw the defensive end take his cleat off and throw it at Coach Hartman, broke his nose (laughter), it was bloody; it was unbelievable how rough this team was.
Story_ID: 34147
Speaker 1: What accounts for--I mean here is--this is--you know you got Carmel [California], you know, Monterey [California], all these beautiful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, but Seaside is where it was rough; it was really rough in Seaside.
Speaker 1: Well what was an occupation for the civilian population there?  Is there a priority?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You had tourism, that was the major industry there, and then you had the farms, you know--agriculture; so it was tourism and agriculture is what a lotta folks did in that, that area and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm just wondering what made 'em so rough, you know--
Speaker 2: Drugs, drugs and, and lack of employment; and it wasn't bad, I didn't see a lot of it but kids grew up on the streets and it was, it was a rough neighborhood.  I lived in Marina [California] and Seaside has cleaned up a lot; it's a great--for me it was a great school, it was a great city, I had a lotta fun but, but we were, we were good at sports (laughter); we dominated in sports and it was either Seaside or Monterey [Bay]that, that would really win the, the Central Coast Championships, whether it was basketball or football or--we weren't as good in, in baseball, but we had really good athletic teams.  I remember going back and I spoke to Coach Miller and Coach Hartman and when I walked in, they said "You look bigger" and they said "We shoulda played you more," and I said "I kept tellin' you that, coach" (laughter).  But I was kind of a walk-on onto the high school because I was coming from Okinawa [Japan] and I was a military kid and back then, they really didn't know how long military kids would be around so they focused on, on the folks that they'd been bringing up from junior high to high school, so like Lee Charles--they knew about Lee Charles when he was in junior high school and he was really fast, so when he joined our team I was like a junior, but we knew Lee Charles; everybody knew he was coming to the team.  But everybody was not a star except like Ron Rivera; Ron Rivera came in, he became an All-American there, he got drafted by the Chicago Bears.  But most of the kids from our area--and when I talked to my coach and he said "I should have played you more," he then said that the year after I left, they sent--like five of the kids went to the pros; they didn't make it; Lee Charles did but, but most of the other ones--you know, it's a dream of a lotta kids to go on and play but, but most of 'em cannot compete at that level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34148
Speaker 1: Okay, so--well, back to [United States Military Academy at] West Point; now what kind of counseling did you have at Seaside [High School] about college?
Speaker 2: About college?  I really didn't have much; no one ever--you know, folks say you cannot do this or you ought a go do that, I, I really didn't have much, and I really didn't know what I wanted to do.  I wasn't dead set on the military but I did like this idea of a great education that the military provided at the Academy.  So that's really all I knew, and I--every year, our high school sent folks to the Academy so it was pretty well-known and the year before me, there was a guy named Steve Torres (ph.) that went to the Academy and the year I went, there was another young man that went with me so, so they had a pretty good network that they would talk to you about what going to the Academy was like because I wasn't dead set on going to West Point, I wanted to go to the Air Force Academy and--first I wanted to go to an academy because that wasn't clear that I could go; in fact, when I--and going back to why I thought I was gonna be a carpenter, when you had to get a nomination, I applied to my congressman and, and I, I wasn't on the list of the folks that my congressman was gonna support, so--and then either my, my local congressman or the senator.  So then I, I talked to my dad [Sidney Christopher Bostick] and I said "Hey, you know you're from Brooklyn, maybe I'll try Shirley Chisholm, you know, and say"--you know we had roots in Brooklyn too.  So I tried that and I, I didn't get a nomination for that, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Shirley Chisholm was big then; she was at the height of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She was big, yeah, and I thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I think that's when she ran for president, in '74' [1974], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So I thought sure I was gonna get--but I couldn't get a nomination, so I couldn't get an appointment but you need a nomination and, and I just--so I, I remember (laughter) getting those letters of rejection and just--I went outside the door; I didn't wanna see mom and dad see me open up the envelope.  I opened 'em up, just sat down on the porch, cried, and I got over it, and then figured out 'okay, I'll go to Monterey Community College [California], focus on carpentry' and drove from there.  And then there was this retired general officer who heard about me, and he came out and he said "You know, there's another way to get a nomination" and I said "There is?"  And he said "Your dad's in the military and the president has a hundred of these nominations, and you should apply for one of those."  I said "But getting a nom--I can't get a nomination from a congressman, how am I gonna get a nomination from the president?"  He said "Well you have the grades, and you've got all these sports and you're doing everything; you're just what we need."  And he got me pumped up again, so I applied and I got a nomination; I got one of those hundred nominations from the president.
Speaker 1: The president then was Gerald Ford?
Speaker 2: You know, uhh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--This is '74' [1974], right?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Three?  Then it would have been Nixon, Richard Nixon.
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It was before Watergate hearings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, so I--and then I immediately received appointments from both the Air Force Academy and the, and the--West Point.
Story_ID: 34149
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask you--I didn't ask you this and I was thinking it but I always ask people like what then racial makeup of their high school was, you know.  What was Seaside's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Seaside High School.  If you open up our book, it almost looked like the United Nations, our Year Book; it was really a melting pot of Asian, African American, Caucasian; real ethnic diversity, real balance, so--
Speaker 1: How did everybody get along?
Speaker 2: We all seemed to get along just fine (laughter); we all, we all, we all got along really well.  I mean I hung out with the academic kids and I hung out with the athletic kids, and we had the kids that were--had issues with, you know, drugs and alcohols, and that was a--seemed like a small population.  There were always girls seemed to get pregnant and there were kids that were having babies in high school, so that was not unusual to see that going on but, but I normally hung out with the athletes and the, and the academic kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's two different kinda groups.
Speaker 2: There were two groups, there were two completely different groups; there were a few that were in both groups but they were completely different and I took the--my wife to the first reunion (laughter) and I went to both of the groups and they were all doing very differently in terms of life, and she didn't wanna go to another reunion because her, her, her high school is very diverse in, in, in--you know, and by the time I went back, I mean--I think it was my ten year reunion, we had guys who were in jail and, and guys that were doctors.
Speaker 1: So did you identify with the African American community primarily, or with the Asian American community, or did you have to?
Speaker 2: I kinda always felt like I was on my own; I felt like--it was almost like I was isolated, and no one intended--'cause I really, you know I say I'm African American; they'd look at my hair, look at my--"You are?"  (Laughter) (unclear).  "I'm Japanese" (laughter).  "With that color skin?"  So, so I didn't really--I didn't go with an ethnic group like that; I, I, I Kinda--and I didn't look at myself as different but I did sense it, you know; I wasn't--you know I wasn't kinda fully embraced by the brothers so to speak, and I wasn't embraced--but, but, but I didn't feel--there was no negative vibes because of that, it was just--we all kinda got along, and when I said I hung out with the academics or the athletes, it was just kinda the nature of it, and mostly with the, you know, football and wrestling.
Story_ID: 34150
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right so now--so you've got a presidential nomination, probably from President Nixon, I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you get a letter from [United States Military Academy at] West Point?
Speaker 2: I received a letter from West Point, and I received a letter from the Air Force Academy and to this day I remember the letter from the Air Force Academy; I really wanted to go to the Air Force Academy but, but it remind--and I didn't think about it as much until years later when I became the head of recruiting.  One of the many skills that you learn in recruiting is how to market and how to advertise the army.  In fact, when I was out there, we created the logo Army Strong, and the music that we have, and--I, I mean we, the head marketing agency recruiting command working with the (unclear) command; we were trying to turn recruiting around back at that time.  But we had to reach out to these youngsters, and I would always tell our recruiters "You have to talk their language; you have to speak in a way that they understand."  And at that time, it was social media and, and other things, but--and you have to talk to the parents in a way.  So we gave all of our recruiters laptops; you know, they would come back from Iraq and Afghanistan, give up their M-16 they'd get a laptop and that was their weapon.  But part of that was thinking back to this letter I received, and there was a line in the letter that if, if, if you come to the Air Force Academy, become an Air Force officer, we promote our best officers to colonel in fourteen years of service.  Now when you're a seventeen year-old and somebody's talking about doing something in fourteen years, and you don't' know what a Colonel is (laughter), you, you, you're not winning 'em over, but fourteen years to make a colonel, that is unbelievable when, when you're in the army and now, now that I know that--but, but for a seventeen year-old that doesn't even wanna--thinking I wanna, I wanna go get an education, I'm not sure I wanna serve for very long, and you're talking to me in the welcome letter about staying for fourteen years and, and that's fast (laughter)?
Speaker 1: There's a difference in perspective (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, right, I'll be an old man and--you know, I mean you're talking twice my age almost (laughter), you know.  So--but, but it's a--it, it, it was a neat example.  The other thing I learned, and I talk to my, my folks in recruiting command years later is the importance of mentorship and reaching out and talking and not pushing folks too hard but letting them and their families make the decision.  I mean I really wanted to go the Air Force Academy; I really--in fact, some of the guys today that would have been my class mates like Ed Rice--Ed Rice who's probably another one you're, you're gonna interview; he was the first African American Brigade or Wing Commander equivalent of Vince Brooks at West Point.  He was the equivalent--the first African American; today, he's their Four-Star General in charge of their training and education command.  But I would have been in his class and we, we joke about that; and I wanted to be--I thought I wanted to be a pilot and I wanted to be in the Air Force and, and what happened to me is no one reached out to me from the Air Force.  In fact, at one point, I asked somebody to reach out (laugher) because the army was all over me; you know I was there at Fort Hood so--or, or Fort Ord [California] so--my dad [Sidney Christopher Bostick] was a master sergeant so a lotta sergeant majors would talk to me.  And then then there was--the generals would bring us in and the colonels, and every other month, seemed like, they would bring in the kids that were thinking about going to West Point.  I remember--this again is talking to your audience.  I remember going in to this one, one-star general's office and he was talking to me about it 'cause I, I said I liked sports and he, and he said "Well, you know they have great sports here;" he said "I played with lacrosse," and he started telling me about lacrosse and my eyes were (laughter) rolling backwards; I, I didn't know what he was talking about; I, I didn't know what lacrosse was, we, we didn't play lacrosse in high school; I had no idea, but it sounded good (laughter), you know, and I later got to understand what lacrosse was and lacrosse of course has blasted across the country.
Story_ID: 34151
Speaker 1: So I had a lot of encouragement from the army; and then my friend Steve Torez (ph.) came by the high school and I said "Steve, I'm really struggling; I think I wanna go to the Air Force Academy but what's West Point like?"  He said "Don't come to West Point."  And he was a (unclear), you know, so (laughter)--which means he was in his first year, so he's getting abused like all get-out (laughter).  And, and I remember sitting there in the quad at Seaside High School eating lunch, and he and I are speaking; I remember it really well because a seagull flew over and went to the bathroom right on my hand, right here (DEMONSRATION) (laughter), you know, somethin' dropped from the sky on my hand, so it was one of those moments that I'll never forget, and him telling me not to come.  So I had him telling me not to come, and you know you trust your peers; the generals and the colonels and the sergeant majors telling me to come--my heart really wanted to go to the Air Force Academy and the Air Force finally sent somebody; they sent a guy that had gone to Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and my mom [Fumiko Mary Taira Bostick] put this white lace on the dining room table.  She had a cup of coffee and he had this slide show of the Air Force Academy, and he said "One of the things you need to understand, Tom, is that the Air Force Academy is really hard; I mean it's very demanding."  And he said "It's an all-male school," and he said "If you want other things like to have--not as demanding, but just go to a school that you have--you could go to ROTC; you know, if you want a social life, that's kind of what I went through."  And I'm sitting here saying "You're supposed to be talking me into the Air Force Academy, not talking to me about ROTC."  And then he reached for the coffee and knocked it over (laughter) on my mom's white lace and, and I said "Gosh."  So I sat and I stewed from February until the fifth of May; the fifth of May I think was the last date you had to decide, and I, I just decided to go to West Point.  I, I, I liked the history, I, I liked the people that had gone through there and, and, and I knew--it seemed comforting, they had reached out to me, and--years later I would tell my recruiters because it turned the other way with my son [Joshua Bostick]; my son was born when I was at Stanford [University], going to grad school, and then we went to West Point to teach.  And when my son was this small (DEMONSTRATION), he was, he was gonna be a cadet at West Point; he was--that's where he was going.  And then between junior and senior year, he went to the cadet camp up there in--it's a week-long school, maybe two weeks, and about thirty percent of the kids that go to that end up going to West Point.  He got accepted early, Valedictorian of his class, and captain of the golf team and did very well in school; great SAT scores, and he really didn't have anyone reaching out to him from West Point and I didn't know if they were expecting me to do that; I think a captain called him once, but other than that, there was no one reaching out.  And then Stanford asked--said "Hey, we'll pay for your plane ticket to fly out to Stanford.  We, we got a week of, you know, scheduled classes and we want you to this, we want you to live in the dorms and--" you know, so they wined and dined him and he ended up going to Stanford.  And, again it reinforced to me the importance of continuing to reach out, not forcing but mentoring youngsters because they're really to decide--and reaching out to their parents.  So as the Head of Recruiting Command, I realized from my own personal experiences and watching my son go through the same thing how important that constant mentoring, not over-burdening them and, and not being oppressive in, in the presence and the encouragement but at least showing that you really care.
Story_ID: 34152
Speaker 1: Now you were engineer ready, I guess, coming out of high school, well I guess from what I understand.  You had calculus and other--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I had studied pre-calculus--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, so I did pre-calculus and a lotta--like my son did calculus in high school.  They're moving a lot faster these days than we moved in my day, so I had pre-calculus.  So I, I was ready to go and, and I, I was really nervous and, and I didn't know what--and I was pretty good at languages I thought, and I was pretty good at math and science but I wasn't--and I loved history in high school, but I, I--English and that area was not my strength, and I, I had to really work on that part of my education, so I was probably more ready on the scientific side--math-science side than I was on the liberal arts side.  And [United States Military Academy at] West Point demands everything; they demand you study everything, which is a great education, but it was predominantly focused on math and science.  So we studied math six days a week, we went to class on Saturday and we studied math--and it turned out that if you were good in math, you could do very well at West Point because everybody had to take electrical engineering.  Even if you were not strong in math, you were gonna take Double E; you were gonna take physics, you were gonna take chemistry, thermodynamics, fluid dynamics; I mean these are courses that if you were at a college or university and you weren't gonna be an engineer, you would never, ever even dream of taking those courses, but--let's say your, your strength is history or English and you're not a math person and you go to West Point, you're, you're gonna have a tough road to hoe because, you know, when this school was created in 1802, it was thee nation's first engineer school--school for engineers, and that's why the Corps of Engineers and West Point, that history of the Corps of Engineers and West Point is the history of America.  You look around this, this city, the Washington Monument, the U.S. Capitol Dome, the Lincoln Memorial, the old Executive Office Building and now the Eisenhower Building, these were all built by, by engineers--the Corps of Engineers; we mapped the west, we built the navigation along the Mississippi, we ensured that the ports in, in, in the industry that could come through and outside those ports; those were engineers that America counted on West Point producing, and it took many, many years before that went away.  But, but the best and brightest whether it was [General Douglas] MacArthur, Robert E. Lee and [Ulysses S.]Grant, and you can go on and on--[Major General George Brinton] McClellan, P.T. Beauregard; these were, these were all engineers and, and they were engineers that West Point produced and as the history went on and we needed other branches of service and others became popular--today, infantry, for example, is the first branch that goes out in terms of selection by cadets but for many years, it was always the engineer branch and, and, and if you came to West Point with a, a proclivity or interest towards engineering and math, you, you, you naturally did better.  Now that they have majors, you can go through West Point and not have to take thermodynamics and physics--or you may have to take physics, but you don't have to take dynamics, which is an advanced form of physics, so to speak.  And I think that's good for the, good for the Academy and it's good for the, the nation to produce a broad range of officers with broad ranges of skills.
Story_ID: 34153
Speaker 1: Well tell us about it now.  Was West Point what you expected?  What was your first day like?
Speaker 2: I remember my first night.  I flew into New York City, I went to a hotel in Central Park, I didn't sleep all night, I just laid in bed; couldn't sleep (laughter), I was nervous; and I boarded the bus with all the other cadets and we went to West Point and I, I remember this turn and it was--it's almost--it was like a yield turn but--and there was a sign for West Point, and you know how you have signs that say 'No U-Turn' or 'No This?'  There was a sign that said "No Turning Back" (laughter); it was meant for the cars, but I remem--it was meant for me (laughter).  There's no turning back now (laughter).  And I, I didn't know, I didn't know if I was gonna make or not; I knew I wanted to, but my--one of my best friends at, at high school sent to the Coast Guard Academy, and I applied for the Coast Guard Academy too, and he went to the Coast Guard Academy while I was--the summer that we were all going, so I went to West Point around, you know, the middle--or the beginning of July; he went to the Coast Guard Academy the beginning of June, and he was at the airport to greet me as I left for West Point because he had already quit the Coast Guard Academy.  And he would--he played football with me, he was smart, he was like six foot six (laughter), and I remember getting on the airport and one of the mothers said "And don't you quit" (laughter).  So, so, so it was kinda scary the first day.
Story_ID: 34154
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So--yeah, and I think anybody that's been through [United States Military Academy at] West Point can tell you their memories of the first day and remember precisely what they were said, sometimes who said it and what actions you had to take, but one of 'em was you had to report to the man in the red sash, and they teach you how to salute and they, they tell you to drop your bags and you drop 'em fast enough; you kinda ease 'em down and, and, and he said "Pick 'em up, I said drop your bags."  (Laughter).  Then you drop 'em, so--and back then they could curse at you and yell at you and, I mean it was high intense--intensity and--but I felt like I was in there with every, everyone else so I quickly acclimated.  And a lotta things didn't bother me externally, so they could yell and scream and, and, and, and one of the things that really helped me--when my dad [Sidney Christopher Bostick] gave us all chores to do when we were growing up and, and I didn't know this was gonna help me but it really did.  But my job was to spit shine my dad's boots and, and I didn't know how to when I was young but he kept working on me and I would--at night, I would spit shine his boots and he'd be ready to go to work the next morning.  And when I arrived at West Point, one of the first things you have to do is spit shine these (DEMONSTRATION) shoes and your boots, and it was one of those really hard things to learn for my peers and I was quickly (laughter) spit shining these boots.  "How'd you do that?"  "I've been doin' it for years, that was what my job was in the house (laughter)."  And, and my dad, I don't think, realized he--well he didn't know I was gonna go to West Point obviously when he started having me do that chore, but it, it really helped me 'cause I was good at something and confident about it and I could help my peers and class mates and, and it was a good thing for me.
Story_ID: 34155
Speaker 1: What did your dad think about you going to West Point?  I neglected to ask you that.
Speaker 2: My, my mom [Fumiko Mary Taira Bostick] and dad [Sidney Christopher Bostick] never, ever--they, they were real humble people; they, they, they didn't themselves accept praise a lot, they didn't give a whole lot out, they, they--great job, proud of you.  So the thing I remember about my dad--he had everybody over to the house and he had this cake, and I still have a picture of it; and this cake--and it had these soldiers on it, and he wanted to celebrate with my high school friends about me going to West Point.  And on the cake, there were these big cross rifles and it said "The first cross rifles in your life."  And we ate the cake, took pictures and everything, and I just forgot about it, and he never said anything to me.  So when I went to West Point and I was about to graduate, and we had to select our branches, and I did pretty well at school so I could, I could select engineers; I was thinking about infantry and I went to ranger school as a cadet, so I was one of twenty-five cadets that went to ranger school, highly selective, and a great bunch of guys, but at the end I then chose engineers and I felt pretty good that I, I did well enough I could select the Corps of Engineers; I, I had my engineer castles on like I do now and I--four years later, I came back home.  And my dad never made it to West Point in the four years, and my mom made it to graduation, so I had one visitor in four years and that was my mom at graduation.  She put her foot down (laughter); she said "I'm gonna go see him graduate."  So when I got home, I get dressed in my uniform and my dad looked at my lapel and he said "What's that on your collar?"  I said "What do you mean?"  He said "Those castles; what's that?"  I said "Oh, dad, I went Corps of Engineers."  And he said "So did they run outta infantry by the time they got to your name?"  I said "No, dad, they didn't run outta infantry; I coulda gone to infantry."  And he said "Oh, okay; I guess I shoulda told you, shoulda talked to you more."  And, and so the, the only thought I had--and then I flashed back to the cake, that was the only communication he had with me about goin' infantry, 'the first cross rifles in your life.'  And then he started telling me about his experience in war.  He says "You know, I fought in Korea--in Vietnam," and he said "You know in Korea I was in infantry" or "I was an engineer."  He said "You know what engineers do."  He said "They got those Bangalore Torpedoes and, and they're blowin' up that wire and they're out with those mine detectors lookin' for those mines," and he said "Pretty dangerous out there."  And I said "I understand."  He said "So why you--why'd you say infantry?"  He goes--he says "Well when I was doin' that, the infantry was always done in the woodline, providing over-watch and protection."  He said "So when I went to Vietnam, I wanted to be an infantry man; I wanted to protect those engineers so, so good luck when you're out front" (laughter).  You know it was sort of--but, but he--we never had those conversations; he never, he never talked about the war, he never talked about the military.
Story_ID: 34156
Speaker 1: So he was really proud of me, he was really, really proud that I was able to get accepted and--but he--the way my mom and dad [Fumiko Mary Taira Bostick and Sidney Christopher Bostick]expressed pride is probably how my son [Joshua Bostick] would say I express it today (laughter); I probably have some of their traits where my--I'm an ISTG--TJ [Introversion, Sensing, Thinking, Judgment], my wife's [Renee Bostick] an ENFP [Extraversion, Intuition, Feeling, Perception]; we're, we're complete opposites in the Myers Briggs; so, so the two of us together kinda shower my son (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Call it the Myers Briggs Designation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, those are the Myers Briggs [Type Indicator] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What do they stand for now?  This is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The I is Introvert, although I've really changed my introvert from hard introvert in high school to kinda--I'm kinda in the middle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You're kinda like an introvert leader (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, I'm more balanced; I'm more--I'm much more balanced than I was, and my wife's more the extrovert and we're kinda--and I'm more of a thinker, more judgmental, I-S, I don't have all the, the meanings of 'em--scientific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, I think I know the one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I'd have to go back and look at what they all mean, but I--but my point is we're complete opposites and how we operate, but we, we get along, and we find a better solution I think because we both start at opposite ends of the spectrum.
Story_ID: 34157
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to ranger school at West Point.  I know that's something that you select to do; not everybody does that, and only a select group of those who wanna do it can do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I always felt like it was one of--I won't say it was a bad decision (laughter); it wasn't my decision to go to ranger school as a cadet.  One of the other things we had to intensely do at West Point was foreign languages and I--you have to select which language you want, so I said Spanish because I studied Spanish for three years and I was pretty good; and then I said German because I--my dad had been in Germany, I really--I liked to learn it; and then I, I had Portuguese as my third choice. And, and West Point had languages like Chinese and French and Arabic and--they didn't have Arabic back then, but they had all the standard languages, but Chinese was really hard; and Russian.  So I was told to go to Portuguese and--I, I said "Really, my third choice?"  And--so I got into Portuguese and it was really confusing for me because it was close to Spanish.  Spanish is "Yo hablo espanol," "I speak Spanish," and Portuguese is "Eu falo Portugues."  So "Au and Yo"--it was enough to make me really confused in my first couple of--first year or so, taking Portuguese.  But after two years, I graduated at the top of my Portuguese class so I was first in Portuguese so--and I was gonna go to Brazil.  They took the top two guys and they said after two years of study, they would send you to Brazil for two months to work with the Brazilian Military Academy and, and I was just excited; I was happy that I finished strong and that I was gonna go to Brazil, and then my TAC [Training, Advising, and Counseling] officer called me up and, and he said that "Got some great news; you're goin' to ranger school; West Point has picked twenty-five cadets that we think can make it through ranger school and you're one of them."  I said "Well when is ranger school?"  He said "Well it's the upcoming summer."  And I said "Well I can't go to ranger school," and he said "Why?"  And I said "Because I'm going to Brazil."  He said "Well go tell the Foreign Language Department you're not going to Brazil, you're going to ranger school."  "I don't wanna tell the Foreign Language Department (laughter) that; I worked hard."  He says "No, you're gonna be one of the leaders in the Corps and you're a great athlete, great leader, you're gonna go to ranger school."  And then I said "Okay."  He's a captain; this guy's pretty--I mean for me, a captain is really smart and senior, he knows what he's talking about (laughter).  I'm not messin' with a captain.  So I went over to the department and then the colonel came out, the head of the department came out (laughter).  He goes "You know, we'd like you to come back and teach Portuguese one day and we'd like you to teach 'em as you really need to go back and tell the TAC officer you're gonna go to Brazil; this is an opportunity."  And so I was torn, but I stuck with my TAC officer (laugher) and I went to, I went to ranger school and it turns out they're some of my best friends in life; a lotta great friends at West Point, a lotta great friends in my company and on my football team but that group; of 25 guys, I mean they're some of the--one of 'em is probably my best friend that we've hung around with, we still golf together today, and almost all of them went infantry so when I went engineers, it was kinda shock to the twenty-five of us that went to ranger school together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34158
Speaker 1: Now ranger school is like some sort of accelerated kind of a boot camp in itself, right?  In the summer, is it?
Speaker 2: It's in the summer, and it's nine weeks.  And what they don't do, they don't send cadets to ranger school now because if you fail and you have to--you get turned back and you have to do ranger school again, then--and they'll do that.  If you fail patrols or if you fail land navigation or if you've got a fitness issue or a medical issue, you can get recycled.  Well if you're a cadet, you don't have time to get recycled; it's one shot and you have to make it.  So, so--and West Point at that time was really pushing hard on selectivity.  I was in the class of '78' [1978], and the class of '77' [1977] was the big cheating scandal.  So the class of '77' [1977] lost 150 cadets due to the cheating scandal in electrical engineering.
Speaker 1: What happened?  I remember it in the news, but what actually happened?  Weren't you and Leo Brooks, Jr. in the same--I mean in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Brooks was--I was '78' [1978], Leo was '79' [1979] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--He was the--yeah, he was right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right behind me, right behind me.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And he was telling us about that and how it affected his class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and it affected--it affected all classes, really.  It changed West Point; that cheating scandal changed West Point in a number of different ways and I think all for the better.  But one of the things I was, I was gonna talk to you--from a physical standpoint, but not, not only did West Point, that, that class--and, and there, there are many great members in that class but there were a couple of things that happened to that class that really changed how they treated (laughter) the other classes that came behind 'em, but one of 'em was physically.  I remember being at, at my first summer after basic training which is called Camp Buckner and--so you're through your "Plebe year" and you're now an upperclassman, you've been on leave to go home and you come to, to Camp Buckner and you're going through your summer training.  Well there was a platoon--about a platoon's worth of upperclassmen that were ahead of me, '77' [1977] that were out there doing training and they were really getting pushed kinda hard, and I found out that there were about thirty folks that went down to airborne school and they had failed airborne school, the PT test [Physical Fitness Test]; well how, how can you, how can you fail the PT test at airborne school?  I mean--or, or other thing, yeah--I mean how can, how can thirty West Point cadets not make it through airborne school?  That's just--ranger school maybe one or two if you don't get it right, but not airborne school.  So, I mean the physical part of West Point got ratcheted up quite a bit, and then when our class--they decided--they were still doing ranger school.  And it was the very, very strong athletes and folks that were--I mean I, I, I, I had played football, I wrestled, I boxed, I held the Olympic--or the indoor obstacle course record, so it's guys that, that were really, really you know, very, very athletic and, and, and what they saw as strong leaders.  We never knew why we were getting picked, but, but when you looked at the guys that were there, they were a lot of strong athletes, strong leaders, and, and, and we went down and we all made it and then when my class had to go to airborne school, we had this guy name Major Herb Lloyd (ph.), and Lloyd I think was from Alabama; he talked with a southern accent and you know 'everbody's gone make it thu airborne school.'  And Herb Lloyd was a major and he was thee most decorated major in the army; that's, that's what everybody kind of said.  He had a whole bunch of medals on his chest and he had these jump wings that had three gold stars on 'em which meant he jumped in combat three different times, you know; so he was, he was like an unbelievable guy.
Story_ID: 34159
Speaker 1: So they decided to send Herb Lloyd down to make sure our class got through Air Force School (laughter) and, and he told everybody (unclear), you know, "Hundred percent graduates; we gone have hundred percent graduate (unclear), and I don't want any monin', groanin', hundred percent grads; y'all got that, yeah."  So we had a class mate Fred Neighbor, he probably can't even say this today but Fred Neighbor--and this was--the Olympics were--when were the Olympics?  I don't--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]--
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]; maybe it was the earlier Olympics, but Fred's brother was that Neighbor that won those Olympic Gold Medals; I think it was Jim Neighbor.  So, so his brother was a great swimming athlete so--everybody knew Fred.  And Fred came in and, and he was talking to a group of the class mates, said "Hey, looks like we're not gonna have hundred percent graduates."  And we all said "Why Fred?"  And he goes "Well I fractured my, fractured my leg, you know it's a hairline fracture but it's fractured, so I really feel bad."  We said "So what are you gonna do?"  And he said "Well I'm gonna go tell Major Neighbor, you know, but looks like we're not gonna have what he wanted."  And he went into the office, there was all kinds of bangin' and screamin' and kickin' and yellin' (laughter).  Fred came out and everybody said "Well Fred, what did Major Lloyd say?"  He said "We're gone have hundred percent graduates, you know what I mean?  Hundred percent graduates."  Fred had tears in his eyes; he's--I'm jumpin' (laughter), I'm jumpin'.  So they wrapped up his leg and they had a hundred percent graduates (laughter).  But--so it changed physically what we're doin' and they pushed people really hard to kinda get through that period.  The other thing it changed is they did a study on the cheating scandal and I learned something, and I don't know the ins and outs of it, but you know, from what I heard as a cadet and what I learned going back there as a professor, some of those changes were absolutely necessary because we were holding cadets almost to an unrealistic standard.  Cheating at West Point--if, if I'm, if I'm sitting here and I'm doing a paper and I'm writing a paper and, and I say "Hey, how do you spell Socrates?"  And you tell me how to spell it, then I gotta--on this paper, I can, I can write the spelling but then I have to acknowledge that you told me how to do X-Y-Z.  So, so it's a very, very high standard that if you get help on something that you have to turn in, there's an honor statement that says "This is all my work."  And if some of that work you got help with, then you have to acknowledge that.  So I, I don't know what happened on this exam in Double-E but, but when, when the study was done, it changed a number of things.  So if you look at my class for example, it says you cannot identify where you graduated; they stopped reporting like that.  In my early days at West Point, like I knew that there were 113 people that studied Portuguese and I was first.  You could go in any week and you could type in your name, you could see exactly where you stood in the class, and you knew how many exams were left and you knew what your grade average was so, so let's say you were a middle-of-the-road C student and you were 50 out of 100, and you're probably--you could study real hard this weekend or you could probably not do worse than a C, and you're not gonna change your grade anyway and--oh, by the way, you're gonna be a Second Lieutenant regardless of where you graduate, as long as you graduate.  So, you know, there was some of that that was going on where, you know academics--if you were hivin' and strivin' at the, at the top level, you were working hard.  If you're at the bottom trying to survive and just get through West Point, you were working hard, but there was some concern about what might be happening in the middle, and how much people were working to really educate themselves.  So, so they, they got, got rid of that.  And then when you--you would come into a classroom and--there was like thirty-two sections of math and there was a U-shape in the math, so if you went into the first section of math, there was a U-shape; at the front of the U, the guy that had the number one grade point average in math was sitting right there; and when you went to the back of the U--the bottom of the U, that person had the lowest grade point average in that section; so in Section One, you had the smartest people in math; in Section Two, you had the people that were about ready to flunk now; most of 'em probably going to summer school.  And, and guys got comfortable with that kind of philosophy; and then when you would graduate, you would graduate one through 1,000, and the guy that graduated at 1,000, he was actually pretty smart because the difference between graduating and not graduating was summer school (laughter), you know.  So it's hard to be dead last, and it was a big kinda--it was a big thing that everybody liked to see who that guy was, and everybody that had a guy like that knows who they were, and they'd give 'em a dollar, so he would walk to graduation with a bag (laughter) on his back with $1,000, and it was hard to graduate last, just like it was hard to graduate first.
Story_ID: 34160
Speaker 1: But it was different type of thing, but--so West Point got rid of that; they had to get rid of--now they already still--they do ranking, but they don't publicize it.  You can't--and I don't know how it works now, but they, they said some of what was going on at West Point that led to the cheating scandal was caused by the environment that we, we, the Academy set; so every time I run into a real bad problem or challenge, I kinda look in the mirror and said "Okay, what's the environment that we the leadership have set that has caused bad things to happen in our organization?"  And it's not all just the culprits that have the issues; sometimes it is--a lotta times it is.  But I think there has to be an introspective look and review at what's, what's the state of the environment that is causing bad things to happen.  And that's what West Point did with the cheating scandal.  And, and what it did is it invited those cadets--if they wanted to come back into our class and graduate with our class, they could.  And some of those cadets came back and they were star football players, they were academic stars; today they're, they're--some are generals.  I mean, so, so, so they run the gamut.
Speaker 2: And, and I thought that was a good thing to do but it took a long time for us to recognize also that cadets are 17, 18, 19--make mistakes, they come from all sorts of backgrounds, ethnicities and religions, and they're gonna make mistakes and, and, and one of the most difficult things for me to see that happened at West Point--one of the guys that I went to ranger school with was one of the greatest soldiers, or could have been one of the greatest soldiers I think we would have ever had.  I went to ranger school with him, he also went to airborne school with the class that graduated everyone, and so he was an airborne ranger at West Point; there were very few of these, and when I started wrestling for the team at West Point, I was probably 160 pounds or so, and this guy was about the same weight, and the coach had asked me to go to 48--he thought that was probably the ideal weight for me to wrestle at, and, and I, I told this guy, this friend of mine, I said "If this starts affecting my grades, I think I have to drop out of wrestling; I just can't"--you know, I went through all of that in high school and I'm just not sure I'm ready to not eat; and then I had to go to swimming and I, I wasn't a swimmer, I didn't know how to swim very well so I had swimming that was bothering me and I was not eating, and it was affecting my grades.  So I dropped out of wrestling; this friend of mine stayed with it.
Story_ID: 34161
Speaker 1: Now to be captain of a team at West Point is a huge thing; you're voted as the captain by your peers and it's a huge thing.  And the best of the best are, you know, are elected to be captains and voted to be captains.  So this friend of mine was voted to be captain as a junior; that was unheard of.  We call 'em cows; but to be that good--well this guy was now in, I think he was wrestling in the 120 arena; he was way, way, way below a healthy weight, and if you look at our Year Book, he looks like he vacationed in Dachau somewhere; he's got--I mean you could see all the indentations.  His senior year--so he's like All-American captain of the team, senior year, again captain of the team, he was going to a tri-state meet and again, I don't know all the details but he was going to a tri-state meet, he was supposed to go to a dental appointment, he skipped the dental appointment so he could go to the gym to lose more weight so he could wrestle, and he was asked "Did you go to your dental appointment?"  And he said "Yes," or he signed out for the dental appointment.  He did something that was not--did not live up to the honor code and, and second semester senior year they kicked him out.  And I, I just say, I say "This guy's an airborne ranger, he's given all this to the Academy, All-American wrestler, he lost a--I said "How can we do that?"  I just--it really bothered me and--so, so West Point's changed since then and--you know I was a G-1 of the army, and all of these youngsters that are getting kicked out of West Point they have to come to the G-1 so, so I'd see all of these cases and we do much better; we have these programs where if you lie, cheat, steal or tolerate someone that does--and the Academic Board or the honor code--the Honor Board decides that you have to leave, there are options to, to come back into West Point or, or to, to not kick you out completely, to give you some amount of grace; so we've come a long way, and I think in the--on the cheating scandal, we, we've come a long way there in terms of what's acceptable human interaction and sharing of knowledge that to the finite detail might not have to be acknowledged.
Story_ID: 34162
Speaker 1: Okay, so considering how tough [United States Academy at] West Point is period, and how would a person like Henry O. Flipper, back in the Nineteenth Century, the first black graduate of West Point, have made it?  Now he's one of your heroes, an engineer as well, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I think for all Americans, Henry O. Flipper is a great role model of persistence, of leadership, of character, and whether you're African American, Hispanic, Caucasian, or any ethnicity or gender, he represents someone that, that graduated from West Point during a very difficult time for him and really was a, a role model for many of us.  I, I can't say that I could even partially appreciate how difficult it must have been for him because a lot of what happens at West Point during my day in once success is really based on partnership and team work with your peers; you study together, you, you, you drill together, you spend time away together but, but it's a family and, and to be any place where you feel like you're alone, I, I, I can't even begin to partially imagine what that would be like, and then to get through it and be successful and then to have what happened to him in the military I think sends a strong statement of the strength of the human character of Henry O. Flipper.  I did get a sense of what it might have been like, I'd say in just a partial way, by watching the first females come to West Point.  I was there when our superintendent and many leaders at the Academy voiced their opinions, very strong opinions, that women should not come to West Point for a variety of reasons, and then when the decision was made that they would come, we were intent on making the women at West Point the best of all the academies.  But that being said, it was very, very difficult for those first women, and some of my class mates and other males were, were thrown outta West Point for their behavior against those women who were the pioneers of Women Service Academy graduates.  And when you look back at the women and what they've done, from lieutenants up to general officers and the All-American athletes, Rhodes Scholars, number one in the class at West Point, you name it--all the different things that, that women have done, it makes you regret the many years that we lost and think about what could have happened with leaders, with athletes, what scholars we could have had had that, that law been changed earlier.  So, so the good news is we've, we've transitioned, we've come a long way; but in my mind, we still have a very long way to go, a very long way to go.  My--I, I never thought about this until years later as I, I would look around the room myself, as an African American engineer, that there were not many African American engineers coming outta West Point.  And then I looked at the four years that I was there, and this is the number one institution in the world in my mind, and in many others.  But I was the only one in my class and there were none in '77' [1977], there were two in '76' [1976], and there were none in '75' [1975].  So 4,000 or so graduates plus or minus a few hundred, and the number one engineering institution produces three Corps of Engineer Officers that are African American.
Story_ID: 34163
Speaker 1: So to say that we have a long way to go, I--and now I'm the Chief of Engineers, I go back to [United States Military Academy at] West Point thirty-five years later, I'm welcoming the newest engineer officers to our branch from West Point, there are 127 of 'em and they're two African Americans from the number one institution in the country in my mind so we, we still have work to do whether it's by branch, whether it's by West Point alone, the other academies--I always say that we're in a fight for talent and, and if we want to represent America and that's what we wanna do in our military; we want youngsters to look up and look at the leaders of our military and know, whether they're civilian or military, that they have a shot, they have an opportunity to, to work hard and to develop and train and educate themselves, to work with their teams and potentially have a shot to help lead in their respective fields.  If they don't see many, then they're gonna feel that they don't have that opportunity.  And, and it's hard to see many if you have one that graduates in my year, and the odds of me staying around--I was planning on leaving after five years.  We're, we're not very strong so, so--I look back and I feel very fortunate to have had mentors and leaders and team mates and a spouse and a family that encouraged me to, to stick with it.  I wanted to stay, not always; there were times where I, I was ready to leave the army but to have the leaders, the mentors and the team mates and the soldiers that inspired you to, to stay in a very demanding profession; demanding not only for the individual with deployments and field exercise and war, but demanding in moves for families and pulling 'em in and out of schools and, and missing important moments in their lives; that's just as demanding on the family side which I probably didn't fully appreciate growing up as a youngster, but looking back on it, I can see how that has a, has an impact on young children, has an impact on spouses.
Story_ID: 34164
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of your mentors at West Point?  I imagine you must have been a good mentor in the Engineering Department, but who were some of those mentors?
Speaker 2: You know I had--I really loved the Mechanics Department, which is the department I went back to teach in, and we had great professors like Colonel Teazak (ph.), who I remember when I was a cadet and then was able to go back and teach with him, and Colonel Wilson was there and Colonel Wilson encouraged me to go and earn my advance degree; and Colonel Heindall (ph.).  Those were some of the professors, but what I would say--it wasn't so much for me.  I, I reluctantly went into the engineer branch; I just wasn't sure.  For me it was, it was a real toss-up between--I wouldn't, I wouldn't say I was reluctant about it but I, I wasn't sure about it.  I knew I had the--it was either for me gonna be engineers or infantry, and I was leaning hard towards infantry but there were a lotta things that I liked about the engineer branch and I liked the fact that I enjoyed engineering as an academic field, so it seemed like if I was gonna come into the army, that I should come into the engineer branch; it seemed like a natural thing for me to do even though I loved the, the infantry and everything it stood for.  I, I just--like I said, as a kid I was a rough and tumble guy, I liked being out, I was very competitive, I, I, I liked the idea of even the light infantry, of forced marches and walking and, and ruck sacks and what I learned in ranger school, but that part of it, of the infantry really appealed for me, so it was a real hard decision for me to decide whether to go engineers or, or infantry.  And we had a lot of infantry mentors; it was almost--it wasn't a "fait accompli," but it was--infantry was the branch that Herb Lloyd--Major Lloyd was an infantryman so I--and he was my Battalion Tactical Officer, and I remember he gave my mother a demerit slip, and these demerit slips--these were the white slips that TAC [Training, Advising, and Counseling] officers would give you if you did something wrong so if you were drinking, you got twenty demerits and two hours on the area, or something like that.  So when my mom came to graduation, Major Lloyd gave my mother my demerit slip and it said 'my error and mistake was going engineers when infantry was still open.'  And he gave me a million demerits for doing that (laughter), you know.  And it was kinda his joke to me, you know?  And it kinda--it really hurt me because I was really so torn, but he knew that I was one of these (unclear) guys who went to ranger school.  "What do you mean you're going to Engineers" (laughter).  So--and I loved infantry, and I still do today.  I, I, really love that (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 34165
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--From the other flag officers we've interviewed, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think people see that as a path to advance faster when you go into infantry, right?
Speaker 2: They, they do, but you know cadets don't think about that and I didn't think about it and I didn't need a path to advance faster if I was leaving after five years, and that was my plan. So I didn't--you know I was thinking I'm probably gonna leave; engineers is a good skill.  The other thing, I thought--and I can pick engineers; I was high enough in my class I could select the Corps of Engineers and that was, that was popular so, so there was engineer branch--the Corps of Engineers--every other person selected engineers.  If you went back to like, you know, the Lee and [General Douglas MacArthur] era, you know, in those days it was like engineer, engineer, engineer, and then whatever was left.  So in my era, the branch that was left they called--you get ranked, so at some point there is--all the branches are spoken for and they're--'cause you would stand up in an auditorium and raise your hand and say "I wanna go to this branch, I wanna go army, I wanna go signal, I wanna go engineer."  And in the branch that was left over was infantry, so I could always go infantry at that time; now, infantry goes up pretty high.  And it's interesting, during war, cadets they wanna be in the fight, they wanna--and during my time, Vietnam was just ending; I came to West Point, the Vietnam War was still goin' on--'74' [1974], so there is a bad taste in everyone's mouth but at that time, infantry.
Story_ID: 34166
Speaker 1: So engineers were still very popular, so it was a popular branch.  In fact, my roommate was--his name was Gary; I won't put other people's names here, but my roommate, one of my roommates, he and I studied engineering together and he loved engineering and we were both thinking infantry, and we--I would go to his house in New Jersey and his mother would always--once I made the decision that I was gonna be an engineer, his mother asked me if I would talk to him and ask--and convince him to be an engineer; she really wanted him to be an engineer.  I said "I really can't do that."  She said "Well tell him why you made the choice," and I said "Okay, I'll tell him my decisions, but this is a life decision; he has to make it von his own."  So I was sitting there in the auditorium, the cadets were picking, and we would go in there generally with the crest of the branch you wanted to pick so, so he went in there and he was squeezing tight to engineers in one hand and infantry in the other hand and they were like--there were a hundred slots for engineers and they were like at ninety-eight; they had just given out the 98th slot and they were like four away from him, you know, and then the next two guys went like 8, ADA (ph.) or something, and then the next guy said "Engineer," so now the 99th slot went, and there were two away from him (laughter), and then they called out the, the next guy and that guy said something like "Armor" and my buddy next to me jumped up (laughter) five feet in the air and said "I'm goin' engineers," and he ran around the auditorium, "I'm goin' engineers" (laughter), 'cause he got the last slot, he got the number 100.  They don't do that anymore because it's too traumatic for the cadets (laughter) to sit there, I mean tears are comin' down guys' eyes, I mean when I was watching him as that 99th slot went, I mean the tears were just comin' out.  We had--I had a friend, Tony Smith, I guess I could use his name--Tony Smith, he could recite almost every major speech of [George Smith] Patton [Jr.]; I mean he talked like Patton, he looked like Patton, he walked like Patton, and you know what branch he wanted; he wanted armor.  So he walked in to selection night dressed as Patton.  He (laughter) had the pants on, he had the boots on, he had the helmet on, he got the swagger stick and he walked in and, and when they got to his name, there was no armor left and he got up there and he started talking about "You sorry sons of bi--" you know (laughter), he started using Patton's words, and then he says "I select infantry" you know, 'cause you always had to stand up; even if there was nothing left, you'd have to--and so at the end, "I select infantry, I select infantry," so he was in that group that--and, and I guess I shouldn't use his name 'cause he, you know--but to this day, he's still admired for what--he could recite Patton, song and verse.
Story_ID: 34167
Speaker 1: Okay, so the graduation--now did you graduate with any special honors?  I mean I would guess so being a ranger and all.
Speaker 2: I was the--you know, I was a battalion commander, so that--they had four regimental commanders; in each regiment, we had three battalion commanders so I was a battalion commander.  The summer before the senior year, there was, there was--we trained the cadets and I, I was the best company commander in what they call Beast, so I received the George C. Bass (ph.) Memorial Award for that, and then I was, you know, the captain of the 115 pound football team so I received a silver plate and an award for that, and I was like on the Superintendent's List which was academic in military; I think it's the top 25 percent--25 or 30 percent of the class so, so I, I, I, I did well militarily and physically.  In fact, they wanted me to be the Deputy Regimental Commander and--that was the first thing and, and I, I, I didn't--I thought I didn't wanna be a deputy to anybody; I'd rather be a commander, so you had the regiment--there were four regiments and then the, the, the battalions within the regiment.  But I was gonna switch out with the Deputy Regimental Commander, and the Deputy Regimental Commander was Cadet [Curtis] Scaparrotti, and Scaparrotti who just got named for his four stars gonna go over and take Korea, so it's funny how after all these years (laughter) I mean--and the two of us knew each other really well, we're good friends, he's a great, great American and it's good to see him going on to do that.  But he was in a leadership role early on as a cadet.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So your mother came to graduation, right?
Speaker 2: My mother [Fumiko Mary Taira Bostick] came to graduation and it's the first time she'd flown in many, many years and my Uncle Bubbie, who I told you about from Brooklyn, and some of my aunts and uncles, they come over and we had a--my siblings couldn't come; so my siblings have never been to West Point but my, my, my brother has been to West Point since because his two sons have gone to West Point.  But my mom came to graduation and then we flew back together and spent some time at home with my dad [Sidney Christopher Bostick], and then I, I went off to Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I went off to school first; I came here to go to the basic course, and then off to, off to Germany for my first assignment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--so this is 1978?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Eight [1978], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were assigned to V-Corps (ph.), right?
Speaker 2: Fifth Corps in the 130th, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34168
Speaker 1: And one other thing I, I wanna, I'm gonna say about West Point and I said I was gonna tell the story--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we made the--when I was there, the movie "MacArthur," and after we did the movie, we went down to Radio City Music Hall and were marching down 42nd Street and, and we--I remember turning in and there were some protestors there and they threw some stuff at us.  And I cleaned it off, we watched the movie, and then I came home and I called my dad and I said "Hey dad, you know, we went to the movie, a good movie," and I explained "Why would the folks throw stuff at us?"  Because I really had not left [United States Military Academy at] West Point that much in my uniform, and he asked "Were you in your uniform?"  And I said "Yes, we're all in our uniform."  And he said "Well, unless you have to, you shouldn't wear your uniform in public because you know the Vietnam War is just ending, people have a bad taste in their mouth to that war," and he said he doesn't wear his uniform in public, and he said "You just don't wear your uniform in public."  And you know, I remembered that and I thought about it, and I, I didn't think hard about it again until I was in recruiting command; and when I was in recruiting command, we wore our uniform in public all the time and, and one of the things I ask the chief staff of the army to do is to change so that we could wear the field uniform in public on our planes, because I thought that since we were at war, that we ought to be able to wear our uniform to travel in.  There was big change for--and since we were recruiters, we represented the army; we were a billboard for the army, everywhere we walked, we were a billboard for the army.  And when I walked in my greens, it was different than when I would walk in my BDU's at the time, and then ACU's.  So the chief gave us permission and then gave the army permission to fly in this uniform.  And I remember when I was first flying; the first--I still remember the first time I flew in that uniform.  I was in Las Vegas, we got off the airplane, I was with my aide.  This elderly lady comes up and she stands in front of me and she says "Can I hug you?"  And I said--I kinda was taken aback and I said "Sure."  So she put her arms around me, she gave me a big hug, she stepped back, there were tears in her eyes and she said "Thanks, thanks for your service."  And then she hugged my aide and, and then we started walking off and I told my aide, I said "You know, we're lucky," and I said "You're lucky."  He goes "What do you mean, sir?"  And I said "It hasn't always been this way, and I still remember when I was in a uniform, I had stuff thrown at me, so don't take American's support for our military for granted."  So, so we should never take the support of the American people for granted because folks, like me and others that have been in long enough and certainly folks like my dad and the Vietnam Veterans, know that they came back to an America that really didn't thank them and really didn't appreciate them for what they did for their country; they answered the call just like our soldiers are answering the call today, but they weren't appreciated.  So I hope that never happens again and today, it's a real good feeling that wherever you go in America, regardless of what they think about politics, regardless of what they think about the war, they think well about their soldiers.
Story_ID: 34169
Speaker 1: Do you think the Vietnam--I mean people's emotions about Vietnam are affected by the very positive coinciding of politics and military direction at World War II?  I think people are very sure that that was the right thing to do, and in everyone's mind, you know, they kinda--they saw the military as a political and moral purpose of the country being (unclear).  The Vietnam War, I think, was the first war--I suppose, I can't think of another where the majority of people felt that the politics were steering the military in the wrong direction.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's part of it; I think the other thing that I remain concerned on is that America's really outta touch with soldiers.  I mean they kinda know 'em but they don't know their life, they don't know their sacrifices.  In World War II, if you went to a town in America that you knew, you know with soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, you knew somebody serving and you knew somebody that served, and you knew and appreciated the sacrifices, and you kinda felt it.  Most folks don't feel Afghanistan today; if you ask 'em, they might know that we have soldiers deployed, they're in harm's way, they're still getting shot at, we're losing lives; but many of our leaders in congress and business, and many of those in home towns all across America do not fully appreciate the service and sacrifice of what soldiers are going through.  So I think it's important for us that are in uniform to stay connected with our communities; to go back and visit and, and, and talk about what we do.  When I was in recruiting command, this was something that I asked the leadership of the army to focus on.  You know, I hadn't been back to my high school in a big way until I was the head of recruiting; and I never thought it was all that important for me, you know, to be recruiting myself.  I mean I did it locally but, but to go back to my home town--and none of us wanna pat ourselves on the back, but when I went back to my home town 30 years later, it was a big deal; it filled the auditorium, they brought principals from other schools, the superintendent of schools came, the newspaper came, the marching band was there, the media, and, and it meant a lot that one of their own went off and did things and, and, and we--it would have meant the same I think if a sergeant went because I started sending my soldiers--in fact, I think it's stronger if our sergeants go back and show that if you come and serve in our military, how it changes you almost immediately after you go through basic training, and then you're in a leadership role.  So trying to get our sergeants and our young people back is something we pushed very hard, but it's important for them one, to know what the army does to a citizen that enters our ranks, but it's even more important that they know that, that they have to support this army; they have to support this military in order for our military to be successful, and if we get disconnected from the American public, that, that could be the worst thing that happens for us going forward.  Right now, there's a strong tie in some areas, but in some areas, there's not.  I used to say in recruiting "You know, if you drew a line from about Texas up to Kansas and then over to the East Coast, about 36, 37 percent of the army comes outta that region," largely from the southeast; maybe 20 percent, 19, 20 percent from the northeast, you know, 24 percent here, and low 20's on the west so, so we, we wanna represent all of America in our army, and it takes going back to different parts of America that don't know soldiers, don't know service members, and continue to talk about what great things our service members are doing, and how it's important for them to continue to support, because a lot of them will never serve in our military.
