Story_ID: 639184
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Cheryl Blackwell Bryson.  C-H-E-R-Y-L, Blackwell, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L, B-R-Y-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your--now do you have a nickname, or a--?
Speaker 2: Cheryl is my name.  I don't have a nickname.
Speaker 1: No middle name either?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a middle name, but I dropped it.  It used to be Cheryl Bernadette Blackwell.  But when I got married [to James Bryson], I dropped my middle name and chose my maiden name as my middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born May 28, 1950 in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you specialize in labor relations, do you not? I believe for--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or is that--
Speaker 2: It's management employment--
Speaker 1: --correct?
Speaker 2: --law. That's how we describe it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that includes labor law.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And we say, I describe it that way because traditionally labor law refers to dealing with the unions--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and employment law refers to dealing with the employees who generally are not unionized.  They're different issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Labor relations always means dealing with, generally means you deal with the unionized workplace.  I deal with both.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I typically represent corporate, corporations--the owners, management.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't have a clue.  Today's date is I think November 20, 2008 (laughter).  Good.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] at 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 639185
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I'd probably say yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say that with feeling.
Speaker 2: I got my health back in Jamaica, seriously.  Not a love thing, a health thing.  I was very sick and I went to Jamaica, and I connected with my spirit and the healing energy within me.  And I was very sick.  The doctors told me I was going to be crippled and needing a scooter, and I started going to Jamaica and I discovered healing energy, and I learned from Jamaica how to multiply the healing energy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I didn't come in on a scooter.
Speaker 1: So, so, so, when did that happen?  So I'll know to ask about it in the chronology.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, you'll get to it.  In 2003.  I had lost seven family members in rapid succession, including my husband of twenty-one years [James Bryson]; my older son [Bradley Bryson] less than a year later; a very best friend who was like family; a cousin; a brother-in-law; father-in-law; and my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell].  And I got sick.
Speaker 1: That seems like enough to make somebody sick.
Speaker 2: It made me sick.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yeah.  All right, well, you made it through.
Speaker 2: I did. I walked in here.  They told me I would need a scooter.
Speaker 1: All right.  We'll get to that, and we'll certainly discuss it fully.  Now, the last question in this little series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably.  It depends on when you would ask me.  But I probably--there--I have a lot of favorite sayings.  But one of them is from the Old Testament when God told Abraham, "All that you see, I will give to you," [Genesis 13:15].  And I'm paraphrasing that.  That's when God took him to a high place and told him, "Look, Abraham. All that you see, I will give to you."  And that goes to the power of visualization.
Story_ID: 639186
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first, as to not to mix them up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is, was Connie McCreary Blackwell.
Speaker 1: Okay. And how do you spell those names?
Speaker 2: Connie, C-O-N-N-I-E, McCreary, M-C, capital C-R-E-A-R-Y, Blackwell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama in, I have it written down.  But it's in Alabama below--it's near--
Speaker 1: Near Birmingham [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, not near Birmingham.  Someplace you never even heard of.  Near Evergreen [Alabama], it was a P.O. box.  She was born in Alabama in 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 1920.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  I mean, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we go back--
Speaker 1: --how far back--
Speaker 2: We go back to my mother's father's father's father.  I think that's how it is.  And that was--we go back to John McClammy.  John McClammy was a white gentleman, Scot Irish [Scots Irish].
Speaker 1: How do you spell McClammy?
Speaker 2: M-C, capital C-L-A-M-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, he was a white gentleman who took as his wife--in those days you couldn't call her your wife--an African, an African woman [Lula Reed], and they had kids together and raised them.  He had a whole lot of land, and he left it to the sons, not to the daughter (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the offspring of his association with an African woman--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the children inherited land?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were able to inherit land.
Speaker 2: And it's still in the family.
Speaker 1: So, they weren't considered slaves or anything, I guess?  Were they considered free--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --free people of color in that situation?
Speaker 2: I think it's because they were in the South, and because it was--they were born in the 1800s in the South.  Oh, earlier--he was born earlier than that.  But I don't know--we never talk about whether they were free or not.  But they--and I'll tell you what.  They live in Alabama.  You know what Alabama looks like.  You've got two--it looks like--the main roads create a Y.  You've got Montgomery [Alabama] here, Mobile [Alabama] down there, Huntsville [Alabama] and Birmingham.  And they were southwest of Montgomery, and there's not much population in that part of the state.  But they lived in an area that was roughly seventy miles southwest of Montgomery where--it was like a town where white men lived with African women, or African American women, as their wives or common law wives.  They had children, and the children all intermarried and formed a community.  So, the people tended to have a lot of land.  They tended to be farmers, and there's some stories about some of John McClammy's sons who were overseers, who oversaw the slaves.  But these were not big plantations, so there weren't many slaves, or maybe they had--the slaves came, you know, through a planting season.  But one of my older relatives used to say they were never slaves.  She never used the term free.  She said--and I'll tell you why you can't use the term free.  She said they were never slaves.  And she would say, in fact, John McClammy's son would ride his horse and oversee the slaves.  So that's one of the family stories that was handed down.  But I have to say that they were never really free, because John McClammy and the, one of the children between John and the African woman was--the family story is he was lent out; he was loaned out.  And when the census taker came along, he was working for someone else, probably working off a debt, who knows?  I'm speculating.  But the census taker changed his name, because he happened to be working at the Griggs' house, and then he became John Griggs [John McClammy Griggs, Sr.].  So, I don't know.  Are you free when you happen to be somebody else's house and the census taker comes and says, "Well, you're here. Okay, you're here in the Griggs house, and now you're John Griggs."  So, he, on the family tree, is John Griggs, because his name was changed when the census taker came along, because he was loaned out working someplace else.
Story_ID: 639187
Speaker 1: I understand, I mean, for a lot of reasons it's hard to pin some of these definitions down, you know, if you were a slave.  Or, you may be technically a slave and function as free in some ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you can't be too free if you're a man of color and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --or a woman of color in the South in the 19th century. I mean, up until the 1970s probably (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.  Actually, there was something I wanted to bring that I forgot.  My sister [Camellia Blackwell Taffel] is an artist, and you'll hear about her later.  And she's traveled to the area where my family grew up--well, my mother's [Connie McCreary Blackwell]--where these people lived.  We actually have a house that was in the community.  It was Captain Riley's [ph.] house.  Captain Riley was a white man who was a captain in the Confederate Army, and we have a picture of the house that he lived in, because the woman who lived with him was an African woman, African American woman.  And you've heard the stories before, where you have a house and you have a little shack that's attached to the house that tells the public, "Well, she's not really my wife.  That's where she really lives."  So, we have a picture of Captain Riley's house, although I would guess that John McClammy lived in a similar way.  That was how they lived.  That's, you know, from what I understand reading about [President] Thomas Jefferson, that's how Sally Hemings lived.  You know, you have to tell the world that we're not married.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, I mean it's a familiar story (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's a situation that existed up until, through the 20th century in some cases--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the South.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I've heard this story a number of times.  And [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson in St. Louis [Missouri] has got a painting on her wall of a black woman who killed the master that she was supposed to be the cook for, but it wasn't really like that, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As a result--you know, love triangle with another slave.  And this woman was the first woman to take her case to court in Missouri [State of Missouri v. Celia, a Slave, 1855], you know, or in the U.S.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I guess to, for, you know, manslaughter or murder, or whatever.  Yeah, yeah, but there's a lot of those stories.  And so, it makes sense.  What you're saying makes sense.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639188
Speaker 1: Was there a name for that particular area of Alabama where--?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] always called it Evergreen [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because that was the, the P.O. box.  But I've heard her call it Atwater [sic. Atmore, Alabama].  But it was such a teeny town, that she used to joke.  And she would send mail, and the mail would always say Evergreen, Alabama, and it was just a P.O. box.  I've driven, recently driven through that part of the state, and it's very, very rural.  So, it was a, it was a little teeny town that was a--it didn't even have a post office box.  They--Evergreen was the next town that had a post office box, a P.O., a post office stop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are your mother's ancestors, and this is where they come from?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, was your, was your mother raised in that, in that community?
Speaker 2: My mother was raised in that community.  She was raised in that community.  McClammy, John McClammy's kids, for the most part, lived in that-the, there were three sons and one daughter.  The one daughter actually was--we called her Flirtie.  Her name was Florida [Florida McClammy Pierce].  But she married into the Pierce family, and that was another one of these families.  I meant to bring that picture, because they look like two old white people.  They married into the Pierce family.  And Pierce--if you, you're familiar with Chicago [Illinois].  Harold [Harold Pierce] of Harold's Chicken [Harold's Chicken Shack, Chicago, Illinois] is a descendent of that line.  He was my mother's first cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So they, they, the--my mother was raised--the offspring of John McClammy, for the most part, lived in that area.  Some of them migrated to Mississippi, you know.  I know that some of the family members ended up, you know, living and going back and forth to Wiggins, Mississippi.  I've never been to Wiggins.  But for the most part, they lived in that area and began to migrate north probably after World War II [WWII]; I'm just guessing.  But based on the stories that I know who came up here when--you know, who came up here when--but they stayed--my mother grew up in that area with her father [Thad McClammy, Sr.] and the other descendants of the McClammys, the McCrearys, the McKinzies [ph.]--a lot of mix in there.  They were Scot Irish [Scots Irish].  And what other--what were the other names?  The McClammys, the McKinzies, the McCrearys, the Pierces, the Rileys; I'm forgetting something.  But they were all--as you go back to that level, you know, that time in history, it was a town--I called it--for those people who know Chicago, it was like Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  It was very integrated, which sort of makes sense.  You know, if you're living that way, to be safe in those days you wanted to be away from a big population center.  I guess it lessened the likelihood that you might get lynched.
Story_ID: 639189
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell]--are there any stories of conflict with that community and the surrounding communities?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of stories.  One of the stories of--now, they were--they're light skinned people, for the most part.  I mean they were, they were, you know, there were some color ranges.  But you've come--you got a lot of descendants of mixed marriages.  So some of them, we have some family members who--you know, from the Pierces a lot of them have blue eyes and blond hair.  But, you know, they're black.  But, so, you had lots of stories of conflicts that we, that we heard about.  We knew that there was one of the family members--and I can't tell you who--but they, you know, oil was discovered under her land.  And the story that my mother told, you know, that we grew up with was, well the white people drilled in sideways and took all the oil from her land; she never made any money from it.  We have another story from Aunt Emma [ph.], who was my mother's father's--my mother's aunt--my mother's father's sister, who had migrated from Alabama to Mississippi.  And Wiggins [Mississippi] seemed to be a place where people made a living, because one of my relatives was a blacksmith there, and people talked about, you know, how well he lived and how well his kids dressed, and what a beautiful house he had.  But at the time, Aunt Emma's son--she had, I don't know, six kids--one son, a bunch of girls.  The son was thirteen, and he had, he and his friend had whistled at a white woman.  And the story is they left Mississippi on a train in the middle of the night, because they didn't want him to get lynched.  So they took a train up to Chicago [Illinois], and then Aunt Emma became the station in Chicago where people migrated north.  Everybody who migrated north stayed with Aunt Emma until they saved up enough money to buy a house.  And when you lived--when you met Aunt Emma, what she always said to you was, she said, "People in my family don't work for white people.  We all own our property.  You got to get a house.  Do you have a house yet?"  Those are the first things she said to me when I met her, "You have to have your own property."  And they were all entrepreneurs, you know.  They, the whole family, they owned real estate here.  When they came to Chicago, they owned real estate.  It was Harold [Harold Pierce] who started--you know, Harold, of Harold's Chicken [Harold's Chicken Shack, Chicago, Illinois], which--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, you know, the well known symbol in Chicago was a cook chasing a chicken with axe--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right
Speaker 1: --on the Harold fried chicken--Harold's fried chicken is famous all over Chicago.
Speaker 2: All over Chicago.
Speaker 1: They even had--he had a white Cadillac with a chicken head on top of it.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: And they rode around through the community scaring some little kids (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: The chicken mobile. Was that, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think when he died, he had seventy-seven locations.  And now, there're a lot more.  And I think they began to franchise them, and all of the owners aren't black anymore.  Some of them are, you know, Middle Eastern.  But he started that.  And he used to cook for my mother when she would come up.  But going back to the stories in the South, one, some of the stories I remember.  You know, my mother would talk about the Depression [Great Depression], and she said she never knew anything about a depression.  She heard people talk about it, but they lived on a farm, and they always, they always had plenty on the farm.  My mother, I, another story was that my mother's father [Thad McClammy, Sr.], was light enough to pass for white until--the joke was until he took off his hat.  And once, he got sick and went to the hospital.  And they were prepared to treat him (laughter) until they took off his hat.  And they shipped him right out and they didn't treat him because he was black, and they didn't treat black people in, at hospitals in those days.
Speaker 1: So, it was his hair texture that gave him away?
Speaker 2: It was hair texture that gave him away.  Now, to me, what--and then you'll hear some other stories when you hear about my father's [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] side of the family.
Story_ID: 639190
Speaker 1: Oh, I'll tell you.  Here's another one.  Reading 'Having Our Say' ['Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years,' Emily Mann], it reminded me, it reminded me of this story.  When we grew up, we referred to John McClammy, the great-great--or how many ever greats--as the white man.  And we would, you know, there were stories about Flirtie [Florida McClammy Pierce], who got married in the white man's house.  Now, that was his daughter.  But the story that I heard was, you know, well, Flirtie got married in the white man's house.  So, there was always this discussion about the white man.  I was forty years old when I said, "Ma [Connie McCreary Blackwell], he was our great-great--how many ever greats--grandfather.  Why have you never called him your great-grandfather?"  She said, "Chile, you can't say that.  Hush."  I'm--that was eighteen years ago.  And I was like, "Well, Ma, why?  I mean, I'm forty years old.  We've heard about this man who was the white man."  And she was in shock.  And it took me some time to understand that the way they were raised, he was a, he was a benevolent family member; he was a family member who supported his family.  He raised these sons, he took care of them, he left the land to them.  And all the stories about him were very, very, good stories.  They [McClammy and Lula Reed] lived together for man--as man and wife as long as, you know, they were alive, as far as I know.  And in the South, you couldn't refer--and I'm sure you've heard this--you couldn't call him your grand- or your great-grandfather, how many ever greats it was.  And I still remember the look of terror on her face when I asked her why she never referred to him as a family member.  She said, "You can't say that."  And so, it took a lot of years of, you know, coaching, saying, "Why Ma?  You got to explain this."  And so she said, "You could lynched for saying something like that.  You just, you don't need to know about that stuff."  That's what she would say when we would ask her about the family.  "You just don't need to know about that."  And then we had to as--you know, as I came to Chicago [Illinois]--I grew up in Baltimore [Maryland], and there was a whole line of family, of older family members here in Chicago.  So, there was Narvey [ph.], who would tell everything.  Because a lot of them would say, "You can't ask about that.  You don't need to know."  You know, we had to, we had to do a lot of digging to figure out, you know, this family heritage and how the people lived.  They, they weren't forth--my mother's generation was not forthcoming about this, because they grew up with--this wasn't--you couldn't talk about it.  These were, you know, white elders who lived with these black people, but this whole aura of pretense of: "He was the white man."  And Flirtie got married in his house.  Well, that was his daughter (laughter).  So those, that, I think is what I remember, you know, the feeling that I remember, of being forty years old and realizing that this white man that we've been talking about and hearing stories about, you know, was a relative.  You know, great-great-great-grandfather, however many greats.  I have to stop and count.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you for that.  I mean that's a real, you know, good analysis of that.  You know, a lot of people have bits and pieces of it and they can't put it together earlier or tell the story of what happened.  But that's, that's pretty clear, yeah, pretty clear.
Story_ID: 639191
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] talk about--well, was she able to go to school there, in that community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, she went to school.  She was, she was a smart student. She went to school.  They all did.  My mother I think was valedictorian from her high school class, and I think her brother was too.
Speaker 1: Was the class there in Evergreen [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but it was a little teeny class.  It was, you know, there was a class in, wherever it was in that Evergreen area.  But they went to high school, and it was a small--it was I think it was one of those--the sense I have is that it was one room, you know, where there were different grades in the same, you know, room.  One room schoolhouse.  It wasn't anything like what we know today.  But she graduated from high school valedictorian.  And what was said about the, her family was they were all really smart, really smart.  Now, my mother's father [Thad McClammy, Sr.] was a very shrewd businessman, and people don't say very kind things about him.  But he ended up with most of the land, as people left to go north.  He paid the taxes on it, and ultimately take it.  It's still in the family, and right now most of it is owned by my uncle, who is actually Thad McClammy [Thad McClammy, Jr.], who is in the state legislature down in Alabama [Alabama House of Representatives].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thad McClammy.  T-H-A-D?
Speaker 2: T-H-A-D McClammy.  He goes by T.C., Thad Cumming, I think.
Speaker 1: He's in the Alabama state legislature?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right in the district that encompasses Montgomery [Alabama].
Story_ID: 639192
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] talk about any of her personal experiences growing up down there, and how things shaped her life?
Speaker 2: You know, the--yes, she did.  She wanted to get--well, she--I think she had a--I think they had a good upbringing, because they came up on a farm.  They didn't have much, you know, because people don't have a lot, by today's standards.  But I don't think they ever felt that they were poor because they had food, and they knew about this thing called the Depression [Great Depression].  They didn't have a lot of clothes, they didn't have a lot of shoes.  The stories that I--that, some of the painful stories that she talks about were the stories that were based on color.  Now, my mother is light, by most people's standards.  And one of her stories that--we grew up in a family where my mother is light and my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] is dark.  And if you ever wanted to get an old fashioned beating, you could talk--you would, you know, call somebody a name based on color.  You couldn't--you know, even now I'm very--I say somebody is this complexion.  I very rarely say, "Oh, he's dark."  Because you couldn't, you couldn't talk about color, you know.  We would call my little sister [Deborah Blackwell Whittleton], who's not dark at all--but she was the brownest of us, you know, by those terms that people use.  We used to call her, you know, a chocolate chip, to make her cry.  You'd get a beating.  You don't talk about color in this house.  But it came from the fact that she had a grandmother who she considered very mean.  And one of the stories that she tells is that when it was time to line up for the chicken, she'd line the kids up by color, and let the--my mother was the lightest, so she got to choose the chicken first.  And--
Speaker 1: So, her piece of chicken was based on her color?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  She'd line them up by color.  That was the grandmother she did not like, Grandmother Harriet [Harriet Longmire McClammy Griggs] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--one is tempted to think that this behavior somehow came down from the, from white society I guess, where lightness would be considered a prize, you know, I guess.  I don't--you know, you would think that--
Speaker 2: That's clearly what--the conclusion that I have reached (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I'm just saying, you know.
Speaker 2: But it--I've heard, I just heard talking to my sister last night that my mother's father [Thad McClammy, Sr.] was very color conscious, that--and these are not stories that one should be proud of, but it's what shapes America--that he was a shrewd businessman.  But talking to my sister last night, she said that one of the family members said, "And he really, you know, he really was very prejudiced based on color.  He really, he told somebody, 'You can't really be a McClammy, because McClammys aren't dark.  You're too dark to be a McClammy.'"  And the relative was offended.  So I don't know what color that person was.  But my mother came up with, "You do not talk--you don't make distinctions on the basis of color."  I mean that was, that was just something we couldn't do.
Speaker 1: So she kind of broke out of the mold?
Speaker 2: Oh, she broke out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: I guess--
Speaker 2: --painful for her.
Speaker 1: And I guess, I suppose the migration north had something to do with breaking out of the mold that--in a sense?
Speaker 2: I think, you know, how sometimes you have experiences when you're young, and you just don't think it's right?  I think that she didn't, that she didn't like that treatment.  And, you know, there, you, that, you had enough issues dealing with other families.  Because all the families had intermarried, and so the tensions that we pick up were the tensions between this family and that family.  And I think that--and she was estranged from her father, and didn't like him.  So, I'm just speculating now.  All I know is that my mother did not like that grandmother, and you could not talk about color.  And she chose to marry a man who was very dark.
Story_ID: 639193
Speaker 1: Your mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] finished high school in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And she moved north about, when did she move north?
Speaker 2: She didn't come north until about 1944.  She finished high school and went down to Mobile [Alabama] to work in an airplane factory during the war [World War II, WWII].  And that's when she met her, my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was stationed in Alabama, in Mobile, that's where they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now those are the days when a lot of black women worked in defense plants (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --putting together bombs, and doing all kinds of things that men would generally be doing if they were here.  But there weren't any around.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So this is, this is like a first kind of a thing, with a woman being able to get a factory job--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or, you know, a job that pays a pretty, pretty good wage, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and they were considered very good jobs.  Several of her family members, the women, worked there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did, her sister did, her cousin did.
Story_ID: 639194
Speaker 1: There she [Blackwell Bryson's mother, Connie McCreary Blackwell] met your father.  Now, now, well, let's go to your father's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and get his information.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Clarence David Blackwell, Sr. [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.].  C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, David, D-A-V-I-D, Blackwell, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born April 15, 1921 in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about your father's ancestors?  How far back can you trace the Blackwells?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The Blackwells, I can trace his father's side back more than I can trace his mother's side back, because they were--people got killed in a fire, and she was raised by an aunt.  But on the father's side, we go back to--there's--my grandfather's [Reginald Blackwell]--my great-grandmother was Ketty Carpenter [Ketty Carpenter Blackwell], who we believe was the daughter of a, of a slave who--of the man--of the couple that owned her.  And Ketty Carpenter had--
Speaker 1: The daughter of the husband of the couple that owned her?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, no.  And here's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's mother was Ketty.  And Ketty we think, was the, was fathered by the man, the white man on the plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She looked, she was very--she had, she was very light with very long straight hair that she could sit on.  And she worked, she was working for, working in the house on a small farm at the time that slavery ended.  She didn't know what to do.  So the couple said, "Well, you can stay here" (laughter).  And then she stayed there until my grandfather came and took her away.  But they used to lend Ketty out.  She was very pretty.  They used to lend Ketty out; again, lending people out.  So Ketty came back with these children that were fathered by a white man.  So, a number of her offspring looked very white.  In fact, Uncle--one of the stories in the house was my father's sister once opened up the door to Uncle Robert [ph.], and called--this is one of my, my grandfather's brothers--and called my grandmother and said, "You know, Ma, there's some white man at the door."  That was Uncle Robert.  So, Ketty's, Ketty came back.  They would lend Ketty out, and she came back with--most of her kids had white fathers.  My grandfather's father was black; he was a Blackwell [David Blackwell].  And from what we know about the Blackwells in that part of Virginia, we believe that the Blackwells were connected to the white Blackwells, who were a wealthy family.  They came over from England in the 1620s.  And in Fauquier County [Virginia] there's Blackwell Road, there's Blackwell Street, there's Blackwell--a lot of, a lot of the streets are named after Blackwell.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the name of that county?
Speaker 2: F--Fauquier, F-A-U-Q-U-I-E-R.  Fauquier County is where my grandfather grew up.  And there's still family land there, forty acres.  One of his aunts had entered into a contract to buy the land.  And after she made, before she made the last payment, there was some dispute as to whether or not she could take the title.  And she was the first black woman to sue in the State of Virginia and win, and got the land.
Speaker 1: So when was this?
Speaker 2: That would have been around the turn of the century, as far as I know.  My sister now owns the land.
Story_ID: 639195
Speaker 1: So, your [paternal] great-grandmother [Ketty Carpenter Blackwell] was already--she was already light with long hair.  And then she was lent out--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in situations where she really couldn't protect herself (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She couldn't protect herself.
Speaker 1: There was nobody to--
Speaker 2: So she'd come back with these children--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: --who also looked white, many of them did.  And you know, on that side of the family, you know, they're--on my mother's [Connie McCreary Blackwell] side of the family we don't--and we do have some stories of people who passed for white.  There's this group of people who went off to Hawaii.  And we laugh, because people went off to Hawaii during, during World War II [WWII], and we never heard from them again.  So the family joke is, "You know what happened.  They went over there and passed for white."  But on my father's [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] side of the family, we do know that one of his sisters had a son who passed for white, and went up to New Jersey and had a bar, married an Italian woman.  He said he was Italian.  It was like 'Imitation of Life,' for those people who remember the movie.  And there was, something went foul, and he was killed.  And my, his mother went up to the funeral, and it was shock in the church, because everybody in the church was white.  But (makes sound) everybody's got those stories, I would presume.  But the, to me, the story of her being lent out is a little painful, you know.  Fourteen years old, slavery ends.  "Oh, gee, you can stay here."  And she stayed there until, as I said, until my grandfather [Reginald Blackwell] went to claim her.  Now, and my grandfather--she and my grandfather's father [David Blackwell] never married.  He was a Blackwell, and you know, we think--
Speaker 1: He was a black Blackwell, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a black Blackwell, we believe connected to the rich Blackwells, you know, probably some alliance with, you know, with a black woman and produced a child, you know.  He was, you know, light with wavy hair.  He looked mixed, you know, whatever that means.  You know, President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] doesn't necessarily look mixed.  What does it mean?  So, there are--oh, I'm sorry, did I answer the question?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, you're telling a story, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're doing fine.
Speaker 2: So that those are the key people on my, on my grandfather's father's side, who was Ketty Carpenter and my grandfather's father.  We don't know very much about him other than his probable connection to the wealthy white Blackwells who were, you know, well to do, owned banks, owned, you know, businesses.  One of them went out to Oklahoma and founded the town of Blackwell, Oklahoma, I think.  We don't know them.  But we suppose because, you know, of the connection, that there was some connection to the family.  That's all supposition.
Story_ID: 639196
Speaker 1: Your father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.], now he was born and raised in Baltimore [Maryland].  So I guess at some point, you know, people migrated in, into Baltimore from Virginia, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.  They came up to Baltimore from Virginia, and they came up because there were jobs.  My grandfather [Reginald Blackwell] was one of--you know, in those days, steel mills, they were the--you worked in the steel mill, you were the wealthy in the community.  They made more than teachers and doctors and lawyers, the--they made the long money.  They drove the big cars in the neighborhood.  So he was, he got on at a refractory company, actually, which is one of the steel related industries.  And my grandfather was a very, very, bright man.  He was, had a third grade education, read a newspaper every single day, at least one; well read.  Taught himself to read, you know, to read to that level.  And managed his money well.  In those days, you know, they say, it came--they saved their money for--they saved their money.  I think they owned the house on Harford Road, I'm not sure.  But he was--when my father got out of the [U.S. military] service, still a young man, my grandfather bought, you know, one of the houses where they were; you know, one of the first black people on the block, or the second or the third, whatever.  But bought a nice house.  He always had a nice house that was very well--very clean, a very pretty house, very well cared for.  He spent a lot of time taking care of the flowers and, you know, keeping the house looking nice.  In those days, it was a Baltimore row house.  But he managed his money well, always had a, you know, nice house, nice car, and lived, lived well, within reason.  And he was a wonderful man.  Everybody loved my grandfather.
Story_ID: 639197
Speaker 1: What were the stories your father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.], I guess, told growing up?
Speaker 2: (Pause) My father's stories were (laughter) always were--my father's stories were (laughter) stories about the Depression [Great Depression], stories about being poor.  (Background noise) My mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] didn't experience the Depression; he did.  He talked about how at one point he had to wear his sister's shoes to school.  There's one story in the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My father's stories were about the Depression.  He was, he was clearly shaped by the Depression.  The stories that--a lot of the stories came--you know, were based on--the stories that lived and reverberated were based on the poverty during the Depression.  He, you know, as I was saying, he had to wear his sister's shoes to school when he was a young kid.  And there's a story that's one of the favorite in the house, you know, one of the favorites that we passed, about a time that they had chicken for dinner, and a kid from the neighborhood came in at dinnertime, and my father offered the kid a bone to suck on (laughter).  So, that was one of the family's--you know, one of the jokes as well.  And then one of the things that we all learned from my [paternal] grandfather [Reginald Blackwell] was how to eat a chicken bone.  And like, you know, there was an art.  It was one of the things that, how we bonded with my grandfather growing up.  And my grandmother [Ethel Meade Blackwell] would just fuss.  "You teaching those kids how to eat a chicken bone.  You need to stop."  And we would sit around and he would say, "Now little girl, you got to suck all the meat off."  And then, you know, you take the drumstick and you suck all the meat off.  And then there's this little teeny bone up there.  And you'd have to take that bone off and make sure you got all the meat off.  And then after you got all the meat everywhere, then you'd take the top off and get the marrow out (laughter).  So my grandmother would be so annoyed that he was teaching us how to really eat a chicken, how to--you know, what to do with the chicken bone.  But that was one of the, that was one of the stories and traditions that were passed, that was passed down during, from the slavery period; I mean, from the Depression.  And I think it was the sense of just really minding your money that was, that I think helped shape my grandfather and my father into being people who managed, you know, who managed to manage his money well.  Well, my grandfather, he didn't have a whole lot, but he had a house that was paid for, my grandmother.  He had a pension in those days that meant something.  The house was completely paid for.  My grandmother never had to worry about anything.  I never heard any family stories about, you know, my grandmother ever needing any money.  And she lived in the house, and it was ultimately--it was, you know, people lose property; you've heard those stories.  But it wasn't lost.  He had the land that, the forty acres that his aunt had given him from Virginia.  That's still in the family today.  So he made sure that when he died, it passed to his children.  He took--you know, one of, one of my issues is black people lose land, and they don't get their insurance money, because we don't know how to take care of our business.  But my grandfather, he passed down an estate.  You know, it wasn't huge, but it's still forty acres.  My sisters built up--you know, have a tree farm on it in Virginia today.  And so I think he set--he was one of the ones who set the model in the family of, you know, of managing your money well.  If you've got it, use it.  He left--like I said, my grandmother was well taken care of.  The house was paid for.  It's still--no, my cousin inherited it, and ultimately sold it.  So, my, the, going back to the family stories, a lot of the stories were shaped by, by the, the Depression.
Story_ID: 639198
Speaker 1: The stories--the--one of the stories that, that shaped me (laughter) was, was how--the stories about white people taking money from black people, borrowing money from black people and never paying them back.  So that, my [paternal] grandfather [Reginald Blackwell] actually was a--he became a money lender in the neighborhood.  And (laughter) sometimes we would get in the car and ride with him to go get his money.  He was known for lending money, and he would go and get his money.  Now later in life, my sister told me he'd take his gun, but I didn't know that.  But my grandfather was one who would get his money.  And I think (laughter) when I started practicing law, I, that shaped me.  Because I thought, I'm a lawyer, I'm going to get paid.  In those days, you know, most of my clients--you know, I had a choice of who I was going to work for.  Part of who I was going to work for was shaped by who was going to pay me.  And for many years, most of my clients were major corporations.  And I always had one of the highest collection rates in the firm.  They evaluate lawyers by, you know, how--if you bill your time, did you collect the money.  And my view was that steely determination to get paid came from my grandfather, who was not going to be cheated like--you know, was not going to be cheated like--he was not going to be a black man who was cheated like often black men were cheated by white people.  And so, that was one of the stories.  White people will take your money, white people will cheat you.  That's not going to happen to me.  If I lend my money, I'm going to get it.  And one of the fears I grew up with was if somebody owes me money, I'm going to collect.  And that came from the steely determination that my grandfather had to get his money.  If he had to lend it out, he would go back and get it with his interest rate.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did your father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] take after your grandfather in that regard?
Speaker 1: My father was a pretty good businessman, actually.  When--and actually we still, we still have things from his estate.  My father--my father, to me, my father was an extraordinary man.  But just financially--my father--we own the house; and my sister and I own the house now.  And it's still in the family, and it's cash flow positive (laughter).  We still own that house.  He owned a second house that was rental property; we still own that.  My father owned an interest in the land, and worked with my sister to make sure that that was--that it stayed in the, in the family.  And my sister owns it now.  And they taught us, they taught us how to manage money.  All of us, when we get, sit around the table, we all have a different story about what the family taught us.  But we had, we had very strong values for, I call it respecting money.  Now, I tell the story about what my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] did.  But other people will say Daddy told them the same thing.  But when I was sixteen, I got my first job.  I got my first paycheck, and my mother said--you know, I knew when I got my first paycheck I was going to the bank, because she told me.  We went to the bank, and she said, "This is what you do with your money every time you get paid.  You got to put money away that you have to give to the church.  You got to put money away--you have to pay yourself."  You have to put money away because we had to get jobs and save for college.  And I believe she told me that you have to save 25 percent.  It might have been 10, but I believe she told me 25.  You got to give something to the family, because you lived in the house.  And in those days if you were black, you worked, you know, you helped out with the family; you gave something.  And then she said after you put money away for church, put money away for savings, and gave something to them--all the rest, you can spend.  You could do whatever you wanted with the rest of it.  And every one of us tells a different story.  My sister says, you know, my father told her that story.  But we were--and the other, the other line that came down in our family was, "Well, if you don't have it, how are you going to spend it?"  And, you know, if you wanted something, they would turn their faces up and say, "Well, it just doesn't make any sense.  If you don't have the money, how are you going to get it?  You got to save your money to get it.  You have to be responsible for your money."  So, that was something that they, they taught us.  My--that came down--you know, from what I could see, that was, that was, that was a family trait.
Story_ID: 639199
Speaker 1: What did your father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] do for a living?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: My father was a die setter.  My father was a highly decorated veteran.  I say he was an extraordinary individual.  He was the model--he, to me, was the kind of man who was the smartest kind of man you could ever meet.  Because anything you ever wanted to know about, you could ask my father and he could tell you something about it.  He was extensively well read.  He was a good student in high school.  Class officer, was a highly decorated--not officer--a highly decorated--served in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Where did he go to high school?
Speaker 2: He went to--
Speaker 1: In Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: --Frederick--
Speaker 1: Douglass?
Speaker 2: Frederick Douglass [Frederick Douglass High School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Baltimore.  Dunbar--I think at some point it changed.  Dunbar was a junior high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School No. 101; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland], and then Frederick Douglass, everybody finished high school at Douglass.  He was a class officer.  And then he went into the [U.S.] military, served admirably, decorated.  And they built, he was a--they built hospitals over in the, over in the Pacific Theater, and then he'd come back as a highly decorated veteran.  My father got on at the steel mill with my [paternal] grandfather, and worked there--started Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1950, graduated from Morgan State summa cum laude.  And in four years, never missed a day of work, and never missed a day of class.  Now, his reward when he graduated which was a nice reward in those days.  Because they gave him the highest paying job in the plant, which was a die setter, which was a good paying job, even today, in a refractory.  Those guys make good money.  When my father died in 1986, he was making about ninety thousand dollars a year.  So his choice was, you know, he chose to stay there rather than--because he had six children at that point--rather than work at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] or become a schoolteacher, because he made more money.  And in those days you had a lot of college graduates had the choice of the post office or, you know--it was before the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed.  They could just tell you, "I'm not going to hire you because you're black."  Or, "Wow," you know, to Reginald Blackwell's son, and Reginald was a good worker.  "Your son's a great worker.  We're going to give him the highest paying job in the plant."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how it was, it was a good thing.
Story_ID: 639200
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Connie McCreary Blackwell and Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter) Yeah.  My mother was working at the, was working at--I forgot what they called it.  You know, the--wherever it was, where they repaired the planes, where they cleaned and repaired the planes.  My mother was a repair--she was doing the riveting.  And my cousin, Narvey [ph.], was cleaning the planes.  She was like Sally the riveter, or whoever it was that--that image that you have of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Rosie the Riveter.
Speaker 2: Rosie the Riveter, right.  She was doing the riveting.  And my father was--you know, they met. And what my mother said was that she was just so impressed with how intelligent he was, and how articulate he was.  He had a huge vocabulary.  He was extremely well spoken.  He was a person who loved to learn, and he was always reading.  So, she was impressed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a little taller than he was, and it didn't matter (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is down in Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: This is down in Mobile.
Speaker 1: And so they, they get together and they move with his family in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, moved in with the family.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Got married and he brought her up here and moved in with the family, and he left his bride with the family while he went off to World War II to fight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what year did they get married, now when was that about?
Speaker 2: Forty four [1944] I think.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639201
Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' talents, their dispositions, personalities--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of them, in different ways.  My father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] was, my father was very demanding of excellence.  And we were all very good students, and almost to the point where I, you know, at some point in growing up I resented it.  You know, I resented it when I graduated from high school--from junior high school [Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland], the first person in the history of school, the school to graduate valedictorian and most outstanding student, to get the two top honors.  And he didn't come to graduation.  His view was, "Well, you haven't done anything until you've graduated from college," (laughter).  "I come to college graduations."  And, you know, you go through junior high school, and for every marking period during junior high school you make A's, except for one B.  And he goes, "What's that B doing there?"  Not, you know, "Great job."  So, I learned to give my kids [Bradley Bryson and Blake Bryson] praise, because I don't think he gave us enough praise.  But my father was so demanding of excellence that it became, it became the, one of the hallmarks of who I am professionally.  Recently, I was interviewed by a leading lawyer.  And the man said, "Well, my goodness, you've accomplished so much.  Aren't you proud of yourself?"  And I stopped and I said, "I never thought about being proud of myself.  You know, when I, the way I was raised, you went and you had to strive for excellence, and that was just a hallmark.  It's what I expect of myself."  It's, you know, it was--I never sat back--and maybe I should--and say, "You know, you really--wow, you know, you--that's great."  I try to do that more now, but it, that wasn't the way I was raised.  It was--my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] used to say, "If it's hard, do it hard.  Just get it done, and get it done right."  That meant, you know, don't complain, you know.  "If it's easy, do it easy.  But if it's hard, that doesn't mean you can quit.  You have to get it done."
Story_ID: 639202
Speaker 1: You have other brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many do you have?
Speaker 2: Five siblings.
Speaker 1: Five siblings, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm number four from the top.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Paula [Paula Blackwell Wilson] is the oldest; David [Clarence Blackwell, Jr.], Camellia [Camellia Blackwell Taffel], me, Debbie [Deborah Blackwell Whittleton], and, Debbie and Michael [Michael Blackwell].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, do you have an earliest memory in the family?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is it?
Speaker 2: I was nine months old.  I have two memories.  People say, "No, you don't."  And I say, "Yes, I do, and it's verifiable."  My, at the--when I was nine months old, my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] brought home a radio.  And it was one of those old radios with the light in it, and it had a back with the little holes in it, and a little fan that whirred.  You might remember.  And I remember being in the dark in the room when he came in at night with it and plugged it in, and seeing all that light, like stars inside the room, and knowing that, you know, from the conversation, that it was a radio.  But I remember the visual of seeing that.  That's nothing anybody told me.  And I knew that I was nine months old, because later people talked about when he bought the radio.  That was a big thing in the family.  It was a military radio.  It had two way capability, and he was proud to have this military radio that we kept for years.  So, that was a big event.  And so, I knew when that happened, and I knew--I remembered the visual.  And then my other memory when I was nine months old was--and that's why I say my favorite color is yellow--standing in my little yellow dress on the back porch.  We lived with my [paternal] grandparents [Ethel Meade Blackwell and Reginald Blackwell] at this point.  When they moved into the new house in the new neighborhood [in Baltimore, Maryland], my father came with his family while he was saving up the money to buy his house, which he bought.  But I was, my memory is sitting--coasting along the railing on the back porch with my grandfather reading the paper, and my oldest sister Camellia [Camellia Blackwell Taffel] on the steps, and my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] coming out in a sundress, and feeling so happy and seeing how pretty the sky was.  And I had on my favorite, a dress that I really liked, that had light blue smocking.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I have a lot of memories from when I was young--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --That others--I'm amazed when people tell me they don't--their memories start at five.  I'm like, I remember when I first tied my shoe; I was three.
Story_ID: 639203
Speaker 1: We were talking about early childhood memories, and--what neighborhood did you live in in Baltimore [Maryland] when you were little?
Speaker 2: I lived in East Baltimore.
Speaker 1: East Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did the, did the neighborhood have a name other than East Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was enough of a name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, there was East Baltimore and West Baltimore.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And West Baltimore, it's sort of like the South Side and the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because I've heard people talk about, "I lived in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]," and--
Speaker 2: Oh, Cherry Hill was another neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, that was another neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, East Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And if you want to--
Speaker 1: --row houses, pretty much?
Speaker 2: Row houses, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Row houses, typical of Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Well, typical of East Baltimore.  West Baltimore had more houses with porches.  That was a big thing in Baltimore if you had a house with a porch and a little bit of grass.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was happening.
Speaker 1: But Baltimore is a place where people scrubbed those steps.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the marble steps, a lot of marble in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Marble and stained glass.  I scrubbed the steps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't see that here, scrubbing the steps (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  Marble was far more plentiful out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Lord, have mercy.  The first smell that came to my mind was the bakery on Wolfe Street and Federal Street.  That old German bakery, oh, the--oh.  You could just--the smell--and they baked the bread fresh every day.  And you'd go by and the doughnuts were fresh, hot.  Oh, man.  And then coming back from church on Sunday, my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] wasn't making homemade bread.  She only did that a few times a year as we got older.  We'd stop and pick up the rolls for dinner, and then we could, you know, buy something for ourselves.  And sometimes she'd go--you know, we'd be, get a treat and get a dozen of the donuts.  And I always--oh.  My sister liked the honey dips, like we called them, you know, like the--
Speaker 1: Glazed?
Speaker 2: The glazed donuts.  But we called them honey dips.  And I liked the--now, we called them chocolate--here, you call them those cake donuts.  We called them chocolate crullers.  That's what they were called out there.  And I liked the chocolate crullers.  Okay, enough of that (laughter).  I'm ready to go eat.
Story_ID: 639204
Speaker 1: The neighborhood that I grew up in really was a middle class neighborhood, you know.  The neighborhood was clean, it was--when we first moved on--I grew up on Lafayette Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland].  That's where they moved to when--that's the house that I grew up in.  They moved from Harford Road, and that's where we lived with my [paternal] grandparents [Ethel Meade Blackwell and Reginald Blackwell].  A lot of people, multiple families lived--a lot of people in these little houses.  There were thirteen of us at the height of our, the density in that house, which was a three bedroom house.  But the neighborhood was beautiful.  It had the clean white steps.  It had the trees on it, and people had--in that neighborhood you had just a little bit of stained glass.  But people had the screens in the window for the summertime that had scenery painted on them.  The neighborhood was integrated.  And, you know, as the white people were leaving, but people lived together as a community.  At the corner, down on the corner, there was Buzzy [ph.] and his family, and they were really poor white people.  But Buzzy played with my brother, and I remember when they moved away and everybody hugged and they cried.  And they were good friends, and Buzzy used to come to our house and we'd go down there.  But then there was Al [ph.], the cop who liked Judy [ph.].  And they would, they lived on this little street around the corner from us, and everybody loved to see Al come, because he was just a nice cop.  And he was like one of the heroes in the community.  He was, you know, a young cop.  And when Mr. Al came--(laughter) and this was--every, people would, we would just jump up and down, because we were happy to see Al.  And we knew he was going to see Judy, because he liked Judy.  And Judy was a white girl with freckles and long red hair.  It was an integrated community; we lived together, you know.  And the neighborhood, and there's a distinction there.  So, that was--one of the sights was, you know, what the people looked like.  And the neighborhood was slowly changing.  Next door to me was Mr. Kramer [ph.].  Now, Mr. Kramer was an older Jewish guy, and his wife lived there.  She had curly hair.  I remember her curly hair.  And Mr. Kramer, I don't care what was going on, if I needed to read to somebody--because I read when I was three.  I started reading when I was three.  And I'd pick up my book and I would read like this (laughter).  I would scream, "See the ball."  (Laughter) And my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] would say, "Baby, could you like not read so loud?"  And I was so excited about reading, I would walk around with my book.  And when they would get tired of hearing me read, I used to think, "I know you will listen to me read.  Mr. Kramer."  And I'd go into the backyard and start reading, and Mr. Kramer would come out and sit down.  And I could read to Mr. Kramer anytime.  I loved Mr. Kramer (laughter).  And Mr. Kramer's yard was filled up with the most beautiful rose bushes.  He had a whole variety of red roses, peach roses, peach and red roses, pink roses, white roses.  But Mr. Kramer would always listen to me read.  And that's one of my fondest early memories, was knowing that if nobody else wanted to hear me read, I'd go to Mr. Kramer, who was white.  And I remember when his, I remember when his wife died.  Well, he died, I think he died first.  And we went to, we went to view the body.  And we didn't go to the funeral, I don't remember.  They took us to visit with the family, and then later his, his--the children took her away, and then we got some neighbors next door who weren't as nice.
Story_ID: 639205
Speaker 1: Slowly, the white people left the neighborhood, and it became all black.  But the stories that we had with the white people in the neighborhood were good stories. But there were other stories that were not--that showed that it, there was another side to that.  Because you could just leave the community and--you know, some of my earliest memories--one of my early memories was going to the little tavern with my sister, and thinking my sister was so mean.  Because I was hungry and she promised me a hamburger, and she wouldn't let me eat it.  You know, she wouldn't let me stay in the store to eat it.  I had to learn that they wouldn't let me eat it because we were black.  And my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is, this is 1955, '56 [1956]?
Speaker 1: It would have, it would have been around '55 [1955]; it would have been around '55 [1955], '55 [1955].  And then I remember, you know, that we couldn't go to the Ritz Theatre [Baltimore, Maryland], because they didn't let blacks in the Ritz Theatre.  But they let them in the Apollo [Apollo Theatre, Baltimore, Maryland] if you went to the, the balcony.  And then later, they let them into the Apollo, then later they, you know, they, we could go to the Ritz.
Story_ID: 639206
Speaker 1: I remember the, you know, when integration was beginning to happen.  And I remember when in 19--after Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], my parents [Connie McCreary Blackwell and Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] deciding whether we were going to go to the white school, which was down the street and around the corner, or the black school, which was a mile away.  And they decided we would go to the black school, you know.  And I remember I was a smart--you know, I was a really smart kid; we all were.  Because we played school.  We'd come home, in our house we played school.  My sister [Camellia Blackwell Taffel] taught me; she was a year ahead of me.  And I was really smart, but part of it was because that's what I was training on.  She'd come and say, "This is what I learned in school."  So, I went to school, I knew what she knew.  And in summers, I read a lot.  So I had, always had really high test scores.  And then for many summers, I was in an experimental school over at Johns Hopkins University [Baltimore, Maryland] where they took the kids in the school with the really high test scores.  And one of my earliest memories after first grade when they chose me--and then, you know, all the family came around, because it was a white environment.  And they would get--telling me, you know, basically, "You're going to be with all these white people, and you're going to be fine."  Basically they were saying that because everybody else I had been with in school had been black.  And I remember being in that class in the summer.  It was a summer program, they were--in those days, they passed kids (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was between first grade and second grade [at Elmer A. Henderson School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Between first grade and second grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In those days, they passed kids.  So they took the really bright kids and, you know, put them in this program.  I don't know, you know, what the theory was. But my mother never let me pass, because my sister was a year older than I.  So, she didn't think that socially that was a good thing to do to my sister, to have me in the same grade as she.  But I remember, I still remember what the teacher looked like.  She was a white woman with big bangs, you know, like one of those Beatles haircuts, but that was before The Beatles.  And I remember that she would go around the room and pat everybody on the head, and skip me.  She never touched me, and I remember trying to figure out why she wouldn't touch me.  Because I knew when she passed the test grades back that I almost always had the highest test score, you know.  If we had a spelling test, I had a hundred, and other people would have other scores.  And I couldn't figure out--because I had come in--I had gone to the black schools for preschool, for kindergarten, and first grade, where I would go up to the teacher in first grade and she would, you know, hug me and show me the work.  And I couldn't figure out why this teacher--you know, it was years later.  I thought, why was there only two of us black in the room?  And she didn't touch me and she didn't touch Allen [ph.], and I couldn't, I didn't make the connection about race.  I knew that there was something going on, that they were preparing me to be with these white people.  But I didn't--because I liked to learn, I went there and I did what I always did.  And I had to figure it out, it was.  You know, there were only two--it must have been.  I could have been wrong, but I remember she never touched me.  And I remember how bad, you know, how bad I felt that she never--that she wouldn't--that she wouldn't--I was used to the teachers acknowledging how smart I was (laughter).  And she didn't acknowledge me, and she never touched me.  And I knew that I was making good grades, and I couldn't figure it out.  And any way, that's one of my early memories.  So the discrimination that I actually experienced, you know, we didn't--I didn't experience the cross burnings.  I experienced the stories about how mean black people--white people--had been to other people in the family.  And we lived with them in the early days, and we lived well with them, as far as I could see, as they were moving away.  But that's one of the pain- early painful memories that as a little kid finishing kinder, first grade, that lady never--would walk and touch that kid, and just go on over my head and touch everybody else.
Story_ID: 639207
Speaker 1: And where did you start school?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Elmer A. Henderson [Elmer A. Henderson School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Elmer A. Henderson.  Was that a black person from the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was a, a black person who actually took Admiral Peary [Robert Peary] to the North Pole [sic.].  He was going to pull Admiral Peary, because Admiral Peary was frostbitten.  And they say Admiral Peary was the first one to discover the North Pole.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about Henson?
Speaker 2: No, Elmer A. Henderson.
Speaker 1: Henderson?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it was Henson that took Peary to the North Pole.  Yeah, Henson, H-E-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe he came to the school to talk to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The school was Elmer A. Henderson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And maybe as a kid, I thought when he came--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Matthew Henson was--
Speaker 2: Matthew Henson, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: No, Elmer A. Henderson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I just merged two memories.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was Matthew Henson.  He came to the school and talked on the stage and showed us the pelts--
Speaker 1: Damn.
Speaker 2: --and told us about going to the North Pole.  And I remember thinking, and he took--?  I remember, you know, he was saying that Matthew Perry [sic.] had discovered the North Pole.  I'm like, that's stupid.  He's the one who pulled them there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Seems to me, he did it.  He finished the course.  He's sitting up there frozen up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they made a pretty good television movie about him, you know, I guess in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Matthew Henson?
Speaker 1: Yes, they did, they really did.  He was almost lynched for pulling an orange off a tree in Florida, off a train.  He was sitting in a train next to an orange tree, and he pulled an orange off the tree, and a mob rushed the train to try to get him for that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was right after he came back.  That was kind of like a wakeup, you know, you're back now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: He used to, you know, for years people didn't believe he went.  You know, he was, he had, in fact, he actually drug Peary up there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Peary was frostbitten.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember him telling the story there.  And then even as a kid I thought that, that doesn't make sense.  Why--if he took him--and Peary was frozen and his feet got there first--how did he say Peary did it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, you know, they say So and So discovered the Dead Sea Scrolls when I was a little kid; in the desert, a little Bedouin boy.  And they're going to give the credit to the white man, who said, "Okay, you know, yeah, that's valuable" (laughter).  That's--
Speaker 1: That's the way, that's what happens (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the way it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 639208
Speaker 1: So, you were at Elmer A. Henderson School [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: For the first grade, and they gave you that test in the first grade.  And so you tested out gifted, and they, they moved you?
Speaker 2: Well, they put me in a program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, where you went to school at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] and you took these classes during the summer.  And I guess I was too young to know.  It was just, you know, they told me it was this great thing, I was going to Johns Hopkins.  I had some of the highest test scores in the city, and this was a wonderful thing.  And most of the kids there were white.  And I couldn't skip.  I remember them having a discussion about whether Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson] would be allowed to skip, and the decision was, "No, she'll have to stay where she is."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're at Johns Hopkins?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, you probably didn't know, at the same time as the fellow who was a heart surgeon. I forget, you know, who--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was probably a student, and I was like in first grade.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, okay.  So, so, that was just a summer program?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you can't, went back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they took me there for three or four summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandfather [Reginald Blackwell] used to take me every day and bring me home.
Speaker 1: So you'd come back to Henderson during the--
Speaker 2: It was during the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was, instead of going to summer camp, I took classes at Johns Hopkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you went to Henderson during the school year?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from preschool to sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then what happened?  Did the family move or something, or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, it was time for seventh grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was a different school.  We had junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was valedictorian.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Clifton Park Junior High.  (Background noise) And it was located in Clifton Park [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, Clifton Park Junior High School.  Oh, now, let me ask you.  Did you have any, were there any special teachers or mentors in elementary school?
Speaker 2: All of them.  We had awesome teachers.  There was Miss Allen [ph.] for--I mean, I remember all their names.  They were just, they were teachers that were just really memorable; they were really memorable.  Those were very memorable experiences.  I loved learning.  I, you know, I read all the time.  I always had really high test scores, because I read and I loved learning, and that was an excellent foundation.  Because later on in high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] where they were racist dogs, that was another story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was an excellent foundation.  I loved--everyone--I remember in second grade, we were studying sentences, and Mrs. Young [ph.] was making a point.  And I'd written as a sentence--I'd written a fragment of it, and I didn't know it, "Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip."  And I remember she turned to the second teacher in the room.  In those days it was during the baby boomer years, and we were on shifts.  And she says, "A sentence is a complete thought.  That is not a complete thought.  What if I said, 'Mrs. Coates [ph.],'" and she was the second teacher.  "And Mrs. Coates said, 'Yes, Mrs. Young.  Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip.'"  And Mrs. Coates said, "Well, that is not a complete thought."  I have never written a fragment since (laughter).  It's like--
Speaker 1: They dramatized it for you.
Speaker 2: They dramatized it.  "That is not a complete sentence.  We write complete sentences.  What did---that says who they are.  What did they do?"  And I have never in life written a fragment.  I don't write run on sentences.  I edit, I'm a, I am a grammarian (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they were good.  You had good teachers.
Speaker 2: I had excellent teachers.
Story_ID: 639209
Speaker 1: In junior high school [Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland], that was a neighborhood school as well, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I walked there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now, was there any particular subject matter that you liked more than the others in those days?
Speaker 2: I always loved English.  I always loved English, and I was always good at math.  But I loved reading, I loved English, I loved to write, and still do.  I loved history, I loved geography.  Biology was okay, but that wasn't something that fascinated me.  You know, me, I have a collection of history, particularly African history and African American history.  I love history.  I read very little fiction.  But I liked school, I was a good student.  I was basically, up until high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] I was basically a straight A student.  So, I loved everything but English and math.  Although later I veered away from math, but I came back to it.  But I was always honors English.  So, I, if I had to choose one, I would say English was the top, my most favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, middle school, any memorable teachers in middle school [Elmer A. Henderson School, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Or any experiences?
Speaker 2: Middle school was different.  Middle school was learning to survive.  It was, Clifton Park [Baltimore, Maryland] was a different neighborhood, and they were, some of the kids were kind of rough.  And I remember figuring out that if I was active in after school activities, by the time the bad girls who used to fight after school had gone, I could go home and not have any problems.  I figured that out immediately.  So, I was involved in all these after school activities.  I never was out with, you know, the ruffians who would come out of school and fight.  And there would be maybe a fight every--I don't know, there were a lot of fights.  But I had already figured out.  Well, you know, you stay in here and, you know, you work with teachers and you work on the paper; you're in a play.  You, you know, you run for president of student council.  You work with the student council, and when you leave, you walk home with your girlfriends and you just chat and have fun.  And life was good.  Nobody's going to beat you up, you know.  So, I learned to navigate that.  So, school was--you know, once I learned the basic principles of how to stay alive (laughter), it was, school was a, school was a good place to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: School was a good place to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until I graduated.  And that's when I graduated, the first and only person in the history of the school to graduate with the two top honors, valedictorian and the most outstanding student, which meant you were academically bright and you had social skills, because you were president of the student government.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Student council.
Speaker 1: So, you were really ready for high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was ready for high school.  I was ready for high school, but not in that way that you think.  I was ready for high school because I was so mad at my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] for not coming to my graduation.  I was going to show him I wasn't going to be smart anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the--that's the--yeah, you said that.
Speaker 2: I was--in high school, my vow was if he didn't come to my graduation and he didn't tell me that this was a good thing, then clearly he didn't appreciate--I didn't need to be smart anymore.  And I went to high school vowing that I was not going to be smart.
Story_ID: 639210
Speaker 1: What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Eastern.  I developed, I honed my social skills.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the goals (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eastern High School [Baltimore, Maryland], fourth oldest public high school in the nation at the time.  It was like a finishing school, all girls, mostly white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I was the last class where the girls were mostly white.  Then it became, the ratios changed, because the city was changing.  Lassies, Eastern lassies, racist dogs.
Speaker 1: So, this is in 1964 I guess when you started?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], I think.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was '64 [1964] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, it might have been '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: I'm a year, I'm a year behind you.  I started in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was trying to remember when I started those places.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '64 [1964], '64 [1964] probably.
Speaker 2: I graduated in '68 [1968].  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So it would have been '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  Well, I started in tenth--high school started in tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, it did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you would have started in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: --sixty-five [1965], '66 [1966]. Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967]. Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Junior high [Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland] was seventh, eighth, and ninth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We didn't have it in dates.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But I still had a good time.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].  So--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did a lot of things in high school.  I was mad at my father.
Speaker 1: So, you were in high school during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, basically.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I still remember the day that Martin--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember the day that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--we all remember the date Martin Luther King was killed.  We should go back there.  Because in junior high school at age thirteen, I went to the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)I was there, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's not that far.  Fifty miles away, right, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right, it wasn't that far.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you know, thirteen and fourteen, my sister and I went to our parents [Connie McCreary Blackwell and Clarence Blackwell, Sr.].  You know, we were watching all of this stuff on TV, and we knew what was going on.  And we knew--you know, it wasn't the white people that we knew who were terrible.  It was the people downtown.  It was the people in the stores.  It was the people who didn't let you into the movies.  And, you know, I remember once we were going roller skating.  And my friend's father had us all in the car, and we were all excited about going roller skating.  And we got there and they said, "Oh, no, no, no."  I remember the man rushing over.  He said, "No, no, no.  You can't come in here," and then the disappointment of not being able to go.  And so there was a dichotomy, that in the neighborhoods we lived with and got along with the white people.  It was outside of the neighborhoods and the, and the institutional settings where you were confronted with it, where you weren't allowed to go the movies.  You couldn't buy the hamburger, you couldn't go roller skating.  And there was another rule, unspoken rule.  You could be friends in the neighborhood, but downtown you didn't speak to white people, and they didn't speak to you.  They'd look right through you, and you'd look right--You would, you might make the mistake of speaking once, and then you quickly learned.  When I first came to Chicago [Illinois], it was a shock to me to walk down the street and have white people say hello to me.  And I lived in other places, but still you grow up with that--you may be friends with them.  And in high school, we were friends with the white girls.  But downtown, you didn't speak to them, and they didn't speak to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's just the way it was.  You were friends in the neighborhood, but outside of the neighborhood it was different.
Story_ID: 639211
Speaker 1: I just keep thinking about that old Langston Hughes poem about being in old Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --And the boy sticks out his tongue and calls him a name [sic. 'Incident,' Countee Cullen]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --You know, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't know that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know, "'Lias! 'Lias! Bless de Lawd! / Don' you know de day's erbroad?"
Speaker 1: That's Dunbar ['In the Morning,' Paul Laurence Dunbar], yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah. But at any rate, so you're at this all girls school, and it has a finishing mentality--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and all that.  So, well, how did you like that?  I mean, after coming out of--
Speaker 2: Well, high school was a, was a different drummer.  I had learned in junior high school [Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland] how to cope by being excellent, you know, basically a straight A student and being in all the activities.  But I had an anger.  I was mad because--I really was angry, because my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.], you know, hadn't--you know, it was just this expectation that I should do that.  And I was resentful that he really had not come--it took me some time to figure it out.  But I knew.  It was like, well, you know, if he doesn't think it's important, I'm not going there to be smart.  Because I'm doing all this stuff and my friends are getting paid for making A's, and they're getting this--and he didn't even come to graduation (makes sound).  That's why I gave my kids [Bradley Bryson and Blake Bryson] praise.  So by the time I got to high school, I was ready to party (laughter).  So those were, those were my partying years.  So that was, you know, that's Motown [Motown Records].  High school for me is--now, for me to say I wasn't a good student--I lowered my standards.  So I graduated in, I think I graduated in the top 5 percent of the class, or the top percent at the lowest.  I don't remember the number now, but, and I was still on the honor roll.  I wasn't on the high honor roll, but, you know, I lowered my standards for myself.  It was like, I'm not trying that hard.  But high school to me was--I don't remember many of the teachers, because a lot of them--you know, you'd go in and you'd--you know, when we graduated from high school, there was no doubt who was the best person in home ec [home economics].  I took the home ec courses.  Well, in my family, we learned to sew when we were kids.  My brothers [Clarence Blackwell, Jr. and Michael Blackwell] could sew.  It was a survival skill, you know.  When I wasn't making my own clothes, when I was in the sixth grade, my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] sat me down worried, and said, "You know, you have to learn to sew.  You--," and I didn't want to learn, but I learned.  I could tailor.   My brothers upholstered.  That was a survival skill.  When the student teacher came in, I had to demonstrate some of the stitches, I still remember that.  And at graduation, they gave the number one award to Darlene Angler [ph.].  And I was like, I didn't even know they had a home ec award.  When they gave us college counseling, we were in college prep, they would call the white girls out in groups of five.  "Where are they taking the white girls?"  And we referred to them as the white girls, although we considered them our friends.  In fact, we just had a reunion, and we were like, "Well, how come the white girls don't come back?   That's not right."  You know, that's how we referred to them.  It wasn't in any derogatory sense.  It was, you know, that's, you know, almost affectionately.  "We want the white girls to come back.  Where's this one?  Where's that one?  Why didn't they come back?"  They gave those white girls college counsel.  We missed affirmative action.  If it came to Eastern [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland], they threw it in the trash.  They didn't give one of us--and we were all in the top classes.  They didn't give us college counseling.  You can see how angry I was at that school.  In some ways, I absolutely hated it, because they were so racist.  But in some ways, it was a love/hate relationship.  Because it was high school, and you know, the hormones--you know, we weren't sexually active in those days.  So, I don't mean that.  But you, it was, you know, just trying to find out who you were, you know.  You've got the Civil Rights Movement going.  You've got Motown and you're dancing in the street.  And we loved to dance.  Now, I'm a dancer.  That's when I really loved, to dance.  High school was a lot of things.  It was, it was, and my passion in high school, to be the best was to be the best dancer.  I wanted to be the best dancer on the floor.  School, it was, you know, it was--I was still, you know, just--I couldn't lower myself to go beyond, you know, the low honor roll.  But I wasn't trying to be number one, because that hadn't paid off; I hadn't gotten any rewards.  And then those, some of those teachers were just racist dogs (laughter).  And I don't know that they really were, you know.  Because we got, we had a reunion a few, you know, a few months ago, and we were all talking about our experiences.  And my one girlfriend, you know, who had been sort of a slower student, blossomed in high school, and she talked about how much she loved it.  And she did all the things, you know, the, you know, carried the garland.  I think I cut forty classes in the eleventh grade (laughter).  You know, one of the things I learned, I learned how to break in cars.  Because we went to Eastern, and they were sitting across the street.  And our guys, guys that we hung out with, you know, drove cars.  The girls didn't have cars.  So, you know, we cut class and we'd go--and I'd break in a car and we'd just sit there.  People said, "Well, what did you do?"  Somebody said, once said, "You must have done more than that."  I said, "No, we would go and break in the car" (laughter).  I was the expert in breaking in the cars.  And we'd just sit there.  We'd cut class and then go back to class, because it was an adventure (laughter).  That was an adventure in those days.  So, Eastern was a, a lot of things, but we had some really good teachers there.
Story_ID: 639212
Speaker 1: Mrs. Schamberger.
Speaker 2: She taught English, honors English.  And she was very, very, very demanding.  So we all hated her, in a love/hate way.  But people still come to me and tell me when I see people, "Oh, Mrs. Schamberger."  And I used to, it's funny; I used to think it was racist.  And I think it was just in part where I was, you know, angry.  I was an angry young woman, you know.  That was a part of where I was, and I danced my frustrations out.  But Mrs. Schamberger, I loved to write in her class.  And often I was the one that's--class was mostly white girls, and I had to laugh years later and say, "Now, why would you call Mrs. Schamberger a racist, when more often than not, when somebody wrote a moving piece, it was you, and she would let you go to the front of the class, you know, to read it."  And people still say, "Oh, I remember the piece you did on your [paternal] grandfather [Reginald Blackwell].  You made the whole class cry."  And I go, "Yeah, that was in Mrs. Schamberger's class."  But she was a great, great, great teacher.  And she really pushed you to be the very best you could be, in terms of producing that work.  She's one of my favorite teachers from that time period.  And although I remember every teacher from junior high school [Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland], I remember very few of the names from Eastern [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  I was kind of checked out.  I was dancing and just keeping my grades up.  I knew I was going to Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], you know.  We didn't know anything about affirmative action.  It went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland], it went to Douglass [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland]; it didn't come to Eastern.  None of us, you know, got some of the opportunities that the kids got who came from the black schools.  I'm like, "Wait a minute.  How did people get to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  What happened?  We're all at Morgan."  It was okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.  That's very true.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I've talked to a lot of people who feel the same way, that had they gone to a black school, they would have received counseling.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They would have received some clues as to how they would pay for college.
Speaker 2: They didn't give us any of it, intentionally called the white girls out in groups of five.  And we're in the honors classes, college prep.  They didn't call any of us.  "Where are they taking the white girls?   They're coming in for the white girls again in groups of five.  What are they doing?"  College counseling.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't get any college counseling?
Speaker 2: No, not from Eastern.  I knew I was going to Morgan.  My father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] had gone to Morgan, and his view was, "Don't get excited about going away.  I'm sending six kids to college, and the only thing we can afford is Morgan.  I went to Morgan, you all are going to Morgan."  So that's, you know, that's what we knew we were going to, "I know I'm going to Morgan.  They're letting me in."
Story_ID: 639213
Speaker 1: When you graduated, what was your--what were your ideas about a career?  What did you think you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Something different.  I was going to be great.  And I remember in high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] in the twelfth grade Mr. Currish [ph.], who became Dr. Currish, the chemistry teacher, who I think gave me the wrong grade.  I think I got Cheryl Teece's [ph.] grade of an A, and she probably got the B (laughter), because I know I didn't earn an A in chemistry.  But I remember he went around the room and he asked everybody what they wanted to be.  Some people wanted to be housewives, a lot of them wanted to be teachers, some wanted to be nurses.  And I thought, I'm not going to do that.  I'm going to be, I want to do something really different.  And when he came to me, I said, "I'm going to be a psychologist."  I didn't even know what a psychologist was, it just sounded good.  And I heard everybody, "Ooh, Cheryl's [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson] going to be a psychologist" (laughter).  Yeah, I'm going to be something; I'm going to be great.  By that time, I was in the twelfth grade and I was kind of disappointed at what I hadn't done.  You know, in the yearbook, I'm on like three pages, because I was cutting classes (laughter).  So it's like, dag, you know, you let it go by.  And you know, you were out there dancing (laughter).  So, I was, I guess I was coming back to myself.  And I was thinking, I don't care about these girls.  I'm going to be great.  One of these days, I'm going to be great.  So, that's, that's, that was how I felt.
Story_ID: 639214
Speaker 1: So, Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Morgan was awesome.
Speaker 1: Morgan State, 19--this is 1968 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I loved every single day I was at Morgan State.  Morgan--after coming from Eastern [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland], where you just felt so beat up.  And one of the testaments to how beat up I felt I was, even though I was not performing anywhere near my capabilities, I was still either in the top 5 or top 10 percent of the class.  And they had taken away from me my belief that I was smart.  And here I--you know, I'd had a stellar record.  Because, you know, the way they--you know, took it from us and gave it to the white girls.  You know, we graduated, and all--you know, the bulk of the awards go--you know, we didn't even know about them.  They didn't give us the college counseling.  Just the subtle kinds of ways that they discriminated against us.  And I was like, well, you know, I used to be smart.  And then I went back to Morgan and I reconnected with who, you know, who I am today.  I loved Morgan.  I say if I went to Morgan, if you went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you might be able to go toe to toe with me.  Because the people from Morgan are the baddest people on the face of the earth, and I mean that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That's how I honestly feel about Morgan State.
Story_ID: 639215
Speaker 1: I hate to change the subject.  But I forgot to ask you really about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What?
Speaker 1: --A couple of things.  About--well, I didn't ask you about--
Speaker 2: The Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about your impressions of the March on--You were there.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I didn't ask you about what--you know, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination.  Because I know there were riots in Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of things going on.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, maybe just, if you could just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --encapsulize those and then go and heads towards Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Going back to, you know, my relationship with the Civil Rights Movement.  You know, growing up in the '50s [1950s], you saw it on TV.  You saw the hoses.  You saw, you know, I remember when the little girls that were killed in the, you know, the bombing.  Where was that?  Birmingham [Alabama], in the church [16th Street Baptist Church]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, people in the family were involved.  You know, my sister [Camellia Blackwell Taffel] was older, and she had--they'd gone to Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] for a sit-in.  So it was, it was a part of the heartbeat of the community, the Civil Rights Movement.  It was, you know, what we talked about at home.  It was what people were doing, and it was a sense of fear, but daring.  It was the fear that you could get killed, but it was time to stand up for something that really mattered.  And people had enough nerve to stand up.  And I remember at, you know, at twelve and thirteen, knowing about the March on Washington.  I was thirteen, going to my parents [Connie McCreary Blackwell and Clarence Blackwell, Sr.].  My sister and I talked about it, and we said we wanted to go.  And I remember the looks on their faces, of, you know, worry and concern, and pride.  And they said, "Well, we need to talk about it."  And that was something I'd never seen my parents do, stop and take a moment and talk about something.  And they said, "Well, you know, the church is going, and you can, you can go."  And we went over to the church, you know, one of the churches in the neighborhood.  It wasn't our regular church.  We got on the bus and, you know, sang a lot of the songs that were, you know, "This little light of mine, I'm going to let it shine," ['This Little Light of Mine'] you know, 'Go Down Moses,' some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, what church was that--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember which church we went with, but it wasn't Israel [Israel Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  I don't believe it was our regular church.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, my sister would remember.  She remembers everything.
Speaker 1: Because I know Union Baptist [Union Baptist Church, Baltimore, Maryland] was really big in the movement.  And I don't know if they went or not.
Speaker 2: I just remember it was in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was a church in East Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland], and we walked to the place where we got on the bus.  And they brought us back home and then we walked back home.  You could walk in those days much more freely than now.  But I--you know, what I remember about the March on Washington was how integrated it was.  That even though I had seen lots of, you know, things on TV, and all the bitterness and the meanness, which was--the world out there was bad to black people, the world out there, because I had many good relationships.  When I went to the March on Washington, I felt like it's not necessarily just us against them.  There are a whole lot of white people who were there.  And it meant a lot to me to see that white people were stand--and you know, I knew about things that you saw on TV, but that was a TV existence.  In my neighborhood, the people who were talking were black people.  But to go to the March on Washington--and I remember Peter, Paul and Mary performed.  I remember, you know, I remember--I was thirteen.  I remember the sense of, you know, standing up for something that other people were standing up for.  I remember the free ice cream (laughter).  I remember just feeling like the people were so nice.  I did not hear the speech.  I didn't know he had even given one until I got back home.  But we were on the Reflection Pond.  I always look at one of those pictures, and say, "That's me right there."  Not that you could see me, because the people were all over.  But I remember being sort of--the closest we got was sort of midway the reflection pond [Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool, Washington, D.C.], with the podium and all the speakers up there.  We could barely hear, where I was.  But it didn't matter, because it was, it was just the sense of overcoming; that all these people had come together.  And whatever it felt, the energy, was that we were going to get what we came for, you know, which I later learned we were, you know, marching for the Civil Acts Right to get passed [Civil Acts Right of 1964], for the Voting Rights Act to get passed [Voting Rights Act of 1965]; all those things that I later understood.  But as a kid, I just wanted to stand up for what was right for black people; stand up against the things that I'd heard my father talk about.  My father talked about the lynchings.  You know, I have the book, 'One Hundred Years of Lynchings' [Ralph Ginzburg] and hearing my father be disappointed because [U.S.] Congress never passed an anti-lynching law.  You know, seeing him slam the paper down and saying, "All these years, all these years, and we can't get an anti-lynching law."  You know, I, you know, just hearing the things that went on at home--that the Civil Rights Movement was important; that it was important that black people, you know, not have to worry about getting lynched.  So it was time to stand up--
Speaker 1: Was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and as a thirteen year old, we stood up.
Story_ID: 639216
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Connie McCreary Blackwell and Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] friendly with the Murphys and the Mitchells, and Reverend Dobson [HistoryMaker Reverend Vernon Dobson] and some of the other activists (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we wouldn't have been, we weren't friends with them.  No, they, we weren't friends with them.
Speaker 1: But you--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We weren't friends with them. But, let me stop that. Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] taught at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  So, you know, my father knew Parren Mitchell.  We were involved--you know, I've been involved in Democratic politics since I was eight; I started leafleting when I was eight.  I'd go to the Eastside Democratic association [Eastside Democratic Organization, Baltimore, Maryland] meetings with my mother.  And you know, my father would have known them.  Did they socialize?  No, we didn't socialize with them.  You know, we knew--you know, at Morgan, Parren Mitchell was a fixture.  Everybody worked with Parren Mitchell.  The, you know, they were way up there, in terms of class.  They were way upper class.  We were middle class.  They were, they were the lauded, the gentry.  Because you got the Murphys and Mitchells--between the Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and you know, starting the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And both of them--you know, the Murphys, you know, one of them was a founding member of the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and another was the founding member of the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.].  They were, they were the lofty gentry.  We were, you know, solidly--probably middle to upper middle class.  We weren't--
Speaker 1: I think Mitchell's grandmother [sic.] really put the population in the NAACP, from what I understand.  She's the one that raised most of the membership when it first started, you know.  I can't think of her name now, but she's--
Speaker 2: Juanita [Juanita Jackson Mitchell].
Story_ID: 639217
Speaker 1: Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] passing--now, you were a senior in high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So this is April 4th (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) April 4th.
Speaker 1: Just before graduation.
Speaker 2: Just before graduation.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], June 4th [sic.].
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, did the rioting touch your street (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It sure did.  I remember the day that Martin Luther King was shot.  I remember when Kennedy was killed, too.  But when Martin Luther King was shot, I remember there was a like a moment, like a moment of shock, I suppose, I, where the sense was that for a moment time froze.  And then a moment later, people started leaving school, and then they rushed to close the doors.  And I was in school, and all my friends were out there (laughter).   So, I'm, "Oh, I'm in school."  And the kids from City [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] were parading down the--you could see them parading down--there was a median, a grassy knoll.  And the guys from City, which was the all-boys school, had already gotten out.  And my girlfriends were out, they barricaded the doors to keep us in school.  And there I was.  I don't know where, you know, I don't know where I--you know, that was just what happened at the moment.  It was like a moment of intense shock that might have lasted a few seconds, and then chaos.  Now, the fires from my neighborhood, you could look out the window, you could see the fires.  I remember the guards coming in.  But my family, it was a moment where we took a stand.  You know, there was chaos.  And I remember my brother came in with a case of pop, and--we called it soda.  And every, everybody was feeling chaotic and afraid, and everybody was glad that we'd gotten home.  And rioting was going on.  People were going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to loot, and you know, people were looting the neighborhood stores.  And my family, you know, we were all screaming.  And I remember saying, "We need to talk about this."  And my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] was looking at me and saying, "We're not going to do this.  We absolutely are not going to do this."  And it was a tough moment, because you were--you know, you were, there was a moment with all this going on, and almost a human, you know, desire to be a part of the moment.  But what we did in my family was to say what was right.  And we said, "We're not going to do this."  And we, you know, we didn't tell Michael [Michael Blackwell], who was the youngest one, you know, take the pop back.  But it was like, we're going to stay in the house.  And this was, you know, it wasn't even a sense of safety.  It was a sense of outrage, you know.  It was, it was sort of--there was, there was a social psychologist who talks about the theory of frustration and aggression, and that a people--a social psychologist whose book I read at, probably when I was at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  No, Penn came later.  But I understood it later, that you can only frustrate so much before it pops, just like a keg of dynamite.  And that's what it felt like--the keg, people had--you know, that we had had.  You know, at this point, Martin was kind of on the--you know, he wasn't all, totally cool.  Because you had Malcolm X out there; you had the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].  And, you know, black was becoming beautiful.  And there was a little confusion about, you know, what we should be doing--whether we should be pacifists or whether we should be activists, or, you know, what.  But at that moment, in my family, we decided that we were not going to loot.  We were going to stay in the house, and we were--that was not something we were going to do.  Because we, you know, it was just a moment that we knew too many people who, you know, white people who had been hurt, or people--you know, the store, the man, the storeowners that you know, we knew, who had been friends for years who were burned out.  We just said we weren't going to participate.  I was proud of my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, then Bobby Kennedy dies as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, prom night (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shot in June, yeah.  Prom night?
Speaker 2: Prom night, prom night, senior prom.  Prom night.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was like, what's this world coming to?
Story_ID: 639218
Speaker 1: It was on that tone that summer [of 1968] that you prepared to go to college?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], you said it was a great experience?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: I believe you.
Speaker 2: Like I said, if you went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you might be able to compete with me.  Now, other people might not feel it that way, but I--you know, it held me in such good stead.
Speaker 1: So, what was it about Morgan State that it was so--?
Speaker 2: They let you know that you're the baddest people on the face of the earth.  You know, it was--after coming in there and being beat down by those people at Eastern [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland], who were just taking things from you, you had these opportunities to do whatever you wanted to do.  You know, it was like my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] always said, "You can be whatever you want to be."  It was, it was renewed.  He always told me as a little girl, "Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson], you can be whatever you want to be."  And at one point I thought, and I was dumb enough to believe him, probably in high school (laughter).  And then at Morgan, it was like, yeah, you can.  And the Civil Rights Movement was still going on, you know.  I had, there were four, six of us.  Everybody went through Morgan's campus, everybody graduated but one.  And I have two sisters who came through [Camellia Blackwell Taffel and Deborah Blackwell Whittleton], and they were doing the beauty queen thing (laughter).  I always laugh, because I wore a military jacket.  I wore my head wrapped in a gele, and I was, you know, when we were marching, I was leading the march, or on the bus.  Not, you know, I was always marching.  And one of the guys who went to college with me came and said, "Cheryl, you were always our leader."  And I stopped and said, "I wasn't.  I never thought of myself as a leader.  I just thought of myself as speaking up when something didn't make sense."  Because when--something happened.  We were protesting.  And we were protesting--we marched up when Ken Gibson [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gibson] ran the--was running for mayor in Newark [New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: We got on the bus and went to help him.  And--
Speaker 1: In Newark, right.
Speaker 2: You know, we got on the bus and we went to march.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your friend Kamala [ph.] talks about doing that.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Going down, going there.
Speaker 2: Right.  So I remember we were in, we were in the auditorium, and we were having a dialogue about whatever we were protesting.  And that we had just, we had marched--it seemed to me we had marched recently to get money to build the stadium.  And they were standing there talking about burning it down.  And I stood up and said, "That's the dumbest idea I ever heard."  And I remember they kind of looked at me.  I guess that's why they called me a leader.  I just never considered myself--you know, that wasn't where I was.  I was just doing what I wanted to do, which was--I was loving school again.  I was, you know, outstanding student in the psych [psychology] department.  I had, you know, did the double senior paper.  I took the semester, go to Penn, and decided--my father said, "You don't--what you, what they have at Penn, you can get anyplace.  What they have at Morgan, you can't get anyplace.  Morgan is better for you than the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And if you went up there and did well, you could have stayed."  I came back to Morgan.  So a lot of people said, "You're a fool.  You could have graduated Ivy League."  I came back to Morgan.  And, yeah, I remember, I remember standing up and turning the tide in that room.  Like that's, "This is not happening on my watch.  You folks are crazy.  We marched to get it, and now how are you going to--?  Protest another way.  Do you--we are not burning down the stadium."  They didn't burn down the stadium (laughter).  I can't say that I--but that was me.  I was just saying whatever I wanted, I remember.
Speaker 1: Was that the RFK Stadium [Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium, Washington, D.C.]?  Was that the new one or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really don't even know what it's called--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I wasn't really into sports.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But we were, we had, we had--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: We were getting a new building going up.  I believe it was the stadium.  I could be wrong about that, but you know, they were talking about burning it down.  And then at some point--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's (unclear), um-hm.
Speaker 2: --this was around Kent State, around the time of Kent State, when--
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969] or '70 [1970].  Spring of '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: This is when all the campuses were now by this time--
Speaker 1: It was the spring of 1970.
Speaker 2: By this time the campus is--there's unrest on every campus.  And I don't remember, it was about the time.  It might have been, it might have preceded Kent State.  But Irene Pasfell [ph.] had come in, and the militants.  And I was wearing my military jacket and my gele and my sandals.  So (laughter), the militants were taking over the campus, and they were going to (laughter) barricade the doors so that we wouldn't take exams.  So I said, "I don't know about you, but I have A's coming.  You're going to move that trashcan.  I'm going in to take my exams" (laughter).  And so, you know, I was there, but that was, that was part of Morgan.  Morgan built me back up.  Morgan built me back up so that when I left there and went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], you know, I started out in psychology, and it was like a hundred people in the class, five blacks.  And they said this is the class that separates the men from the boys, or whatever, the wheat from the chaff, or whatever it's called.  I finished number six in the stat [statistics] class, because I knew I'd come from Morgan State, and Morgan was the--had the baddest people on the face of the earth.  We couldn't be at the bottom of the class.  It was just, I could never be at the bottom.  That wasn't a place for me.  So, it was a combination.  Morgan had reaffirmed what my father had instilled in me.  But I had rebelled against it, and Morgan rekindled it in a way that was palatable.  Because I was still angry about not getting the praise, but I didn't need his praise at this point.
Speaker 1: Now, did he come to graduation at Morgan State?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was there at graduation.  But that was his theory, the only graduation--because he was--he, my father was--now, my father was an--he was an extraordinary student.  Never missed a day of work, graduated summa cum laude.  See, I didn't know he graduated--I thought he graduated magna, because I was doing what he did.  I didn't learn until like three years ago that he graduated summa.  I was like, "No, I did what Daddy did."  My sister said, "No, Daddy was summa."  I said, "Daddy was summa?  Shoot, I missed that.  I thought I was beating him" (laughter).  I thought he'd graduated magna.  He graduated summa, he beat me.  My sister said she wouldn't even take the teachers he had, because he was such a good student (laughter).
Story_ID: 639219
Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] for grad school?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Before we leave Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], who were some of the teachers and personalities that you remember that you know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was Dr. Williams [Roger K. Williams], who was head of the department in psychology.  That was a bad psychology department.  There was some awesome teachers everywhere.  And people from Morgan went to some of the best places in--for psychology.  Now, you know, you have to get past that East Coast, Ivy League thing, because really at that time, the best labs for psychology were really the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] or the midwestern schools--not the Big Ten, the midwestern schools.  Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], it was, had a good psych [psychology] program.  Ohio State was number one in the country for human factors, which I studied.  University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], they had a particular school--training, that, you know, that they were really strong in.  And the East Coast schools were strong in another type of training.  I don't remember now, but only ten people in the world knew.  But Ohio State, for what I did, was number one in the country.  And I went there because I was interested in experimental psychology.  I chose Ohio State.  Number one, Ohio State chose me.  And I wanted to get away from the East Coast.  I was really tired of the East Coast.  I wanted to see something else.
Story_ID: 639220
Speaker 1: So, what did you think of Columbus [Ohio], and Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I actually liked Columbus and Ohio State.  And had my husband [James Bryson], you know, who I met there, wanted to stay at Ohio State, I may have stayed.  But he was, he did not like Columbus.  It was, it was, he wanted, he was from Peoria [Illinois].  It was too much like, the mood was too much like Peoria, too much of a small town.  He wanted a big city, he wanted Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you all met in school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We met in school.  We met actually at a party when he was out on a date with another woman (laughter).
Speaker 1: I don't know if you want to tell this story (laughter).
Speaker 2: I--oh, when was alive--he's now deceased--I would, we would tell different stories.  I would say, "I met him at a party, and he saw me and ran across the room, fell on his knee, and said, 'Please be mine.'"  And he said, "No, that's not what's true.  We were at a party, but she had to beat her way through a bevy of women" (laughter).  I never told the truth until after he passed.  He was out on a date with another woman. I called him up the next day.  And the rest is history (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you actually called him up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: The next day?
Speaker 2: I did.  I called him up on graduate student business.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had the Black Graduate and Professional Student Caucus, which we started.
Speaker 1: Well, you had a legitimate reason to call him, right.
Speaker 2: I did.  I needed to know how to become a member.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm responsible.
Story_ID: 639221
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Special teachers or mentors?  I suppose Harvey Shulman, who was the head of the experimental psychology lab.  And I, the, what I, it--I did very, very, well at Ohio State.  And I left to go to law school, because I just decided I did not want a Ph.D. in experimental psychology.  It was, I'd chosen that for the wrong reasons.  People who were experimentalists are known as being very heavy quantitatively, and I just wanted people to, basically wanted people to know I was smart.  So, in terms of the career potentials that it held for me, they were not enticing at all.  So, Harvey Shulman was one of the ones who was my first advisor.  But when I decided to go to law school, and went to law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio]--I'm not going to remember the names.  I don't know if any--I suppose Dean Henderson [Jack Henderson] stood out.  He was one of the deans that I worked very closely with.  Oh, yeah, some of them stood out, especially in a negative way.  Many of them were racist dogs.  And in those days, we came through and those teachers would love to give us bad grades.  And I had one teacher whose name I won't mention.  But in the first year, you had these nine credit courses that you take; nine credits.  You get a nine credit C, your grade point average is messed up.  So during those days when I came through, the blacks were just beginning to get admitted into the law schools.  And we would come together in BALSA, the Black American Law School Association [sic. Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association].  And we would say, "We don't understand it.  We don't do well in contracts."  They go, "Contracts?  We don't well in real estate."  And we go, we, "No, we don't do well in estate planning."  And we realized that it wasn't us, because if we were intellectually deficient, we should all do poorly in contracts.  And then we realized it was some old white man who didn't want to see the profession integrated.  That was the link.  And so, you'd have those professors--I had one professor who actually recommended me for a teaching position at University of Virginia, UVA [Charlottesville, Virginia].  And he was--and I made law review, which is one of the highest honors you get when you're in law school.  And he told me I was one of the brightest black students he'd ever had.  And he gave me the lowest B that he could give anybody, because I was good enough to deserve a B.
Story_ID: 639222
Speaker 1: Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  And so, so you switched to--when did you switch to law?  I mean, were you in psychology (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had--
Speaker 1: --for a year before you switched or--?
Speaker 2: I was in psychology for a year, and I realized it wasn't a career path that I wanted.  And in the second year, I was looking for something else to do.  I knew I was going to get a degree, but I didn't know whether it was going to be at Ohio State or what it was going to be in.  And I considered every degree that Ohio State awarded, and I decided that law made sense, primarily, because it was three years and a big test.  And I could figure out what I wanted to do after I got a law degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was about 1972 or so?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], I decided I did not want a Ph.D. in experimental psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 1973, okay.  So, well, how did you find Ohio State law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio]?  Was it, was it, was that a good experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I want to say something before we get there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: When I left my Ph.D. program, I was the first student in the history of Ohio State's experimental psychology program who had in two years satisfied all the requirements for a master's thesis, except defending my master's thesis.  Typically, it took people five years.  That's the kind of person I was.  I needed to get out of there, and I wanted to finish.  But I couldn't, I didn't have enough time.  And I started law school and I decided to pursue the law review route as opposed to finishing up the, the master's degree, which I never finished.  And I never had one regret.  It was a good lesson in knowing when to quit (laughter) something that didn't make sense.
Story_ID: 639223
Speaker 1: Ohio State University law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio].  So, so, how, how long did it take you to finish Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, three years, three years.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I did well, you know, dealt with the races, made a lot of good friends.  Made lot of good friends.  In fact, probably one, I--and I will share this.  When we had study groups at Ohio State, and we all formed our groups, I was one of the students who would study with the white kids as well as the black kids.  Because a lot of the black kids wouldn't study with the white kids.  I mean, it was just, you know, I don't know what it was.  But at that point--and I think it was common--I think it was a common part of integrating.  We were some of the first classes to have this many blacks.  And I really did some pretty dumb things, you know, when they brought us in, you know.  They had to learn how to welcome people in, you know, what affirmative action meant or diversity meant.  You know, when we started at Ohio State, the first, the first day of school they basically said, "Oh, we have a special writing class for the black students, because we don't think you write well.  And you have to choose whether you're going to take this class or the special writing class, because black students don't write well."  And I went, "Moi?  I was honors English all the way, and no matter what I did, I wrote well.  I'm not taking that class."  And you go through the whole year with a cloud over your head, "Should I have been in the class or not?"
Speaker 1: Was that--they didn't even test your writing, they just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They just assumed.
Speaker 1: --came--assumed?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, one of the things I did when we finished was say, "This is a stigma, to have the black students walk in here and say, 'You don't write well, so you're in this class for the black, dumb black kids.'"  I said, "You need to, A, move it to the second semester, and let kids who don't write well opt to take this class.  And it shouldn't be just limited to black kids.  Let kids who don't write well take this class."  That was one of my first things, one of the things I did while I was there.  And I made law review [Ohio State Law Journal], so I was not anybody with writing problems.  And I became an editor at the law review.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were an associate editor at law review, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The first black pers- the first black woman in the history of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because before me was Judge Duncan [Robert Morton Duncan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the first black judge on the, on the circuit court [sic.].  He made law review.
Speaker 1: Is that the Duncan [Allyson Kay Duncan] from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], or the, no, from (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he's from Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Columbus, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 639224
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other personalities in school with you that we might know?
Speaker 2: That we might know?  I don't know of anybody that we might know, other than the guy who became mayor of Cleveland [Ohio].  What was his name?
Speaker 1: Kevin White [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kevin White was there; he was an undergraduate.
Speaker 1: No, Michael White [Michael R. White].
Speaker 2: Mike White was there.
Speaker 1: Michael, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was--I didn't think Kevin sounded right.  He was in undergraduate school--
Speaker 1: That was the mayor of Boston [Massachusetts] (laughter).
Speaker 2: --when I was there.  And he was extraordinary.  He you know, was like a little Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] or whatever.  He had, with that little teeny black population of Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], he became the president of the student government.  I knew he was going to have a future in politics.  Who else was there?  There were a number of blacks who really worked together to support each other.  And I will tell you.  Those of us from Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] tended to, tended to do very well at Ohio State.
Speaker 1: Were there other Morgan-ites there, I mean, other people from Morgan?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  There was a whole bunch of us who went.  There was Gail Martin [ph.], who got a Ph.D. in pharmacology.  There was Gary Hollis [ph.], who graduated with me.  And I don't know what happened to Gary.  Two or three others, and we kind of kept the community and supported each other, and held ourselves accountable to making great grades and being at the top of the classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think Julie [Julieanna Richardson] told me that there was an attorney here in town you went to high school with named Lauderdale.  Does that ring a bell?
Speaker 2: Oh, Aunt Katherine's--Katherine Lauderdale's brother.  But he was ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He may be retired now.  Is he still with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]?
Speaker 1: I don't, I have no--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Story_ID: 639225
Speaker 1: Is there any particular aspect of the law that you were focusing on when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you just, you don't really focus on an aspect of the law in law school.  You're focusing on getting out and passing the bar exam, and doing as well as you can and getting away from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Law school was a good experience, you know.  I had teachers who helped me.  Because in part, I really wanted to--I didn't want to go to Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio], because I wanted a school with more status.  And I didn't want to leave the guy I was dating [James Bryson], so I stayed at Ohio State and got married.  Never had a regret about that decision.  Got married two weeks before I started law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, so I guess the people in Ohio think Ohio State's law school is (laughter), is decent (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, they think Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] are neck and neck.
Speaker 1: Right, I know.
Speaker 2: You know, I think Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] is neck and neck with Harvard, too.  So it's a regional thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's like, "You went to Harvard?  Well, you might be as good as I am.  We'll see."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you came out in '76 [1976], I guess?
Speaker 2: No, law school, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had two years of graduate school, and three years of law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1977.  Now, okay, did, what did you do immediately after law school?
Speaker 2: Started working in a law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you get a lot of offers or--?
Speaker 2: No.  This is the story.  At Ohio State, they told us that it's considered a regional school, and people from Chicago [Illinois] generally don't hire from Ohio State.  And my view was, well, you know what?  I had one experience where I listened to people who told me people didn't hire me.  After my first year, they said, "Don't really look for a job in the law, because people don't hire first year law students."  Then half of the black students got jobs at the U.S. attorney's office, or the AG's [attorney general] office, or the state's attorney's office.  And here I was working at Gold Circle as a checkout girl.  I said, "That's the last time somebody's going to tell me not to apply because it's going to be fruitless."  So I said when I started interviewing--I said I would give every law firm in the City of Chicago the opportunity to tell me no.  So, I interviewed and interviewed and interviewed.  And as I recall, I got--no, you didn't get a lot of offers.  I don't remember how many resumes I sent out.  It seems like seventy-five to a hundred.  I got two offers.  That's all you needed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started at Friedman and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Koven [Friedman and Koven].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yep.  It doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a very fine firm.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So you were a labor law associate, it says here.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Employment and labor law associate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about what that means, in terms of--
Speaker 2: What that meant was I--well, that meant that I started at a firm that before you got hired, they said, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"  And I had to choose.  And I liked tax and I liked people, so I chose employment law, because it was more fun than sitting there reading the tax code all day.  And the people I saw who were in the tax department sat there and read all day.  And the people who were in employment law were up and about, and going to visit clients.  So I though, okay, that's what I want to do.  I want to have fun.  So, I chose employment law, which meant I represented places like the Hyatt [Hyatt Corporation]; you know, employers.  In those days it would have been, you know, that would have been a type of client that I would have represented.  And when they had issues with employees, they called on us to either defend them or help them--generally help them resolve problems with employees.  That's one thing I liked about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That you were, you helped the employer solve problems.  And generally, you know, throughout my thirty--however many years of practicing law--every employer I've ever met has wanted to solve problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because, do you think it's because they're looking forward, and say well, if this--if we have a problem now, just because I squash this one, is, it can--you know, it's going to pop up again if we don't do something to solve it, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that's one way of looking at it.  The way I think they tend to look at it is, it's cost effective to solve problems.  Therefore, we solve problems.  Because if we have people who are discriminating, then we have people who go out and sue, and we have to spend money defending it.  So, it's cost effective to troubleshoot the workplace to make sure we're minimizing the likelihood that problems will come about.
Story_ID: 639226
Speaker 1: Can you give us, us an example of a case in those early days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Here, one of the companies that I represented was a big financial--a big bank, and they had several branches.  And the, at that, in those days, the government was doing class action--initiating class action litigation, and the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] had initiated class action against a particular company.  And then they say, "We think you've discriminated across the board: race, sex; race, sex and national; race, sex, national; race, sex and national origin.  We think you've discriminated against blacks, Hispanics, and women.  And will, we want to look at your record so that we can figure out how much money we need to pay these people."  Well, what you do is, you say--first, A, you look at your records and say, "I don't think you looked at the record, records right.  Because you're looking at the applicant logs, and not everybody who came in here, you know, could even read or write," to be extreme.  "So, they couldn't have seriously been considered as an applicant.  So let's take them out, and just look at the people who could have been considered applicants."  That's the kind of thing you do.  You work with the government to say, "I understand you're saying we're discriminating.  But let's look at the records, and see whether we really are or not."  And then if you are, then you are working to make sure that whatever discriminatory practices that you have in place--the client has in place--you're working to eliminate those.  So, I had a case like that that went on for, I don't know, twelve years.  It was a big case, at least twelve years.
Speaker 1: The same case?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How was it resolve, resolved?  I mean how was it--?
Speaker 2: There were some programmatic things that the company finally had to do.  You know, it had to do train- had to train the workforce.  It had to train supervisors, you know, about avoiding discrimination.  It had to put in some programs that would educate people, you know, pay for the programs that had to pay for particular educational opportunities.  I don't know whether there was a back pay award.  We might have given some people back pay who should have been promoted, but weren't.  But a lot of the monies went into programmatic things to help people in the work, in the workplace.
Story_ID: 639227
Speaker 1: I've heard it said that 80 percent of people involved in racial discrimination don't know what they're doing.  I mean, they don't even know they're, that's what they're doing.  They wouldn't disagree that that's what they're doing, I mean, honestly disagree with it until they're shown what they're actually doing.  Did you--does that make any sense to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, it does.  Because a lot of times people use tests that, you know, somebody--they bought a company, they're using a test.  They keep using the test, and people get screened out.  It wasn't that they were trying to get rid of blacks or Hispanics, or; they just didn't know that you needed to validate the test.  And you come along and say, "Well, you can't just pick up somebody's test and use it."  "No, I can't?  It was cheap to do it this way, and it costs money to validate it.  Well, we didn't have time to do that."  So, you find some.  But, you know, then you find some situations where, you know, there are some bad eggs.  And you let management know that, "You got a choice.  You got some bad eggs, you either have to convince them that they need to, you know, get some religion and change, or you're going to pay money to defend them."  And money speaks, money talks.  So, I think today most employers in America understand the money aspects of discrimination, and would rather not spend money that way.  So, they work to make sure the workplace works better, and is, you know, at least pretends to be non-discriminatory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One area of life where it doesn't seem--especially in Chicago [Illinois], it doesn't seem, unless it's changed since I left.  They don't seem to get it.  And that's what City of Chicago, with police brutality suits.  The same people seem to cause the same problems year after year--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and cost the city millions of dollars in lawsuits.  And they stay on the force [Chicago Police Department].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is this--is it because it's not their money that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Probably.  Well, you know, the, it's a little bit more complicated with--and I've worked with the city.  With, because they, these, the employees are hired pursuant to collective bargaining agreements, so they have rights under the collective bargaining agreements.  They have rights on the, under the personnel code.  So, getting rid of somebody requires process.  And they're entitled to the process, so it's a bit more complicated.  And I don't know that I really have a lot of insight into the police brutality thing, other than I'm very much opposed to it.  And I believe that they shouldn't be on the force, but there're so many protections in place that have been there for so long that it takes time for these things to work themselves out, if that says anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, everything you say is true.  I mean, it does take time.  And there're a lot of protections.  The Fraternal Order of Police and the police union that we have in Chicago is very strong.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and I've seen the process live, at the, you know, in hearings and such.  And it does take a lot of energy to get rid of somebody.  But, you know--I don't know.  But that's--it seems like if it was a corporation losing that money instead of the taxpayers, though, I think it would be solved a lot--
Speaker 2: That's the difference between government--
Speaker 1: --quicker (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and the private sector.  The private sector is profit driven, and government is power driven.  That's one reason why I went back to the private sector.
Story_ID: 639228
Speaker 1: You went from Friedman and Koven [Chicago, Illinois] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --Katten Muchin.
Speaker 2: Katten Muchin, yes.
Speaker 1: And Zavis?  Is it Zavis?
Speaker 2: Katten Muchin and Zavis.
Speaker 1: Zavis, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now it's just Katten Muchin [Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois] I think, I don't know.  Firms change names all the time now, or frequently (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know Julie, I know Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] was speculating that they were, they had somehow come from Kirkland and Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] or something, that group?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  It wasn't--?  That's not true?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were, they were brilliant lawyers and businessmen who came from, many of them came from a small tax firm.  And Shelly Reinsdorf--is it Shelly Reinsdorf?  No.  What's Reinsdorf's first name, of the, who owns White Sox [Chicago White Sox]?
Speaker 1: Oh, Jerry.
Speaker 2: Jerry Reinsdorf.  He used to practice law with them.  And they got a big client (laughter).  They were the lawyers for the White Sox, the Bulls [Chicago Bulls], and whatever else they owned, real estate holdings.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were with them until, from '80 [1980] to '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: And that's where I became the first African American woman to make partner coming up through the ranks at a major law firm in the greater Chicago area, one of the early ones in the country.
Speaker 1: Now, that is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm still there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: High attrition rate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, what kind of cases did you work on there at a--?
Speaker 2: Employment law cases (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --The whole time, union organizing, all aspects of managing employees.  Did some benefits work, did some health care work.
Story_ID: 639229
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] to '89 [1989]--because this is during the tail end of the, this is the tail end of the Harold Washington administration.  And I guess--[HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were the deputy corporation counsel for the City of Chicago law department [City of Chicago Department of Law].
Speaker 2: Right, one of the deputies--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --responsible for labor, labor relations then, the union work.
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Renegotiating first, the first contracts for the--I think they were the first contracts.  Were they the first contracts?  I came in because the city--yeah, they were the first contracts for--I think they were the first contracts.  I came in to manage the collective bargaining process.  Harold Washington had, you know, endorsed the law that allowed governmental employees to unionize.  So all of a sudden you've got all these unionized employees, and you have to manage collective bargaining agreements and manage unfair labor practices and handle arbitrations, those kinds of things; help solve problems with the workers.  And that's what I did.  I led that group, I was the deputy.  That light seems brighter than it was before.
Speaker 1: Oh, is, it's too much heat, or what?
Speaker 2: No, it just seems, it didn't seem that bright before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's probably the same brightness, I guess.
Speaker 2: Maybe it's just that it's darker out there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's probably it.  That's probably it.  Okay, so what was that experience like, working in government?
Speaker 2: Fascinating.  It was, it was just the drumbeat of power in a positive way, as in the power of being part of an administration that had a vision for, you know, a new Chicago [Illinois]; the power of, you know, being there.  I don't remember--'86 [1986]?  Was that the second term, when I went in?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1983] was the first one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his second term actually started in '87 [1987].  But you know, he ran in eighty--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I guess '86 [1986], yeah.  Well, no, no.
Speaker 2: I started in July.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It would have been--
Speaker 1: He started running in '86 [1986] for the election in '87 [1987].  He won the '87 [1987] election--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he was only in office a few months.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what happened, yeah.  So, I guess he won the election in April or something.
Speaker 2: I was only there one year under Harold?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I went in in June of '86 [1986], okay.
Speaker 1: That would have been almost--
Speaker 2: A year and a half then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --under him.  And the rest of the time under, under Eugene Sawyer.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was night and day.
Speaker 1: What was the difference?
Speaker 2: It felt that the things I did--I drafted the executive order that gave protection for AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] victims.  The, I felt that I was a part of an administration that had created and energized people who were thinking big.  And with Sawyer, maybe it was a letdown over the fight between--not the fight--over Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans] and Sawyer.
Speaker 1: The secession [sic.] of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Succession--
Speaker 2: But Sawyer was never--Sawyer was a regular, he was a regular Democrat.  He wasn't a reform Democrat.  So, you felt like you were part of the administration where somebody else was running it.  No disrespect--
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to his memory, but he wasn't a Harold Washington.  He had, he was; he'd been there.  He was a regular Democrat.  That says it all.  Regular Democrats hang out with regular Democrats.  When Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] died, more, he got a greater plurality, as I recall, from white voters than he did from black voters.  He was a regular Democrat.
Speaker 1: What was--
Speaker 2: They did what they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --and that's important.  Because they didn't let race stand in their way like they did, you know, when Harold Washington was the nominee.  And then all of a sudden, we had a Bernie Epton [Bernard Epton].
Story_ID: 639230
Speaker 1: We were talking about the differences between the Harold Washington administration and the [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer administration.  Eugene Sawyer took over after Harold Washington died unexpectedly--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, in office.  And what a tremendous letdown it was for a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and what was it about the Washington administration that excited people, you think?  Or excited you?
Speaker 2: Harold Washington reached out for the best and the brightest.  He was a man of ideas.  And many ideas he started, Daley [Richard M. Daley] continued with, from what I could see.  Under Harold Washington, my view is that some of his policies saved the city.  We were in the middle of white flight, and he put in a residency requirement, requiring city workers to stay in the city.  That's huge.  On the East Coast, Baltimore [Maryland] lost its tax base because so many governmental workers moved to the suburbs, where you do pay your taxes?  I used to enforce it, my people did, the residency requirement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's--that is--
Speaker 2: He was--he I think he had a, I think he was a great man, a great leader.  He was charismatic.  He inspired loyalty, he was bright and creative, and expected the same of his people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, today we kind of see a similar excitement for President-elect Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my neighbor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I can't help thinking sometimes, that you know, he saw the Harold Washington thing unfold.  I, really, when you see--I mean, there are very few politicians that inspire the kind of excitement that Washington did, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  I think part of it is--and Obama has--but I think part of it is he is really smart, in the sense that he is--I don't know that, you know, one day he woke up and said he wanted to be president.  But he clearly wanted to be in a position to help people, and it drew him to politics.  But he's educated himself along the way.  He's read Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], he's read Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].  I'm sure he studied Harold Washington, because he's got David Axelrod.  And his playbook is a, is Harold Washington revised.
Speaker 1: On a national scale, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 639231
Speaker 1: So, you were there until 1989.  Now this is eight--so did you leave before Daley [Richard M. Daley] was elected, or as Daley was being elected (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About the time that Daley--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I only went in on a temporary basis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't intend to make a--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't intend to make a career move.  I liked the gov- at that point, I liked the product, the product--the profit motivation, as opposed to what to me was power motivation.  So many things I saw in government, to me, were about keeping the balance of power.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--now, you went to another firm, then from what I understand, from what I have here, that you went to Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '89 [1989], okay.
Story_ID: 639232
Speaker 1: Let's I guess go back to Katten Muchin and Zavis [Katten Muchin and Zavis; Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What it was like at a law firm?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  What else was significant about Kachen--Katten and Muchin and Davis [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Katten Muchin.
Speaker 1: Katten Muchin and Davis, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was--it was the--you know, before I went to the city, I'd had six years--what was it?  Seventy-seven [1977], '78 [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980]?  How many years?  I finished law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio] in '77 [1977], and I went to the city in '86 [1986], I think.  And during that time, I'd spent all my time in a law firm.  I was married, had had two kids [Bradley Bryson and Blake Bryson].  And this was a time when blacks were just beginning to join law firms.  And when I first started, the pattern was for the firms to hire blacks--some women--but I'm talking about blacks now, African Americans--hire us, not give us work, and fire us at the end of the year, and say they didn't, that our hours were low.  And it was not a pretty sight, because many people came and left, in short order.  It was not a welcoming environment; the law firm world was not.  People say it's still not.  The percentages of African Americans in law firms is relatively low.  So, it was a, it was a, it was a tough environment where you--you know, for me, I was always the only one, the first and the only.  And I--there was no comfort in that.  But we had created (background noise) sort of a network throughout the city, so that many of us at the firms knew each other, and we would call each other up.  We were still dropping like flies, but it worked for me, because there were things I liked about practicing law--I'm entrepreneurial.  And I liked even--I liked working with the partners to develop the work that I did for myself, and I think it was my entrepreneurial skills.  Of course, you're a good lawyer.  Everybody's a good lawyer, but can you survive if you're, you know, just being a good lawyer?  It was my entrepreneurial skills that allowed me to work with other partners and do what they call bring in business.  So, and it was a tough time.  Women, there were very few women.  And a lot of women who--they didn't--there was a belief that women couldn't have kids and practice law.  This was in the, in, you know, this was all cutting edge stuff.  In my law school graduating class, I think 15 percent of the class may have been females, and the classes ahead of me would have had fewer females.  So, the women came behind me.  I was on the cutting edge of those people who, when I came along, there were no maternity leave policies.  I helped create one.  I just took the work, went home, had the baby and kept working from home until they figured out that I needed to get paid in some way that made sense.  I suggested that I get paid by the hour.  So, I was one of the pioneers for creating a maternity leave policy.  And I, they say that I was one of the first lawyers to show that mothers could practice law.  I had to figure out how to play the game of, you know, not working like crazy and going home and taking care of your kid.  And then I was the first African American woman to rise up through the ranks in a major law firm to make partner, which is a scary experience.  Because as an associate, people give you work, so you have--you make your living by how many, how much work you do.  And then you make partner, and it's this fear that you're going to run out of work.  So, there were--a lot of people had already left the firm by the time I made partner.  And that's not to say that they made decisions, they, bad decisions.  They chose other career paths, and my choice was to, to, to go the law firm route.
Story_ID: 639233
Speaker 1: Can you walk us through how you became a partner?  I mean, the, the whole process to, of--is there a story there?
Speaker 2: I think I'm kind of telling the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The story is that when I came in, I was looking for a world that worked for me.  I was looking for a place where I could do good work, get paid, have a family.  And making partner was not necessarily my objective; that happened.  Because I was still trying to figure out what I was going to do.  I'd finished law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio], and I'd gone to law school just to get a degree, because I'd left home to get a degree.  I left graduate school [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and then I pursued law school.  And I stayed there at Katten Muchin [Katten Muchin and Zavis; Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois] because in those days, if you've already proven yourself, why go someplace and start all over, when having a baby was a very risky thing to do.  A lot of women ahead of me chose not to have kids, because they didn't see how you could have a kid, mix the kid with the career.  And I chose to have a kid and, you know, have kids, you know, with my husband [James Bryson], and have a career.  So, I think the key for me was that I had my eye on what worked for me.  What worked for me was staying at that firm until I had two kids [Bradley Bryson and Blake Bryson].  I made partner in the process.  I was not looking to make partner.  I was looking to have the family that I wanted to have.  And I was unusual, I think, because I had great rainmaking skills.  I worked, I had, I, when I was four years old, my sister [Camellia Blackwell Taffel] and I would have lemonade stands in the neighborhood [in Baltimore, Maryland].  You know, we sold paper shoes.  We made movies, sold the movies.  We were the neighborhood entrepreneurs.  My entrepreneurial side was still there, and it came out in my ability to work with lawyers to create work, you know, create opportunities to add value for clients.  And that's what led me to make partner, the fact that it made sense for me in terms of where I was with my family, and be--I was good at practicing law, but I was good at helping to generate business, helping to find the ways we could add value to clients.  And I felt that I would leave at some point, but it didn't make sense to leave until I made partner, and I did that.  And then I went--and then I (unclear) shortly after I made partner, I took a leave of absence from the law firm and went to work in the Harold Washington administration.
Story_ID: 639234
Speaker 1: Despite your ability as a rainmaker and bring- the ability to draw business to the firm [Katten Muchin and Zavis; Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois], was there any opposition to you becoming partner?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).  When--it used to be painful.  It isn't anymore.  The firm used to say, "We don't have surprises.  Everybody knows whether they're going to be made partner."  And the drill was, they tell you in--I want to make sure I have that right.  They tell you in August, because they didn't want any drama like telling people at the last minute that they wouldn't make it.  And they told me in August that, you know, I was a shoo in.  I had had a lot of success at the firm.  The head of my practice group had gotten sick.  And I basically, you know, was, you know, he was advising me from home.  But on a day to day, I had a lot of responsibility for running the department, and I believed I was a shoo in.  And then the day before that, you know, I was supposed to make partner, I got a call at 3:30 in the afternoon.  And they say, "Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson], there's been some confusion."  I said, "What do you mean?  What are you talking about?"  They said, "You think you're up for partner."  And I'm like, "What are you talking about I think I'm up for partner?"  "But you're not."  Because there was this stigma about being passed over.  If you, in those days if you were passed over, that meant you had to leave the firm.  And I'm sitting there, 3:30.  And the two partners said to me, "Yeah, you think you're up for partner, but you're not."  I'm like, "What do you mean, I think I'm up?  They told me in August I've passed all the steps."  And they said, "Well, no, there's a problem."  I said, "A problem?  What is the problem?"  And they went through this garbage, you know.  Basically what had happened was they had reached out to another African American that they wanted to bring in laterally, as in you didn't come up through the ranks; you want to come in this way.  And one of the huge rainmakers felt that we needed a political presence in Springfield [Illinois].  So, we needed to get an African American, whom I will not name, to come in as a partner.  And Harold Washington was in office, we needed to have a, you know, a more high, more highly visible African American to help us get some of the governmental business.  And here I was coming up through the ranks, I could wait.  That's basically what happened.  And they said to me, "It wouldn't look right to have two African Americans make partner at the same time.  So, you have to wait.  Now, don't think you're being passed over," because they had to rewrite the rules, "don't think you're being passed over, because you're not.  You're just not up," which is a distinction.  As to say that if you put, go up for the vote and you don't make it, you got passed over.  But your name doesn't go up, you weren't passed over.  It's crazy, but it was the distinction.  So it was, that was very, very, very riveting to me.  You know, very upsetting.  I couldn't even think straight.  You know, here, you know, I felt my dignity was on the line, you know.  How could you do this to me?  And I knew then I was going to leave the firm, you know, at some point.  It was like, "Okay, I'm going to stay here.  I'm going to have my, I'm not leaving until I have my second baby," because that's what it was all about.  I wanted to have the second baby at that firm.  And after I had my second, second son [Blake Bryson] and I got the call from the Harold Washington administration, I went into the, went into government as a deputy.
Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did make partner the next year, and I have to tell you that story.  The next year, they, you know, they gave me a big raise and said, you know, "Don't think you're being passed over.  We really appreciate you."  And the other person that they brought in didn't get voted in.  So, and it was, basically it was a power play.  The powerful partner wanted to, wanted to--I hope I didn't mention his name--wanted to bring in his person, and said Cheryl can wait.  And the other partners with whom I'd worked had supported me.  And then there was chaos, because they didn't put my name up, and people couldn't vote for me.  But they all came and told me what had happened, and apologized and told me how badly they felt that the people in power didn't put my name up.  And the next year--now, what the tradition is you're supposed to sit in the office and wait for them to come and tell you congratulations.  The next year I refused to go sit in the office.  I said, "I'm going to New York.  I'll be on a train from Baltimore [Maryland] to New York."  And the partner who mentored me said, "Well, how will I tell you whether you made partner or not?"  I said, "Call my husband [James Bryson] and tell him whether I made it."  And I did.  You know, in those days, that was a big deal.  Now, looking back at it, you know, it was very painful at the time.  And it was politics.  It had nothing to do with me and my work or anything, or my value.  And then I went in, went off to do what I really wanted to do.  I really wanted to work for Harold Washington, and I was happy that I, I was a part of the best and brightest who were called to serve in his administration.
Story_ID: 639235
Speaker 1: It was '89 [1989] you left, left the Washington [Harold Washington] administration and went, joined another firm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those years kind of, can be taken together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because at that point I left the Harold, the Washing- I left the Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] administration.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember whether Daley [Richard M. Daley] was in or not in '89 [1989].  I don't, I don't remember whether--
Speaker 1: No, I think he was in.
Speaker 2: No, yes he was.
Speaker 1: Was he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because they started changing the people--oh no, that was later.  I was doing work for some of the clients.  But then when I left the government, my, the question was did I want to--what did I want to do?  Did I want to go teach at a law school?  Or did I want to fly jets?  I wanted to be, I wanted to be a rainmaker.  That's always what I wanted to do from the day I first walked in.  I wanted to, wanted to bring in business.  I wanted to serve clients in a way that made them want me to service them and pay for the work that I did for them.  That's what I wanted to do in a way--I wanted to contribute that way.  That was a burning desire for me.  And I left the Washington administration and decided that's what I was going to do.  And that's when I started moving around through the various firms.  So, the story isn't in each firm.  The story is what did I learn at those stages?  Because what happened was I was a genius at bringing in business.  I had learned, I'd honed that skill when I worked in the firm and they were letting other people go, because they didn't have work.  Well, I created my own work.  I'd meet the client, figure out what the client needed, serve the client, introduce the client to other people.  The partner was taking care of the client, client was happy, and the partner was making money off the legal bills that I was helping to generate.  And I did this repeatedly, all the time, you know, repeatedly for a number of partners that I had relationships with.  And then I decided to do it for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I left the city, I began building a practice, and I was a genius at it.  I started out at Bell Boyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP], and at the end of the first year, I was in the top 15 percent of the people who bring in business.  That's extraordinary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know how to get paid, though.  I had to learn.  One of the reasons I moved around to firms, was I would go and bring in business, and then I wouldn't get paid.  I mean, they would underpay me.  And I'd go, "Well, I'm going to leave and take my business and go someplace else."  And I did that at Bell Boyd.  And then a friend hired me over at Rivkin Radler [Rivkin Radler LLP], and I brought in enough business that they wanted me to be an equity partner.  I'm like, I don't want to be an equity partner.  I want to be on a contract.  This is working for me.  I've got enough business, I'm going to make a lot of money.  I'm going to make less money as an, as an equity partner and owner; there's a lot of status in that.  And when my friend Irv [ph.] said, "Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson], I want you, you know, I want you to fill out the paperwork to be an equity partner," I didn't do it.  He came and he said, "You didn't do the paperwork."  I said, "I don't want to be an equity partner."  I said, "I want to know how much I'm getting paid."  And Irv put my name up, and I became an equity partner.  And then I moved to, I was still underpaid, and then I moved to Holleb and Coff [Chicago, Illinois], which is a firm that doesn't exist now.  And that's when I learned how to get paid.  Because I demanded, I demand--I learned.  A lot of women are underpaid, and a lot of African American men and Hispanic men.  I just saw in an article that despite the fact that--you know, if you take equally educated African American men and Hispanic men, the white men make more.  You know, that doesn't surprise you.  But I was always the top rainmaker, and then I got to the point where I figured out how to get paid.  I had enough business.  I could, you know, go move my practice to any place in the city.  And I told the firm very nicely that if I didn't get paid, I was leaving and taking all my people.   And then I made it clear that I wasn't interested in negotiating.  I'd already figured out what I was entitled to, and either they were going to pay me or they weren't.  And they paid me.  And I bought a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], paid cash for it, and took all of my family to Europe on a, on a cruise and paid cash.  So, I got a nice little bonus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is like 1999 or so?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would have been, yeah, that would have been around '97 [1997].  And then we went over to where I am now.
Story_ID: 639236
Speaker 1: I'm not clear here.  Where, where, where are we now?
Speaker 2: I've gone through, I've taken us through Bell Boyd and Lloyd [Bell Boyd and Lloyd LLP; K and L Gates LLP].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was there for two years I think.  Then I went to Rivkin Radler [Rivkin Radler LLP], I was there from '92 [1992] to '95 [1995].  Then I went to Holleb and Coff [Chicago, Illinois], and then a bunch of people decided to leave Holleb and Coff and join my current firm.  And they asked me to join them, because I had a substantial book of business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So you're at Duane Morris [Duane Morris, LLP].
Speaker 2: And then I went on over to Duane Morris.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is where I still am.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And I've had a lot of success since I've been there; a lot of success, a lot of drama, lot of change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Drama in what sense (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Drama in that I got sick at the height of my game.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I got sick.
Story_ID: 639237
Speaker 1: Now, this is a terrible period of life here in your life, and it would be in anybody's life, but just--a lot of people who were close and dear to you passed away around the same time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, well, tell us about it.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, a few things were going on at the same time.  The marketplace was changing.  I was still, you know, determined to--you know, in a law firm, in, to some extent you get judged by how much business you bring in.  And I was still Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson], who always had to be at the head of the class, and I was one of the top rainmakers.  And I don't know if there's a woman in the city today who's generated as much business as I generated, African American.  I was the first African American to make partner.  I was the first to head a--in a, in a, the greater Chicago [Illinois] area at the least--I was the first to head a practice group, and I did that at Rivkin Radler [Rivkin Radler LLP].  I became the head of the labor and employment practice group.  And then at--I was the first to build a very significant book of business in a major law firm.  And then I was the first to sit on a management committee.  So, I helped run the firm for a while.  And then I got sick.  My husband [James Bryson] got, was diagnosed with cancer in, I don't even remember the year.  Some of this stuff I don't remember.  Ninety-nine [1999], no, '98 [1998].  He was diagnosed in '98 [1998], and he died in 2000.  He lived roughly two and a half years, right.  And I was still, I never missed one--I missed only one of his doctor's appointments.  I went to all of his doctor's appointments with him.  The one that I couldn't make, his brother came up and went with him.  He had colon cancer.  And we had two kids, and we'd been, we were married for twenty-seven years--twenty-five years, together for twenty-seven.  It wasn't perfect, but it was a very good marriage.  We loved each other, and we were very supportive of one another.  It was, it was great; I loved being married.  I actually loved being married and having a family of four.  I loved being married, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was involved in real estate, I think?  Or was it, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  He has a Ph.D. in physical chemistry.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He was a, he, at one point he and his co-coach had the longest winning streak for coaches, Little League coaches in the Hyde Park league [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were the nice coaches, who let every kid play, as opposed to some of the competitive coaches who didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know that story--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a scientist over at Inland Steel [Inland Steel Company].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was fifty-three when he passed.  Then less than a year later, I lost my older son [Bradley Bryson] in a car accident.  And then it was just (makes sound).  Between 2000 and 2003 I lost my husband, my older son, one of my dearest friends, a brother-in-law, a first cousin, my father-in-law, and my mother [Connie McCreary Wilson].  And my remaining son [Blake Bryson] lost all the close--well, role, male role models in his life--his father, his brother, and his grandfather.  And he was very close to his grandfather, so it was, it was devastating.
Story_ID: 639238
Speaker 1: Do you think that that had something to do with your physical sickness?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have any doubt but that it did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was--and I was one of those kind who just kept going, just kept going, you know, managing the business, keeping everything going.  And then I remember days when I couldn't turn my head, because all the stress was in my back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what illness were you diagnosed with?
Speaker 2: Well, I have several conditions, all muscular, musculoskeletal conditions.  I have scoliosis, spondylolisthesis, stenosis, and degenerated discs, all in the lower back.  They come together at a small area between S1 and L5.  And the, two of the conditions are considered congenital deformities, and the other are considered degenerative conditions.  So, doctors want to give you surgery and put you on pills.  And basically, I went, I embarked on a journey.  I was up at the rehab institute in Washington [D.C.], a renowned institution, which I will not name, that basically saw me and told me after several years of my going back, that if I didn't have surgery I was headed for the undesirable fate of being committed to a scooter and shriveled up, like that.  And I told them I didn't believe them.  And I didn't believe them because I was trying to figure out how I'd gotten sick.  And what I realized was each time I had a flare up and had to go and get a steroid shot to control the pain, was when my husband [James Bryson] died, my son [Bradley Bryson] died, all related to the deaths; all you have to do is chart it.  This happened--I had to get a shot--this happened--I went in and showed one of my doctors and said, "Look, this has got to have an emotional component."  In those days, which wasn't that long ago, they said, "There's nothing we can do about that.  You know, we know that a lot of people tell us that, but right now what we can do is tell you you need surgery."  And I didn't believe him.  Because why would I get surgery if I've had, you know, traumatic events that triggered these kinds of painful conditions?  So, I thought, I'll tackle this on my own now.  We had midwives in my mother's [Connie McCreary Blackwell] line.  And I grew up in a home where if something was wrong, we tried to figure it out.  And we're the kind who would, you know, who would turn to herbs, who would turn to exercise, who would--you know.  And me, I did everything under the sun.  So, it wasn't that extraordinary for me to tell these doctors that they weren't going to operate on my back with some very risky surgery.
Story_ID: 639239
Speaker 1: I'd been dealing with back problems since I was thirty-six.  I had just managed them, but now it was totally out of control.  And I thought it was because of all the trauma; that I just hadn't, you know, trying to manage a practice.  And it was at this time my practice was at its, you know, its height, which was, you know, very significant, by law firm terms.  In one year at that point I might have been number five, you know, in the top 5 percent of the business generators, or at the lowest in the top 15 percent of the business generated.  I was, I competed against myself.  I forced myself to make numbers because I liked it.  I liked the thrill of being a rainmaker.  I liked keeping clients happy.  I liked servicing clients.  I liked thinking through what you needed to do to help the clients.  And it was, it was invigorating at that point.  But I realized that I was not listening to my body.  Intellectually, I liked it, and it was, it was intoxicating, you know, just to be able to make it happen, and be able to figure out people's problems and help them solve them.  And, you get paid in the process.  It couldn't get any better than that.  And then you have all these people working for you, you know.  At one point there were a lot of people--you know, lawyers are often leveraged, as they say, one to one.  A partner has one person working for him or her.  And I had a lot, a lot more than that.  I think at one point it was either--clearly five.  Maybe at some point it was, you know, part of three other people, and that would have taken it to eight.  I don't keep track of the numbers now.  But I enjoyed it, I loved it.  But I learned when I was sick that I loved it intellectually, but my body didn't like it.  And I learned that my body--my brain would tell me I could do it, and my body would beg me to stop, and I ignored it.  And I practiced for two years laying on the floor here at this firm, Duane Morris [Duane Morris, LLP], before I finally said, "You know what?  You need to figure this out, because this is not healthy."  And then I took a whole different turn.  You know, I had gone to see the doctor, and the doctor--I'd gotten another doctor, who said basically, "With your conditions, I don't see how you can continue in a stressful occupation like practicing law.  You know, I think you're disabled."  And I said basically, "That's between me and God, and God will tell me when I'm disabled" (laughter).  Now, I'm partially disabled.  You see I look healthy, but that's because I exercise every single day of my life, even on a short day, which this morning was.  Because I had a busy morning, but I still did twenty minutes of yoga and I rolled on my foam roller.  Yesterday I did, I did forty-five minutes, and I did time on the, on the elliptical machine.  There are some days when I may walk four or five miles.  But I am, I do something every single day.  There's not a day that goes by that I don't exercise.  Because I don't believe the doctors completely know what my condition is.  But I have a condition where my muscles--your muscles tighten up when they, your body needs to be protected, and then they release.  And my muscles don't release easily, so I've had to learn that I have to do things to make--and when your muscles tighten up like that, that causes pain.  That's a lot of pain.  And I've had to learn to do what it takes to make my muscles release.  Part of it is I have to manage the stress.  So the stress of like trying a case, my muscles tighten up, and it's very painful.  I don't do that anymore. I withdrew from the trial bar.  The hardest part of it was to--that I had to change my identity, you know, from being the hard driving, you know, Miss Rainmaker to now a person who still contributes to the firm, but works part time.  But I have learned to listen to my body.  I've learned to listen to my body, and I love it when I can listen to my body and say, "You can't do that."  You know, like this morning I knew that--you know, I couldn't tell from the sheet whether I was--you know, you wanted all this stuff in advance.  And I thought, oh, gee, I could do this.  And I said, "Stop.  You're doing too much.  You will be so stressed out if you try to do all that."  And I stopped.  Or, you know, I, I know now how to manage myself.
Story_ID: 639240
Speaker 1: Tell us about Jamaica, and what significance it has in terms of playing a part in your healing process.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I, I would say God sent me to Jamaica when I was really sick.  I call it when I was sick.  At the, after my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] died, one day I could not, I literally could not get out of bed.  I couldn't turn my head.  I couldn't do this (gesture).  I couldn't walk across my living room floor.  I couldn't walk a half a block.  I had to stand up to eat, because sitting down and chewing was, at, literally caused pain in my calf.  And standing up to eat and chew caused less pain, but it felt like somebody put a red hot poker in my calf.  And the doctors that I was seeing were at a loss, other than surgery, for what it was going to take me to heal.  And I made up my mind that I was going to heal, and I was going to do everything under the sun.  I went to one doctor after one institution told me that I was not going to heal without this radical surgery that does not have a track record for helping anybody.  I went to one doctor who said basically, "I don't need your money.  I'm not sure that's, the surgery that's being recommended is--on a scale of one to ten, it's an eight.  It's a very complicated surgery.  The other surgeons you've talked to, I don't think they have the right idea.  Now, if you've been--."  I went to five surgeons, and I got four different opinions.  That's scary.  "I don't think they have the right idea.  This is what I would do.  But I don't need your money.  I don't think you should have surgery.  I think you should try everything under the sun.  And then if you don't get better, you should come back to me."  And then I embarked on this journey to try everything under the sun before I went back to him to see whether I needed surgery.  So, I tried a number of things in the beginning.  I went to a chiropractor.  I did massage therapy, which helped.  But I got to a certain point where I just couldn't--on the pain scale of one to ten, I couldn't consistently get below a four.  And then my son [Blake Bryson] graduated from high school.  And I had always said that when he graduated from high school, the family of four was going to go to Ghana.  Well, we were now a family of two.  My husband [James Bryson] was gone, and my older son [Bradley Bryson] had died in a car accident.  And my son was graduating, and I had everything lined up for us to go to Ghana.  And then one lofty, highly regarded medical institution, another one in the Chicago [Illinois] area, made a mistake on my travel shots and we couldn't go.  We found out on a Monday--Tuesday.  Or was it Monday?  It was a Monday; that we could not leave for Ghana for this trip I had planned for a, his lifetime, and had paid for.  Everything was already done, and we couldn't go because we were missing one of the, a couple of the key shots.  So, aside from making that institution pay for the vacation that I did take, after I wrote them a few letters, my son wanted to go to Jamaica.  I didn't want to go to Jamaica.  I didn't like Jamaica.  And his view was "Oh, Mom, this is wonderful.  I didn't want to go to Africa anyway.  You know, anyplace we have to take that many shots has to be scary.  I'll go to Jamaica, you stay home."  And I said, "Okay.  You have friends who live in Jamaica.  You can go to Jamaica, but I'm going to Jamaica too.  And I'll stay with my friends in Jamaica, and you stay with yours, and we'll meet on the beach."  And my--through happenstance it was, it was independence weekend. Not a place available on the island.  My friends who know Jamaica were trying to find me a place.  The only place I could get in turned out to be a holistic spa.  I had no clue when I went to Jackies on the Reef [Negril, Jamaica] that I--you know, I was still riddled in pain, wondering whether I could--I had to fly first class, because I was in so much pain I couldn't go coach.  I went to Jackies on the Reef, and there I was at a holistic spa.  And when I went in, I was walking bent over like this (gesture).  That's how I walked.  And Jackie [Jackie Lewis] looked at me and said, "When you leave, you're going to be better."  And I thought, she's got to be kidding, all these doctors I've seen.  And needless to say, eight days later when I left, I was dancing, I was fluid.  When I went there, I told her I thought I was going to have trouble with the yoga classes.  And I always say God sent me to Jamaica, that it was his intent for them to mess up the shot so I could end up not going to Ghana, because I needed to go to Jamaica to heal.  And I spent a week there.  I did all this alternative stuff.  I did past life regression.  I did reiki.  I had my chakras balanced.  I had deep tissue massages.  I basically rested for five, for the eight days, because a hurricane came up and we stayed an extra day.  I stayed an extra day.  I think--I don't remember when he came back, because we, we had different flights.
Story_ID: 639241
Speaker 1: But when I came back, I was a different--that was the beginning of a different person.  I came back, and I had gotten the pain under control.  And then I began to pay attention, attention to what was making me sick.  And to my horror, I realized that practicing, some parts of practicing law were making me sick.  The stress of trying cases was, would just make my body totally, totally taut.  And I slowly--this took some time.  That trip to Jamaica was in '04 [2004], and I had to accept the fact that I really was partially disabled. That I couldn't do what I used to do.  And it wasn't a bad word to be disabled.  It meant that I had to re-envision a new life for myself; that, you know, Cheryl Bryson [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson], the hard charging, you know, lawyer who was going to come in and save the day and, you know, be the rainmaker and solve the problems--she didn't exist anymore.  You know, I had to be the Cheryl Bryson who listened to her body.  Like this morning, I had--oh, my god, this morning I had the worse cramp in my quadricep.  It was like, "Aww."  I knew what I had to do.  I had to get out my physical therapy equipment and roll that.  And I had to stop.  I've had to learn to listen to my body and honor my body.  And my body said, "Girlfriend, you got to stop.  Because there's a cramp in your leg, you know, and you've got to get rid of it, because you can't walk."  So, I--other people would pop a pill; I'd get out my rolling pin.  And I thought okay, I have to do a different routine today.  I'm not going to get on the elliptical machine.  I have to just lay here and roll, and do some yoga stretches and some abs work.  And that's what I did.  So this is--I travel with exercise equipment when I--I just came back from Egypt and Israel.  I carried my Pilates ring.  I carry my--I carry a little gym in my suitcase.  So, wherever I am--and even without the gym, I can exercise.  So, what Jamaica did to me was help me usher in this new stage of my life.  I'm still a partner in a law firm [Duane Morris, LLP]. I still practice.  I--my identity is not tied up in how much, what my numbers are.  My identity is tied up in can I make a difference?  You know, I've always wanted to make a difference, but now it's more, you know, can I make a difference, and is my body going to let me?  And you see me, I walked in today with a little heel.  Most days, I wear very comfortable shoes.  I work on my feet, but I also--I think that God allowed me to get sick so that I could heal and share my story.  I've written a book.  I have a manuscript; it's out with agents now.  And it's all about how I got sick, and how I got well, like doing what one of the doctors said, trying everything under the sun.  And trust me, I get excited about--as you can see, I get excited about what I can try next.  The next thing I'm going to try is Thai massage.  I'm going to--I figured out what was wrong with my foot.  And that, this is why I stay ahead of my doctors.  I knew that the fact that I broke my foot threw my gait off and threw the knee off, threw the hip off, threw the back off.  I can't tell you how many specialists I went to, to try to get them to understand the connection.  And earlier last week I talked to my physical therapist, and she came up with an answer that I didn't agree with.  And yesterday I said, "I really need you to listen to me.  Because I really think this is what's happening."  And when she finally listened to me, she said, "I can tell you what it is.  You've got muscle knots in your foot."  Because I have pain many times when I walk.  And I thought, yes, that's just like those muscle knots that have been in my, you know, in the piriformis, and all these names of these muscles; you know, all in my hip and my butt and my, in the groin, in my quadriceps and my knees, all over.  But I know what to do to work those out.  And once she told, once she said that, I said, "That's exactly what it is.  I need to get the, you know, I need to come back for physical therapy to get those muscle knots out of my feet, and I'll have less pain when I walk."  So, I--that is, that is, that is what, who I've become, as I have moved away from being Cheryl Bryson, driven by making numbers, to Cheryl Bryson who's driven to live a life that's, you know, focused more on making a difference in, you know, other people's lives and keeping my body strong.
Story_ID: 639242
Speaker 1: Do you wish you had started that earlier in life (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've kind of done it all my life.  I don't feel that I wish I'd started.  I don't have any regrets.  I feel like God got my attention.  I felt like it was a thunderbolt when this trip that I'd planned--I had said, "When my kids were born, when they graduate from high school, we're all going to go to Ghana."  And here, you know, the child [Blake Bryson] was eighteen, and one of the best known hospitals in the area messes up on your travel shots.  It's unheard of, you know, at least I thought.  So, I thought it was God getting my attention, saying it's time for you--you know, that's how I, that's what I believe.  He got my attention so that I could use my story to make a difference in other people's lives, which I felt made me compelled to write this book which I wrote.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the working title of the book?
Speaker 2: The working title is 'Solving the Back Pain Connection: Unlocking the Mind/Body'--'Solving the Back Pain Puzzle: Unlocking the Mind/Body Connection with Alternative and Complementary Therapies.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so you're trying to get a publisher for that, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what I did was basically--I mean, I basically talked about--I've been ahead of the industry.  When--years ago, when I was put out and told that, you know, I needed this surgery, statistically, more Americans have back pain today than fifteen years ago.  They keep looking to surgery and pills, and it's not solving the problem.  It's really understanding that--for me it's--under stress--you know, we all have our DNA.  And my DNA says under stress, it's going to go to my muscles, joints.  Somebody else's stress is going to cause a heart attack.  Somebody else is going to have a stroke.  But with this kind of DNA, I need to understand how to live.  You know, if you've, if you're inclined to have heart attacks, I hope you manage your stress, and exercise and do what you need to do.  And me, since I believe that I understand what my DNA, you know, has created the propensity, you know, for me to realize--I realize what I need to do.  And I have to manage the stress.  And if that means I have to change who I am professionally, I have done that, and am doing that.  And in sharing my story, I've helped a lot of people.  You know, people have come to me and asked me questions.  I don't, you know, profess to practice medicine.  I just profess to say I had to accept the fact that I had to have the courage to change who I was, and become somebody new.
Story_ID: 639243
Speaker 1: I notice you do a lot of volunteering.  You're on the board of the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --other institutions in the community.  Is that new?  Had you been doing that before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I've always--
Speaker 1: You've always been involved?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when the kids were growing up, the boards I was on often reflected, you know, what I was doing with the kids [Bradley Bryson and Blake Bryson].  I was always the room parent.  I was always involved in the, you know, in school, as they were going through school, and always involved in--I was always involved in politics.  I've been, I've--you know, I have a passion for politics.  I love, I've done, been pretty much everything but the candidate.  I co-chaired Cecil Partee's [Cecil A. Partee] campaign when he ran for state's attorney with the chairman of the firm Sidley and Austin [Sidley Austin LLP].  I've, you know, I'm typically on the finance committee.  I was on the finance committee for Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  That's that entrepreneurial side; I don't mind raising money.  I was on the finance committee for Senator, now President-elect Obama.  And if you go back, I've been, there've been many campaigns that I've been involved in.  I don't know that there--the political arena is a place where I have been involved.  I'm on the board of Sinai Community Institute [Chicago, Illinois], and I'm missing one of their board meetings as we sit here and speak.  And, yes, I'm very much involved on the board over at DuSable, which reaches a lot of school kids.  And I've been on many other boards, and I do a lot of mentoring.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's not a person who's ever asked to spend some time with me that I've said no to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major activity that you would do differently, if you could?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have started listening to my body a lot sooner (laughter).  That's the only thing I think I would change.  I'd still be a family of four, but that was God's decision (laughter).
Story_ID: 639244
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My passion for the African American community today is wellness.  I see us, I mean, I see--there are a lot of things that, that matter to me.  Education matters to me.  You know, it matters to me that kids understand that you have to have a dream to make a dream come true.  And when you have the dream, you have to work to make the dream come true.  Those things matter.  But my particular passion is wellness.  It saddens me to see the obesity rate in the African American community.  It saddens me to see so many people on medications.  It saddens me to see people who, you know, for maybe lack of education--and I think that has a lot to do with it, lack of education.  Don't know how to take responsibility for their lives, and eat right and exercise.  It sounds really simple, but every day we're bombarded with messages that make that very, very difficult.  So, to me, part of where we are today is one of the things that's at crisis level in this country.  When then Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] listed the five priorities, healthcare was number five.  It was always on his list of five.  We will not become a healthier America unless we learn to take responsibility for our health, and understand that fat doesn't just have to happen; that poor health doesn't have to happen; high blood pressure isn't just something that we're going to grow into.  That if we take responsibility, we can make better lives for ourselves, we make better lives for our kids.  Our kids are morbidly obese.  We have a health crisis in the community.  And if I, my--number one on my list of things I'm passionate about is health.  Because I had to--you know, I had a serious health challenge, where I didn't take the drugs, I didn't have the surgery.  I won't say I didn't.  You know, there are times when I will take an Aleve.  But I was not ready to be dependent on drugs with side effects that have record numbers of, numbers of people in the community on kidney--you know, on dialysis, because, you know, to a large extent because of the side effects of the medicine.  And, you know, suffering from, you know, all kinds of conditions--high blood pressure, osteoporosis, sleep apnea, you name it.  That if you took responsibility for your health, you can improve your vital signs.  And it's, you bring down the cost of healthcare, you have better quality of life for yourselves and for your kids.  That's what I get on the soapbox about.  That's where I want to make a difference in the next stage of my life.
Story_ID: 639245
Speaker 1: Earlier you were talking about your father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] not going to your junior high school graduation [from Clifton Park Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  What, was he, how, how did he feel about you becoming a lawyer?  Was he excited about that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You're making me cry.  He was there for my swearing in ceremony.  He was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your mother's [Connie McCreary Blackwell] still alive, right?
Speaker 2: No, they're both passed.
Speaker 1: Both passed, okay.
Speaker 2: They were both there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I didn't graduate from (crying)--I didn't go through the graduation service, ceremony at Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio], because the bar review course started like June 1st, and graduation was like June 16th [1977].  I was like, we've got a choice here, folks.  You either come to graduation or you will come to the swearing in ceremony.  And they chose to come to the swearing in ceremony.  And of course, I passed the bar in due course the first time around.  But he was there.  I never even thought about that (crying).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nice question.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And your remaining son [Blake Bryson], he's, how's he doing now?
Speaker 2: He's had a, he's had a lot of challenges, because he's lost a lot of people.  But he is now doing very, very well, and I'm very proud of him.
Speaker 1: And you still have sisters [Paula Blackwell Wilson, Camellia Blackwell Taffel and Deborah Blackwell Whittleton] and--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah.
Speaker 2: I have sisters and brothers [Clarence Blackwell, Jr. and Michael Blackwell], and all of them are alive and doing well.  Everybody, they've, I have one sister who's a Ph.D.  She's a fine artist, and an art educator.  She has a very interesting business.  She has an artist, an art exchange program where she promotes artists from Eastern Europe and has, brings artists here, takes work there.  She's had a very storied career.  She's created exhibits of our family that are, have been shown--create--were part of a traveling exhibit at Smithsonian [National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.].  We have a--she's our family historian.  And she, at the behest of Brooklyn Museum [Brooklyn, New York] in conjunction with Alex Haley, she's led photographic expeditions in Africa, and traveled extensively in conjunction with her artwork.  She owns a gallery in Savage Mill, Maryland [Savage Mill, Savage, Maryland].  I have two--three other siblings, one brother and two sisters who are with the school system.  One, two, one is an outstanding reading specialist.  Another brother who had an outstanding career, he taught special needs kids.  And at one time they, he was--he was trained on two instruments, taught his kids on, and had a marching band.  And they were an award winning marching band.  He's very musically inclined.  And then the one brother who--the one of us I said, we all went all to Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and five of us finished.  He's now in a supervisor level job for the--and I don't know what he's supervising.  He's, he, what he does, he's out in Delaware with the State of Delaware, and he has a job where he's responsible for bringing people who are so remote in their lifestyle that they're out of the service net for the state resources.  He identifies them and brings them in.  Some of these people don't have running water, and he lets them know how they can come together and create a, you know, an incorporated area so that they can get the services that the state provides.
Story_ID: 639246
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point--and you still have a lot more things to do, I would think--what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would say that in the law, I blazed a trail that people look up to and can say, "If she can do it, I can do it."  And many people feel that way, because it's still a tough road to hoe, to make partner and to be successful.  There's a huge attrition rate.  And there was, when I came along I used to look at [HistoryMaker] Demetrius Carney, and say--or I used to look at [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, now deceased, and say, "If they could do it, I can do it."  And there's a lot of value in being able to point to somebody who can say, "If she could do it, I could do it."  If she could, you know, go out and maintain her integrity, you know, and set very high goals, and accomplish, you know, some very major accomplishments that--for anybody in the law firm world.  And you know, she kept her balance.  She, you know, kept her family going until God had other things in mind.  And if she could do it, I could do it.  I think that would--in terms of the law.  But I think the other legacy is to say--the other legacy, which is my health message, is to say, "Along the way, you--in keeping your balance, you really have to make sure that you're listening to all the messages that God is sending you, so that you're open to the new directions and the new paths that open up."  That would be part of it.  And I guess I go back to what my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] always told me, which is, "You can be anybody you want to be."  And I think that--and people tell me that.  When I look at--I saw a young lady the other day, and she almost started crying.  She said, "I can't tell you how much you've meant to me."  And I said--I'd only met her a few times; I took her to lunch.  And she said, "I just look at you every single day.  Here I am trying to be a mother, I've got young kids.  And you have no idea.  I think if Cheryl Bryson [HistoryMaker Cheryl Blackwell Bryson] can do this, and do all the things that she did, I know I can do what I want to do in the law."  So, I think I've been an--I think my life is as much of an inspiration to other people as they have been to me, the people I've looked up--and sometimes you think, can I really do it?  And I, they say, "I think if he can do it, I can do it."
Story_ID: 639247
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't touched on that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I'd say the other part which has mattered to me has, along the way, touching as many lives as I can possibly can, what my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.] used to say is the greatest good for the greatest number.  Have you done--and I'm going to cry now (crying).  Have you done what you could do to help as many people as possible?  My father was a magnificent individual.  He was one of those people who, when he died, they stood in line to get into the church.  We sat there and we--he always helped so many people.  I have to just tell you this.  My father was helping the homeless before they had a name.  And we were indignant (laughter).  We'd come in the house and say, "Ma [Connie McCreary Blackwell], he's feeding those people again.  He's got those people coming to the house, and they just eat food," (laughter) you know, outside.   And my mother would say, "And what is wrong with that?"  We'd go, "Why does he have to help those people?" (Laughter) And I wrote his obituary, in collaboration with my sisters [Paula Blackwell Wilson, Camellia Blackwell Taffel and Deborah Blackwell Whittleton].  But the line I put in was that he was generous to a fault.  I wrote that in there.  And at his funeral, I knew I was wrong.  He was teaching me from the grave.  Because he always said, "The greatest good for the greatest number.  You have to help as many people as you can."  At his funeral, we stood there and we just had to shrug and say, "We have to let the program go."  People walked up and told stories we never heard about how he had helped them finish college, you know, how he had helped people do so many things, inspire them to be better than they, you ever knew.  And his ministry was a private ministry.  He just touched as many people who came into his life.  (Crying) I just want to do as much as my father did, really.
Speaker 1: Now our last question--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I hope it doesn't sound redundant.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because we're almost--but it's--we always ask this question.  It sounds like legacy, but it's a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I suppose I would like to be remembered as a person who dared to be the best that she could be at everything she ever tried, and to help people along the way, as many people as she could.
Story_ID: 639248
Speaker 1: This picture was taken on June 3, 1968, which was the night of my prom.  And it was early--no, June 4th, because he was--that was the night that Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated [sic.] out, wherever he was.  I don't know whether he was in California.  But I was with Norris Turnseed [ph.], and we were heading out to the prom, unbeknownst to us that night that, that that night Kennedy would be assassinated.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That would have been '68 [1968] or '67 [1967].  I made that dress.  I indicated earlier that my mother [Connie McCreary Blackwell] made us all learn to sew, including my brothers [Clarence Blackwell, Jr. and Michael Blackwell].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's me.  Oh, my goodness.  When was I on the cover--?  That picture, I used on the cover of the--one of the magazines.  This one--The Network Journal.  I was featured on the cover of this magazine of March 2001, as twenty-five influential black women in business.  And that photo was on the cover of this magazine.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my [maternal] uncle, Thad McClammy [Thad McClammy, Jr.] on his wedding day, with his father there.  Thad is the one in the tuxedo by the bride [Patricia Larkin McClammy].  That's his father, my grandfather [Thad McClammy, Sr.], who is in the gray suit.  Thad is now an elected state representative in Alabama.  And my grand- his father is the one I tell the story about who went to the--when he had his hat on, he went to the white hospital, and then when they took his--he looked white, other than his hair.  When they took off his hat and saw his hair, they refused to serve him at the white hospital for the white people.  Sent him away.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a recent shot from two years ago of my sister Camellia [Camellia Blackwell Taffel].  She's the fine artist and art educator.  We had gone on a vacation in Sedona, Arizona.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken in 1974.  That's a picture of me and my husband.  Well, he, I guess it was just before we got married.  We got married in '74 [1974].  We were in Chicago [Illinois] for a family reunion.
Speaker 2: His name?
Speaker 1: James--Dr. James H. Bryson [James Bryson].  He was a physical chemist.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's me on my wedding day, August 31, 1974.  That's me with my husband, my mother and my father [Clarence Blackwell, Sr.], and a young cousin, and a niece.  I had an African wedding.
Speaker 2: All right, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is a picture of me with a group of supporters around Cecil Partee [Cecil A. Partee].  And it was some activity in conjunction with his running for state's attorney for Cook County [Illinois].  I am over, I am there to his right, in the rear of his right shoulder.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is the last picture of us as a family of four.  From the left is my now deceased son, Bradley [Bradley Bryson]; me; my husband, Dr. James H. Bryson; and my remaining son, Blake Bryson.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: We were on a cruise.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That beautiful picture is of me in my favorite turquoise jumper.  I think I was in, I don't remember whether I was in the kindergarten or first grade [at Elmer A. Henderson School, Baltimore, Maryland].  But I loved that jumper.  Oh, that turned out nice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, Lord.  That is a picture of me when I was on NBC, on 'The Today Show' ['Today'], on the local segment.  Probably that's the local segment of 'The Today Show' during the--around the time of 1998, I was frequently called upon to be a comment- to be a commentator on employment law issues.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of me in, probably around 1990, featured with then Mayor Eugene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer].  I was one of his senior advisors as a deputy in the law department. It's folding.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: That is me featured on the cover of Chicago Lawyer in 2001 when I was one of three minorities who sat on the management committees at major law firms.  I was the first African American woman to do that.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.  Tell us about this.
Speaker 1: I was saluted as one of twenty-five influential black women in business by The Network Journal.  And that year would have been 2001 as well.  It was a good year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me as 100 women making a difference from, capturing a picture of me when I was on the management committee of my law firm, Duane Morris [Duane Morris LLP].  And also had a very successful practice.
