Story_ID: 177901
Speaker 1: If you could just tell us who everybody is from left to right.
Speaker 2: From left to right, okay, this is my family.  That's my parents that's--I'm seated in front on the bench.  That's my mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard] on the left and my dad [Orville Lee Ballard].  And in the back, there I am on the far left, and then my two sisters.  That's Pamela Ballard and Kathryn Ballard, my two sisters, older sisters, nine and ten years older.  And that was my brother, Orville Ballard, who is a junior actually named after dad, and he was five years older.  And that's--I guess, I--and that's 1950, so I am about, I'm ten, ten years old.
Speaker 1: What, what's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother's name is Kathryn also.  She was Kathryn Wise before she married my father and from Louisville, Kentucky.  And my dad was originally from Lexington, but he came to Louisville as a young man and they kind of met.  That's where they met, was in Louisville.
Speaker 1: And what was the occasion?
Speaker 2: This occasion was just that dad said we need to take a family portrait, so we went to the local studio that Mr. Evans ran in Louisville and then the picture was taken.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Again, that's a photo when I was in college.  I, you know, I can't recall--I think I'm about nineteen there.  And, again, I think dad decided it'd be nice to have--you're in college, it would be nice if you would go and get a--to the studio and get a photo taken.  And that's what I did.  I think I was, I know that I was, I had to be around nineteen because I think I was on the verge of thinking, verge of applying to medical school.  So that was when that one was taken.  The photo at a reception and the year was--I, I think it was 2001.  I have to check the date.  It was either 2001 or 2000.  This was--I was made an alumni fellow of the medical college which is a kind of nice thing that the alumni association does with people who've have--I guess, with connections with school over a number of years.  Faculty members, administrators sometimes, you know, board members have become what they call alumni fellows.  And it was a very, very nice reception and dinner and all of that.  So it's a picture of my wife, Eleanor Cross Ballard, and myself at the reception.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next, and that's something printed out here, yeah, okay, okay.  But 2001 is probably--it's a beautiful area.
Speaker 2: And this is [Louisville] Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky.  And this was 1956 and this was when I graduated.  I was at--I'd forgotten I--until I looked back for this particular interview, that I was editor of the high school paper.  And my picture is there with the young lady, Pauline Thomas, because we were number one and number two in the class.  I was the valedictorian and she was the salutatorian at the high school class so that was a picture taken at the high school.  It was fun.  The only reason I had this is my mom saved it for some reason (laughter).  That was a real thought so.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But that's that picture.  Very much, very nice to be part of because Dr. Jeanne Spurlock, the late Dr. Jeanne Spurlock was a very prominent African American psychiatrist and a deputy medical director of the American Psychiatric Association.  And Jeanne was always interested in history, and history particularly of black psychiatrists in American psychiatry.  So she got a number of us to contribute and to write chapters and so on.  So I coauthored a chapter in the book with Dr. Irma Bland about black psychiatrists and academia.  And this was in the nineties [1990s] that this particular book came out.  And I--at the bottom, a, a photo that was taken, I guess, of all the people who were contributing, contributors to the book so.
Speaker 1: Again, a lot of (unclear) shot.  They can--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's not my book.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) frame.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That's not my most flattering picture anyway.  I just brought it in.  But it's a picture that the American Psychiatric Association obviously has somewhere in its files 'cause Jeanne found it so.  This was an American Psychiatric Association meeting in Miami [Florida] in 1976.  Now, this was a committee that I chaired, and the committee worked out of Dr. Spurlock's office.  Dr. Spurlock is in the picture.  And what our committee was about is the--a selection advisory committee for a special minority fellowship program for minority psychiatric residents to get them more acquainted with a lot of the leadership functions in the American Psychiatric [Association].  And it's interesting because the people in that photo, you know, are--when I think of the kinds of things they did.  Now, the lady on the far left was Dr. Spurlock's secretary.  That was Beverly Harrison [ph.].  Next to her is Pedro Reyes and Pedro, a Cuban American psychiatrist, who is still very prominent in the association as a professor at one of the medical schools down in Texas and, as I recall, is department chair now.  Next to her is Dr. Anne Seiden.  And Anne, at one point, I know, is chair of the Department of Psychiatry at Cook County Hospital in Chicago [Illinois].  There's Dr. Spurlock.  And next to her is Dr. Joe, Joseph Yamamoto, the late Dr. Yamamoto, who was a very--how to put--prominent Japanese American psychiatrist based in California--I believe at the University of Southern California [later Keck School of Medicine, formerly University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California], and who did a lot of work around the issues of the internment of the Japanese during World War II.  There's myself.  I was chairing the selection advisory committee.  Next to me is Dr. Johanna Clevenger.  She was then, and she's still Dr. Clevenger.  She is--was a, is a prominent American Indian psychiatrist, Navajo background, and has continued a lot of her work in the [National] Association of American Indian Physicians, is involved, I think, more in medical education of late.  Next to her is Dr. Cervando Martinez.  As far as I know, Dr. Martinez still works in Texas.  I still think he--I'm not sure, but I still think he's based in San Antonio, Texas and he is a well-known Latino psychiatrist and Mexican American who has done a lot of work in the area of Mexican Americans and the field of psychiatry.  It was a fun committee.  It was a real kind of--we had great fun working with a fellowship, getting minority psychiatric residents involved with the program.  And for ourselves, we felt that we were--our, a cross-cultural experience ourselves.  We talked about the many kinds of issues and minority issues that affected each of us and we felt affected the mental health of various populations.
Story_ID: 177902
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to start out just by asking you to state your name and spell it for us and give us your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I am Bruce, B-R-U-C-E, Laine, L-A-I-N-E, Ballard, B-A-L-L-A-R-D, born December 19, 1939.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 19th--
Speaker 1: 2003.
Speaker 2: --2003, okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm off a day (laughter) so I've been off a day all week.  And then, I'd like to have our location.
Speaker 2: New York City [New York], you're at the Weill, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University in New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a physician.  I'm trained as a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst.  And my major position here is associate dean for student affairs and equal opportunity programs here at the medical college.
Story_ID: 177903
Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone.  Just, they're a little People magazine-ish so bear with me.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food, wow (laughter), shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Sarasota, Florida.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really.
Speaker 1: No problem.
Story_ID: 177904
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out, I'm gonna start out by asking about your mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I would like to have her name and what you know about her, you know, background.
Speaker 2: Sure, of course.  She was Kathryn Wise from Louisville, Kentucky.  Mom came from a family of nine children.  She was the second youngest of the nine.  Her own mother has an interesting history because her own mother was Isabella [ph.] Shidell [ph.].  Now the interesting thing about that history of my grandmother on that side is Isabella Shidell was supposedly the daughter of the brother of the governor of Kentucky.  If you went back into the history of the early twenties [1920s], you know, early enough that--she was basically kind of, probably reared to be a slave mistress type.  She was known as a very beautiful woman.  And her name was Shidell, even though my mother said that was really not her real name.  Her real name was something else.  I think it was Bradley, so this is an interesting kind of connection there.  Her dad was Louis [ph.] Preston Wise, but I never knew he had died before I was born.  I think he worked as a laborer in this city of Louisville.  And my mother was the second youngest of the nine kids.  She, herself, she was the only one of the nine, I think, to be trained--educated beyond on high school.  She had a teaching certificate from what was called the old Louisville Normal School [Louisville, Kentucky], she told me back then, and which trained teachers, you know, just a small school.  And--but she never worked as a teacher.  She did that because my grandmother wanted her to do that.  She really worked mainly--first as a legal secretary and ultimately, at least part-time as a secretary for my father.  She made more money doing that then teaching so.
Speaker 1: Now, are you saying your grandmother was the--was it the grandmother who was the, the--
Speaker 2: Supposedly, that's the best family legend.  It's not written down but that was what--
Speaker 1: Supposedly, okay, okay.  Do you remember, do you, did you remember seeing your grand-, did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I knew her as a toddler.  She died when I was very, very young.  I have very faint memories of her though, you know, that--but I was a really, really quite a toddler at that point.  And so, a lot of this is what you hear as you get further history.  But you asked me about mom, I can, I can talk about my family so, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother share, like a story of that youth, you know, of her growing up, you know, in this family of nine?  Did she share any, any--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, yes, yes, because she--her real--her other major talent was music.  She was an excellent pianist, an excellent classical pianist.  And she played for the church, even from the time she was a teenager, she was a church pianist, then the church organist at whatever.  It wasn't the church we went to later, but it was one of the local churches.  And at one point, she even lived in New York [New York] for a few years, and did not have the money to attend Juilliard [the Juilliard School, New York, New York] even though she was accepted, but did not have the money to attend.  But she did periodically take piano lessons from one of the Damrosch brothers that--the Damrosches in New York were--one of the Damrosches was a famous, was one of the conductors at the New York Philharmonic [New York Symphony Orchestra, New York, New York], I think--Walter Damrosch, I believe.  I think she studied piano with the brother [Frank Damrosch], so she was a musician really at heart.  So her stories were really largely centered around music, and what she did in music and playing, and the music teachers who taught here and, you know, the necessity of, you know, practicing.  All of us, three of the four of us, there were my two sisters and I all played piano.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where was she in the nine, did you say?
Speaker 2: She was the second youngest.
Speaker 1: She was the second youngest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 177905
Speaker 1: Your father [Orville Lee Ballard], can you tell me about his background and I know that--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dad was from Lexington, Kentucky--son of William--what was grandpop's name--William Henry Ballard.  My dad was Orville Lee Ballard.  He was the second of the four.  There were four kids in that family.  My uncle Will, he was another William Henry [Ballard].  Dad, dad's younger brother, Edward Hunter Ballard, and then Vivian [Ballard] was the youngest.  So those, he was the second of those four kids, grew up in Lexington, Kentucky.  Grandad was a pharmacist, had a well-known drugstore at least in that neighborhood.  It was Ballard's Pharmacy.  It was at the corner of DeWeese [Street] and Tolliver [unable to verify] in Lexington, Kentucky.  And people knew that Dr. Ballard--he was called Dr. Ballard also.  He, although I've never seen it, and but this is always what dad indicated, and I have one of my cousins who said, yes, she has seen it--is, I do believe, the first African American graduate of the Northwestern School of Pharmacy somewhere in the 1870s.
Speaker 1: Your father?
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and where was this school located, do you know?  Was it Northwestern--
Speaker 2: Northwestern [University], Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, so Chicago, so it was, so he, do you know then what happened?  He came--
Speaker 2: How he got from Lexington, Kentucky to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's, that's why it was just, right.
Speaker 2: I don't know because his family at, at various points when he was growing up, he was in Kentucky at one point.  I think granddad lived also in Jackson, Tennessee for some years.  As a young man, I think there were, there was a point where he even lived in Arkansas because he was involved with either some teaching or part of his education at Philander Smith College in [Little Rock] Arkansas, and then somehow came back to Kentucky ultimately.  But I never knew all about his migrations here, there, and everywhere.  Granddad died when I was in high school.  He was about--I had to be fifteen or sixteen, he was ninety-one.  But so I knew some things about him, but there was a lot I didn't know.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, the, the, you know, this letter that you gave, can you trace that part of the history--what the letter essentially says?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I hope I can get it accurately.  This, I didn't know about really until I was myself grown up.  And mom sent each of us copies of this letter that granddad had written to uncle Ed when I think uncle Ed asked them, what can you tell us about the history of the Ballard family?  And uncle Ed--I'm sorry, granddad wrote this letter describing this person, Bland Ballard, who I later found out through another cousin who was interested in our family history--what I think was an English judge or something like that who migrated to the states [the United States of America].  I'm not sure how he got into Kentucky.  I do know that a lot of that family of--that migrated from England was actually lost because there was a massacre by the Indians of the settlement.  So, but I guess Bland Ballard survived, but also there was a slave mistress named Flora.  That woman would have to be--I think my great-great-grandmother, if I'm tracing it correctly.  But Flora and Bland gave birth to Dowan who was grandpop's father.  And then from there, the fam line came down with part of the family--I think, settling in Kentucky, part in Ohio.  And that's what I kind of knew about granddad's sort of origin, so dad came with one of the kids.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your grandfather had become such a prominent pharmacist?  Do you know that story or even understand the role of, you know, pharmacists in that, in that time?
Speaker 2: In that era, I guess, you know, any African American sort of pharmacist would have been absolutely--I guess, rare, but he--I mean, that was the African American community of Lexington, Kentucky.  And I guess when he came back and somehow got his business started and opened his pharmacy, that's--he became known in the community.  Now, he and grandma were, were very involved in the Lexington African American community at the time.  If you want an interesting story of what my grandmother was like (laughter), she really kind of sort of oversaw in a sense, the behaviors of young people in that community (laughter), and had a kind of reputation for that.  And you did not want to encounter her disfavor, so to speak.  She watched over the young people and sort of made them behave themselves and watched whether they were in church or not and (laughter) did things like that.  So he--
Speaker 1: So she--
Speaker 2: --they were just well-known in the community right there.
Story_ID: 177906
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Orville Lee Ballard], did he share any stories about his growing up, you know, as this, yeah?
Speaker 2: Sure.  He, because they, they worked in the pharmacy, and I remember stories of his, you know, how early in the morning he would have to get up on certain days, particularly on the weekends because he would, he would have to start making the ice cream.  And I guess it was the old-fashioned way of making it then when you did the (laughter) churning by the handle and all of that, and getting everything ready.  And he used to sort of help out and do stuff in the pharmacy [Ballard's Pharmacy, Lexington, Kentucky] all the time.  So that there would be stories of that, you know, and mainly that was--I remember the house very vividly in Lexington [Kentucky], granddad's [William Henry Ballard] house, because as a little kid, what I had never seen, and what we really were intrigued with is that it had one of those sort of back stairways that seem to go down, behind, and back into the kitchen as those old-fashioned houses had back then--from the upstairs to the downstairs and that, to us, was absolutely fascinating.  It was like a secret passageway, it sort of felt like so.
Speaker 1: No problem so--
Speaker 2: Didn't think about that.
Speaker 1: --so, you, you said, you said your father remembers growing up in the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the pharmacy and getting up and, you know, making ice cream.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The ice cream.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any other stories he sort of told you about his--
Speaker 2: About growing up in Lexington?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Not that sort of flashed to mind really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, he, you know, it was--they, they were always sort of a very busy, very hardworking sort of family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you see, if you knew, my, my grandfather was the epitome of the gentleman.  I mean, I can tell you what my memories of him--what, that are just permanently embedded are when he would come for Thanksgiving.  This was after grandmother had died.  Grandmother died, I guess when I was somewhere around five or six and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --granddad used to come down and spend Thanksgiving with us.  But he was always--you always saw him in his full tweed suit with a vest, tie, you know, always, you know, dressed, watch fob, you know, and a very distinguished man.  And the, the feeling I--whatever anecdotes my dad would have told me about the family would have included that kind of thing.  Because in many ways, dad was also similar and that they were raised early, you know, strictly, and, you know, respectably, and had to be that way always in the way they were seen, behaved, (laughter), and everything in the community.
Speaker 1: Well, well, you can see in the photo of the family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, that I saw of your, you know, your family, but they--how did your father decide that he wanted to go to medical school?  Where did that--do you know?
Speaker 2: He was always interested in it.  I don't know that he could ever told me anything that said, ah ha, because not only he became a physician, Uncle Ed [Edward Hunter Ballard] became a physician, Uncle Will [William Henry Ballard, Jr.] became a pharmacist, so that they all--interestingly enough, Aunt Vivian [Ballard] became ultimately a funeral director.  But I think that was also because of the person who she married, too, who was a funeral director.  But the, the three of them all went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Uncle Will went to Howard, dad went to Howard, and Uncle Ed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How they--that ambition, I guess, well, because granddad was, was educated.  I guess, the ambition was there and probably the expectation.  Now, interestingly, dad had to work his way through Howard, largely because although it was a pharmacy, there was not a lot of money and there were several--there were the four kids and the kids were to be educated.  So dad worked on the railroads.  He was a dining car waiter and he used to describe that to me--what it was like going to school for him, both undergraduate and medical school, because the moment the spring semester was over, he would head for the railroad and start his summer as a dining car waiter, and railroaded wherever the, you know, wherever the trains went.  And he said, back then, you really made your money, of course, on your tips and things.  But that's what he had to do and that's the way he afforded and paid for most of his expenses to go to both college and medical school.
Story_ID: 177907
Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  We grew up in a--first, a, a kind of unique circumstance.  My father [Orville Lee Ballard] was a physician on the staff of a tuberculosis sanitorium [Waverly Hills Sanatorium] at Waverly Hills, Kentucky, ten miles outside of Louisville [Kentucky].  Now, to give you an accurate picture of what it was, this is Louisville.  This is, this was, this is the South.  And so, basically, you had a white hospital and a black hospital basically in terms.  There were these two separate hospital buildings.  He was on the staff of the hospital for blacks, basically, and on that staff and, ultimately, became medical director there.  And we grew up.  In those days, tuberculosis was treated in a sanitorium setting.  They took patients sort of out from the city--the, the screened-in porches with the fresh air and everything else like that.  We lived in a house behind the sanitorium.  And so, growing up, this meant that the four of us--I'm the youngest of four--kind of grew up to a degree in, in isolation.  And we played with some kids who were kind of in the surrounding area who were generally farm kids.  These were not black kids.  These are white kids.  They were--and they had farms in the area.  And we kind of knew some of those kids to run around and play with, but otherwise, we kind of grew up in a sort of isolation in a way.  And so, a lot of my memories from early on are just sort of being out in this kind of country area, and sort of playing outside and running around outside, but also looking over at the hospital and waving at the patients who kind of, in those days, some of them come and watch us grow up.  There was--some of those patients were in there a long, long time.  And some, I guess, never--and I learned later--never made it out.  But the--I just remember people looking and then sort of waving.
Speaker 1: So you were told to sort of stay away, right, from the sanit--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you weren't near it.
Speaker 1: You weren't near it?
Speaker 2: I mean, I mean, you, I mean, because they were screened-in porches, but I mean you could see, you could see the hospital there.  It wasn't, it wouldn't have been dangerous to us in any way because we're just waving at people or, you know, who were maybe fifty, you know, feet from you or (unclear), you know, more than that, actually--probably half a football field and maybe, what's maybe fifty yards or so.  You know, from the house, you'd see the hospital buildings there, maybe thirty yards, and just wave at the people.  And they would, they would watch us playing and things like that.
Speaker 1: So, so were you, is that where you grew up your whole youth, I mean, until you went--
Speaker 2: Until I wen to--well, yes, basically, I did until I went away to college.  Now, we, in terms of schooling, we went to a very tiny rural school that was a couple of miles sort of down 31W, Dixie Highway [Kentucky].  It's called Lorrell [ph.] School where we went through the eighth grade, and then we went into high school in Louisville.  And because it was a segregated sort of time in Kentucky, basically, we were bused into the black high school which was [Louisville] Central [High School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So that we all went into Central High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you going into to, to spend time at your grandfather's [William Henry Ballard] house, where was he living and, and--
Speaker 2: He was--no, granddad didn't live in Louisville.  Granddad lived in Lexington [Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Lexington, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --oh, that's right.  Okay, I'm sorry, Lexington, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, would you go and spend times there also, yes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd occasionally make visits.  I can't remember how often it was, but it wasn't all that often in those days, but we would visit periodically.  And I remember going to--that's why I remember going to granddad's house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably visited less as I was around ten or eleven because by then, grandmother was no longer alive.  And granddad used to either come, come to us more or to our Aunt Vivian [Ballard] who lived down then in Harrodsburg, Kentucky with her husband.
Story_ID: 177908
Speaker 1: --I'd like you to just take yourself back--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to the house, to your house, and I want you to describe what sights, smells and sounds, or sounds, you know, remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Of growing up?  Okay.  It was really--I mean, by standards of those days out in the country, it didn't feel suburban at all because there weren't, in the sense, suburbs quite then (laughter)--I mean of, of Louisville [Kentucky].  So that there was a bus--I mean, you could take the buses out from Louisville to the sanitorium [Waverly Hills Sanitorium, Waverly Hills, Kentucky] because people visited their families who were in there, and, and being treated with the TB [tuberculosis].  But what I remember most really is a lot of nature type sounds--I mean, in the sense of it's, it was quiet.  At night, you would hear all the buzz that you hear, you know, at night in the summer time.  Remember all summer, we always went barefoot.  I mean, it was really a kind of rural existence, is what I remember in terms of were the sight and sounds of things.  Interesting and fun at the same time, in all honestly, there was an age where I begin to, began to feel also a bit boring.  I wanted something else and that I remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what, what age, what age were you at that point? And I'm wondering even what type of, you know, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When I wanted something, began to want something else--well, I think, I was around perhaps eleven or so, or even eleven, twelve, because then--I guess maybe I was, you know, getting to be pre-teen.  But my mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard] used to always, at various points, tell us stories.  She was very musical.  We listened to music.  We played classical music.  She, and she would sometimes talk about New York [New York] and when she was in New York.  And so, I was intrigued with the notion of being in a big city, maybe going to New York at some point myself, going to be in something larger.  My older brother and I, although there were many things nice about growing up in Kentucky, felt that it would be best served if it were a national park.  It was a beautiful place to grow up in (laughter).  But sidewalks (laughter), to teenage boys, sidewalks came in awfully early (laughter).  So we want--we were looking for something different more exciting, that's all (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: That's cute, okay.
Story_ID: 177909
Speaker 1: What were you like?  Were you introspective and I mean, were you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I mean, what was happening--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --up in the brain, as what?
Speaker 2: Now, you're talking to a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, too.  So there are many views that I've had at various points in my life about this because I've been in the situation where being trained as an analyst where you explore a lot about yourself and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Basically, I was a skinny little kid who read books and played the piano is really what I was like growing up.  I was not athletic at all.  I was a very kind of an almost nerd-like little kid in certain ways.  And I, you know, I liked to read certain stuff.  I liked to, you know, I just--and, and I liked playing the piano and I tried--
Speaker 1: What did you like reading?
Speaker 2: Oh, jeez, I liked reading.  I remember, in fact, my older sister was surprised.  I was given some money for a birthday present.  I think, I think I was ten.  And I went into the city [Louisville, Kentucky] and where I went into a bookcase and I brought, and I bought a collection of Mark Twain to read '[The Adventures of] Tom Sawyer' and '[The Adventures of] Huckleberry Finn' (laughter) and stuff, so I would read that.  I remember reading just the stuff, the classic stuff we had in the house, 'Alice['s Adventures] in Wonderland,' [Lewis Carroll] and 'Through the Looking-Glass,' [Lewis Carroll] and 'Grimm's Fairy Tales' [Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm].  I think I remember reading when I was a small child.  And then when I got to be around twelve or thirteen, I became fascinated by Robert A. Heinlein who wrote very nice science fiction for children of that age.  And I remember reading things like, you know.  I--so, I guess it was really sort of what was there in the house in a way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But yours is what, was in many ways sort of an insular world if I take it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because the, the school that you attended was a very, was a small school.
Speaker 2: Tiny school.  There would be, there were six kids in my total grade, for example.  There were four grades in one room, four grades in the other room (laughter).  There was--
Speaker 1: And that was it, was it a black school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was a black school.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the teach-, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: All schools were segregated in Kentucky at that point, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the teachers, they were, you know, you have one teacher to a--
Speaker 2: There were two teachers.  One had grades ones through four.  The second teacher had grades five through eight, and she was also the school principal.  And there was a kitchen, small kitchen area where we had lunch.
Speaker 1: And what subjects did you graduate to, and did you--were you sort of the top in your class and/or classes or were you--
Speaker 2: In elementary school, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and your, and your brothers are in school with you, right--oh, no, you--
Speaker 2: Well, no, he was close to five years older.
Speaker 1: I see.  You're--even the next one, the one next to you?
Speaker 2: The next one, yeah, yeah.  There's a, there was a ten-year difference in my, my family.  It was my older sister, Pam, was born in what--1929.  Kathryn in 1930; Orville was born in thirty-five [1935].  I was born in thirty-nine [1939].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, oh, so they spread them out big time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: They also married relatively late.  My father [Orville Lee Ballard] was like in his early thirties and my mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard] late twenties when they married which was older for that era.
Story_ID: 177910
Speaker 1: Is there any comparison on the, you know, to the, to teachers for the Ballard kids to--is there any comparison going on or--
Speaker 2: Comparison for?
Speaker 1: In terms of, you know, expectations because of what your brothers had done, you know, or is it--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, my brother and my sister--well, yeah, my, my, okay.  I can say it on television or videotape.  I'll put it this way.  We were all very smart.  There was no question about that.  We were all very, very smart kids.  Dad [Orville Lee Ballard] was smart and mom [Kathryn Wise Ballard], too, and so we were that.  Actually, my older brother, who, unfortunately, passed away recently, but he was, he was actually identified in many ways as the smartest because my mother used to always talk about his high, you know, one-- and [one hundred forty-five] IQ [intelligence quotient] that he had.  He was never a student.  He never particularly liked studying stuff.  He, interestingly enough, became a lighting designer in theatrical productions--
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: --is what he became and he loved that.  And, but he, he was in a sense, he was certainly intellectual, but was a very non-traditional guy.  He was a very--he was a rebellious kid.  He really had a struggle with my parents a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And more than any, any of the four of us.  Kathryn, my--the second of my older sisters was a very high achieving lady and, you know, had that reputation throughout her education.  She ultimately was a research physiologist.  She had a doctorate [degree] ultimately in physiology.  And so she, so that we weren't--the family expectation is that we would--we're smart and hence, were to do well.  And we did.  It wasn't, it really, at that level, schooling wasn't hard for any of us.
Speaker 1: And you enjoyed it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so this what--so I'm seeing that this is all very insular.  You, do you have a sense of any of the outside world except, except through your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, no, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying--I mean, I'm just trying to get a--you know, 'cause--
Speaker 2: I know what you mean.  Oh, sure, yeah, yeah, it was all right.  I mean--
Speaker 1: --I grew up in a small town but I'm just say-, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm, yeah.  I know exactly what you mean.  Well, I mean if I could look at it as aware of worlds in many different ways.  It isn't that I was in the house all the time.  Anyway, I described that way about myself, but I still played with the local, some of the local kids who either were kids of farmers, laborers, or whatever.  They went to different schools and we're in a different world.  But I mean, as usual, in the South, you sort of played together.  So this was, you know, just, you know, this was, this was just being out, figuring out whatever you do over the hillsides and chasing through the woods and all of that.  So, I mean, I had that and was kind of in a way exposed to the world that they lived in which was not so much the bookish sort of world at all.  And, you know, that's where I, you know, I remembered at one point, you know, riding a horse bareback and things like that.  I mean (laughter), so, so that, you know, and then it was that world.  My dad and mom had, had friends, of course, who were in Louisville [Kentucky].  And, interestingly enough, because I know how you got some of the connection and got my name.  I know that Dr. Riggs [ph.], who you happen to inter-, interviewed yesterday, I saw him last night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, also in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  And my father founded the Boule in Louisville--well, along with some friends in 1939, the year I was born, so that what we also--the other people I knew in Louisville were, again, the people in the African American community of the time.  I mean, the, the school principals, the doctors, the--Frank Stanley, who is the editor of the Louisville Defender which was a black newspaper.  These were people who we also were exposed to and I was just growing up.  I mean that you just sort of see them and they'd either be at some activities and you were very aware of them.  And so, there was distinctly an outside world that was a rather sophisticated world in many ways--I mean of, certainly education-wise.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 177911
Speaker 1: Did you have any racial experiences at all?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, okay--
Speaker 2: Growing up, sure.
Speaker 1: --and, yeah, what age or where?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you did--you see, the thing is when you grow up in the South that way, you didn't and did--it's a, there's sort of crazy, and I've never really--it, it's, it's always very, very hard to understand.  I guess as a psychiatrist, I can understand why it can lead to such conflicts.  What happened is you grew up in a kind of an apartheid sort of world.  And it was an apartheid system, so you played with white kids, but you didn't go to school with that.  And so, and they were fine.  I mean, none of the kids that I played with would ever call me names and so on.  The people who would call you names and things could be strangers.  You could walk past a place and get called some name or something like that, so that sort of thing was not unusual when you grew up in the South.  And so, it was more in that form or more in--when you went to the schools, went to the high schools, you were aware that you were given books in the schools, and you knew they were the hand-me-down books.  And it was a lot of that.  It was more--for me, it was more that sense of being shut out from certain things.  That was very much the most sort of, the strongest sort of, racist sort of side of things was just that sense of being shut out.  There are always places you couldn't go to.  So you went--there was of the six parks in Louisville [Kentucky], one you could go to.  And that was the one designated for blacks.  It was--there was one high school, one public high school.  That was [Louisville] Central [High School, Louisville, Kentucky], so every black kid in the whole area went to Central.  There are some who went to a small Catholic school.  There was a black Catholic school, but it was a much smaller high school.  That was Catholic [Colored] High [School, Louisville, Kentucky], and there were some who went to Catholic High but it was very small.  Most went to Central and that was the one school that you could go to.  So this is a part to us.  Everything was segregated except for buses--and buses were not.  You did not have to sit in the back of buses, but movie theaters were.  You had your choice of three in Louisville, and they were all in, in, in the central area which was predominantly a black area.  There was the Lyric [Theater, Louisville, Kentucky], the Grand [ph.], and the [Louisville] Palace [Theater, Louisville, Kentucky].  Any other movie theater, you couldn't get into.  I mean, so that it was, it was that sort of sense more than anything--
Story_ID: 177912
Speaker 1: What church or denomination were you or your parents [Kathryn Wise Ballard and Orville Lee Ballard] or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal, and that's an interesting--you talk about my--what, what dad told me.  That was my grandfather's [William Henry Ballard] church, I guess.  And when dad moved to Louisville [Kentucky], granddad had said to him, son, now you will join AME (laughter).  And he said, of course, yes, sir.  So, that was kind of the way it was.  It was Quinn Chapel AME Church on Chestnut Street [later, West Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the black population, can you describe Louisville's black population?  And I mean, how large do you think it was and--
Speaker 2: It was never all that large, I don't think.  And, and this is in retrospect because growing up, I was not cognizant of its size, but it was always--it may not have been ten percent of the population of Louisville.  And, interestingly enough, back then, it had a somewhat different pattern of--that it's interesting to look at sort of socially and, and historically.  It had about a ten percent black population and you had either various black neighborhoods throughout the city.  It was not the kind of thing that you would see in a Chicago [Illinois] where it was the South side, you know, which is my impression.  I'm sure there are other areas, but it was the South side when I went to Chicago.  It seemed to be.  But you'd find several areas in Louisville, and then you would also find the situation where you could be on a street, and all the families on this side of the street were black.  All the families on the other side were white (laughter)--it is, so it's which side of the street you were on.  And you would find things where a street would sort of stop.  The name would change and the area (laughter), same street, but Chestnut Street became at some point River Park Drive (laughter), you know, that kind of thing.  So, it, it was--really had this kind of--it, it was throughout.  It had this sort of sporadic, you know--the, the various sort of areas which, of course, in the late fifties [1950s] had a real implication because it meant automatically that you would have to sort of integrate just about every school in the city because you couldn't draw, you couldn't draw a district and have it mainly black (laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you find that, that's what happened in Louisville?
Speaker 2: In Louisville, it's interesting.  I mean, I, I haven't been back there a lot, but something that I did notice was a--it seemed to be undergoing some degree of change where increasingly, the West side was almost following to be the South-side-of-Chicago phenomenon where, you know, it seemed that there was less the areas throughout the city and more of that.  I don't know if that's still true or not.  I really don't 'cause I haven't been back there enough to really know.
Speaker 1: Now, besides your father, who were the other pillars of the community?  They're black--I mean, you know, who are the others?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, I can tell you who they were.  Well, for us, I mean, because this is the (unclear).  They were the high school principal.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name was Atwood Wilson.  He was the high school principal, [Louisville] Central High School [Louisville, Kentucky] and, you know, very respected, well-known.  We knew the junior, the black junior high school principal, too.  That was Mr.-Perry [ph.] was one of them.  I remember him.  There was another one whose name escapes me.  Mr. [Frank] Stanley who was the editor of the "Louisville Defender".  There were other physicians.  There was Dr. Walls [ph.]; Dr. Lattimore [ph.]; Dr. [Joseph] Laine.  My father, he--I--my middle name came after Dr. Laine.  He was a physician senior to my father that had to do with my father's career.  Dr. [John] Nurse was in the same building as dad.  Dad, in addition to working at the [Waverly Hills] Sanitorium [Waverly Hills, Kentucky], also worked with some other physicians in an office in Louisville as well.  And it was Dr. Laine, Dr. Nurse, the dentist--I can't remember the dentist's name.  Ministers, I guess, were, although I didn't always know them as well, like a few, a couple of them, I do remember, you know, from I guess, social things.  Mr. Steele, Charles Steele, was the head of the local [Louisville] Urban League [Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Was there an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there in town?  You know, there are sometimes--
Speaker 2: There was, there was.  Interest-, I don't know that much about it.  Dad was active in it.  But I don't remember who the people--all the people I named were members, I'm reasonably sure, and were involved.  I can't recall who might have headed it at that point, but there was one.
Story_ID: 177913
Speaker 1: One other question--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your father [Orville Lee Ballard], was he probably, the doctor with the highest esteem, you know, or highest position in the community?  This--at the, right, 'cause he was head of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think he was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean he was also known as that.  I mean, he was, you know, he was extraordinarily well-regarded, well-respected and so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And was there, was, you know, 'cause you don't think of tuberculosis in that way anymore, you know, the sanit[oriums]--
Speaker 2: Oh, you don't, no.
Speaker 1: --I mean, you, you don't now.  I mean--
Speaker 2: You also--I mean, tuberculosis was a disease of the poor.  As a disease, this is exactly where you saw it develop, whether it was New York City [New York] or wherever, in poor areas.  You went to New York, the Lower East Side.  It was wherever there were poor people.  Dad's history in working with that disease was one where he had to almost get up on soap boxes now.  I described the hospital building which I think had a bed capacity of about maybe seventy or seventy-five, you know, that, that, where he worked then.  Earlier in his history, however, he had like, about seventeen beds to work with when he first wanted--came there and began interested in taking care of the people who had TB [tuberculosis].  And he had to just get about to get up on soap boxes and try to fight.  He worked for the county [Jefferson Country, Kentucky].  I mean, and to try and fight to get more facilities, more help, to deal with tuberculosis and African American people in Louisville [Kentucky].  And it was--there, there was a lot that needed to be done, so he had a lot to do himself and lot to do with the fact that at least there was a larger facility built ultimately.
Speaker 1: So he was responsible for that happening?
Speaker 2: (Nods, yes).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 177914
Speaker 1: You get to [Louisville] Central High [School, Louisville, Kentucky].  You're at what age at that point?
Speaker 2: I was young (laughter).  I was--
Speaker 1: Did you get moved forward?
Speaker 2: I got moved forward.  What had happened was I, I skipped first grade--the reason for that being that, remember, I said I was the youngest of four.  What happened when I went into first grade is because of my two older sisters and my older brother.  And I was a kind of pesky--I guess, curious little kid and kind of a pest in a way.  I knew how to write my name.  I knew the alphabet.  I knew all kinds of things.  And so, the teachers talked to my parents [Kathryn Wise Ballard and Orville Lee Ballard] and said they'd have to put me in the second grade because I couldn't, you know, I--they were worried about my comportment (unclear), so he couldn't, so I was put there.  So I remained at grade level from there.  So I was young when I started into high school and was--and actually when I first came into Louisville [Kentucky], I had to do that.  The rural system was through the eighth grade, and then high school out in the country.  In the city, it was a six-three-three.  It was sixth elementary; three years junior high, seventh, eighth, and ninth; and three of high school.  And in senior high, they call it tenth and eleven to twelve.  So I had to do one year of the junior high school, the ninth grade, at one of the junior highs.  And then was into Central so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at Central, this is--how large is Central?
Speaker 2: Central then was about 1,500 to 1,600 students.
Speaker 1: So it's large--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --compared to what you've come from, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah, it was really very different, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, are you at this point knowing you want to be a doctor or going to--I mean, is that--
Speaker 2: Basically, yes.  Now, I did this--if you had asked that from the time I was six or seven, I would have said, yes, I want to be a doctor.  And just like your father [Orville Lee Ballard], huh?  I get, yeah, right, and so I had--was exposed to a lot of that, and did in a sense, like a lot of little kids, because of dad, wanted to be a doctor.  Now, my brother and sisters didn't necessarily feel that way, but I did.  Now, part of that may have been hearing over and over and over again that I was the one who looked the most like him.  And "you're the spitting image of your dad, you're the spitting image of your dad", you know, kind of thing.  So that a lot of it may have been that.  But, I would, yes, when I was in high school, I was, I liked sciences.  I was intending to go, you know, pursue ultimate-, medicine ultimately.
Speaker 1: Now, were you engaged in any other activities during, you know, any extracurricular activities?  And I'm just trying to figure out what's forming you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as a young person?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school, for example?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Sure.  There were, there, there were several.  I was--well, and, and you see in the photos, the school newspaper.  I'd forgotten, I became editor of the school newspaper.  I was one of the accompanists for the chorus, the high school chorus 'cause I was into music and piano.  I was on the student council--I think I was vice president or something of the student council.  I was involved in, and then starting a kind of inter-high school organization called Youth Speaks.  I was active in that so I was involved in a lot of stuff like that.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 177915
Speaker 1: And this is in nineteen-, we're in the nineteen--
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], yeah, 19--
Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], right.
Speaker 2: This would have been when I was a tenth grader.  It would have been the '53 [1953], '54 [1954] year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And like, as editor of the newspaper, what subjects, what are things are you guys discussing, you know, as --I mean, what are the things that you're talking about and--
Speaker 2: (Laughing).  As I recall, the school newspaper--a lot of it was about things within the high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  I mean, it was the news of the high school and, you know, students wanting this or, you know, an article about a student or an article about what was planned for the high school, it was always really within the school.  It wasn't the kind of newspaper where we really were looking at the outside world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But are you aware of the outside world and some of the social activism that's occurring, you know?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I mean, I'd--look.  I can tell you that the thing that really made--look, we were in the tenth grade.  May 17, 1954, Brown vs. the Board of Education, that was one of the most dramatic moments that I can recall.  What happened is we were at home.  It was after school.  I was at home 'cause my brother had--was off in college.  And so, it was just my mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard], and myself. And my older sister was there at home.  She kind of lived at home.  And 'cause, but the-dad [Orville Lee Ballard] walks in with the newspaper and says, "they finally did it", and it was the Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education].  And that rocked Louisville [Kentucky].  It literally rocked the city.  You should have seen--they--newspaper after newspaper after newspaper about this momentous event and "how can we change?  How can, how can they have made such a decision?  How could they change our way of life?"  You know, it was really the Southern reaction that you saw.  It was incredible.  And within the high school, there was the same kind of thing where there were students saying that, okay, you know, "it should be this way."  And "why do we have to go, you know, all be at this one high school?" to other students who were saying, "I don't want to go to school with white kids.  You know, I don't like them"--I, you know.  So you, you know, you saw the full range of reactions.  And that was kind of what it was like, so you are kind of then very, very cognizant of what was going on, change-wise then.  If you looked following into the next year and, of course, what the court did--it says, okay.  Then it took a full year before they said things were going to be implemented, so I was really out of high school before integration of high schools in Louisville took place.  I, by then, I'd graduated actually.  But okay, what happens in fifty [1950]--I think in fifty-six [1956] is-fifty-five [1955] is Rosa Parks.  And so, all of these things were having their implications for all of us.  I remember at the high school--Autherine Lucy came to speak.  She was the woman who, who the first African American person admitted to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], you know, with all the riots [February 1956] and everything like that, that was, you know, hit the newspapers, and she was in the midst of all of that.  She--I remember her speaking at our high school. So--
Speaker 1: So there's, there's a sense that the world is becoming a different place?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, things are changing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There, there is that, right, okay, and anticipation of that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 177916
Speaker 1: Now, how do you end up going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: That's why it connects (laughter).  I wound up going to Yale, I and--
Speaker 1: And how and where did that, you know--
Speaker 2: Where'd it come from?
Speaker 1: Right.  Because we, you know, we had been--the family's focus had been Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] then.  How are, though, you know, your grandfather--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather, right, had gone to Northwestern [University] Pharmacy School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: How I wound up at Yale--well, first, there was no way that I wanted to go to Howard.  Dad [Orville Lee Ballard], Uncle Ed [Edward Hunter Ballard], Uncle Will [William Henry Ballard, Jr.], and one of my sisters had all gone, gone to Howard.  I wanted nothing to do with Howard (laughter) for that reason.  I didn't want to go to the same place dad was.  I mean, it was like having a shadow over you again.  So I wanted a different place so it wouldn't have been Howard.  I remember at one point, even when I was in high school, there was a lot of contact because even early in high school, there was a program that Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was trying to, to basically take students after the junior year of high school.  And Morehouse was, was kind of, you know, contacting me and trying to get my father interested.  They felt I was too young to go away.  And there was no way, you know, they, they would have anything about my going away to college at an age like fifteen or something 'cause I graduated high school at sixteen.  So it's, so that was out.  But what really happened with Yale is simply this.  There was a Yale student.  He was not a black student.  He was a Yale student who was involved.  And Yale had a public service program that operated out of an entity called Dwight Hall at Yale [New Haven, Connecticut], and it was community service and that kind of thing.  There were students there who said, why don't--do we ever go to predominantly--to the black high schools in the South basically, and talk and see whether any of the students might be interested in applying to Yale?  And I mean, I learned later that the students who wanted to do this were told by Dean Howell [ph.], you know, who was one of the deans at Yale-"oh, we don't do that."  But the students decided to anyway.  So this was a student who was coming--going to various high schools, black high schools in the South, just describing Yale--where it was, what it was done, and encouraging and talking to principals-"Do you have any students who may be interested in going here?" and just to get information out.  Dr. [Atwood] Wilson,  Atwood Wilson, the principal of the high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky], a friend of my father, became very intrigued at that point with a notion of my going to Yale, and told my father that, that's where I was going.  Sounded fine to me--I mean, I didn't, you know, it's, it was okay for me--sounded fine to me.  I mean, I, I wanted to not be in Louisville [Kentucky].  Even though I had applied to the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], I had also applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I was--to remember, I was trying to get to a more exciting place.  And I was accepted at the University of Chicago.  I was, you know, I was accepted at Ohio Wesleyan [Delaware, Ohio].  I mean, I was trying to get out of the city and go to, go someplace else.  And so, I really was set on going to the University of Chicago.  Now, I had, I had some family there so that helped.  But mom and dad were very leery of my being in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  It was a big, dangerous place (laughter) and were very leery of the whole idea of my being up there kind of thing.  And New Haven [Connecticut] sounded better to them (laughter)--New Haven, Connecticut.  And so, they also, although it was farther away, I think they also liked the idea more of my being in a place like a New Haven than in a Chicago, Illinois.  So that when I was accepted there and everything like that, so that's, that's basically how I ended up at Yale--very different exposure for me and a very different experience.  Now, for me, I think there was also a different thing and maybe--I don't know if it's family based.  It was historically based, but I've had this conversation with some other sort of colleagues.  There were some of us around that time in history who were, particularly black and from the South and teenagers and just coming out of high school, who almost sort of saw as a social mission going to a place that was very predominantly white because some of us should do it.  And somebody should do this.  And I was probably in that kind of group.  And that's why, because in my class at Yale, there were what--I think there were four or five--I think one left, so, ultimately, I ended up being of four African Americans out of a thousand when I went to Yale.  So, it's--but that was part of kind of what we were about--I think, socially.  And, and, to me, it was just exciting.  It was east, and I'd never seen it even.
Speaker 1: Before you went there?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, people didn't do as much of that.  That was expensive.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: It was much too expensive to go around, like kids these days--have to see this school, that school and the others, other school. You didn't do that back then.  You applied to a school and then you got in, you got the information.  You just kind of decided whether you were going there or not.  And so, I decided I'd--they accepted me and I wouldn't, and I had a tuition scholarship and they just--so I said, well, I'll go.
Story_ID: 177917
Speaker 1: Now, so there's a great deal of anticipation that you have, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you show up, not show up, but you go there [to Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I'm wondering--this is a whole new world.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: I don't--and, and you can't even really be prepared for it.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, you know, what you experienced.  And who are your, you know, you said there were four class--
Speaker 2: Four blacks in my class, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Four blacks, okay.  There were a total four, three, okay.
Speaker 2: Total four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were the other three?
Speaker 2: Rollie [ph.] Davenport who I think wound up in Virginia.  I, you know, he hasn't had much contact with the schools then, much since.  Alvin Purrierre [ph.] who was on the football team and actually was in the New York area for a long time connected with Columbia [University, New York, New York].  And Greg, Greg Tigner [Gregory H. Tignor], who was from the [Washington] D.C. area.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: We kind of knew each other, but we really weren't close friends.  We kind of knew each other.  They had--each other, each, each of us had developed our circle of friends, but we knew who each other were and would now, we'd been and kind of--I think, probably each sort of had some idea of what the other ultimately did.
Speaker 1: But you're saying you didn't really know--did--you're saying you didn't really socialize on campus.  Is that what you're saying or you knew each other before--
Speaker 2: No, I was part of Yale.  I mean, no, it was--you mean the four black students?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: No, we socialized and did things, but Yale was all male so that you were involved.  But we all had circles of friends and we are probably just involved in the usual activities of Yale students at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But Yale, Yale has a culture and a tradition and even though you had come from a family that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, sort of had culture and tradition.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering what you--how, how you experienced Yale.  That's what I'm trying to get to.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It was so new and different that it was really kind of an eye opener and very intriguing.  Now, there was something interesting also about the class of sixty [1960] at Yale.  The class of sixty [1960]--I think, was the first class admitted to Yale where there were more graduates of public high schools than private high schools by a slight percentage.  But that was often sort of put forth in the media and so on as an indication of how Yale was changing that.  And so a number of the students that I knew--it's interesting enough who are friends, that actually had gone to, to a public high school, and not to [Phillips Academy] Andover [Andover, Massachusetts] or [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] or [the] Lawrenceville [School, Lawrenceville, New Jersey] or one of the prep [preparatory] schools, the eastern prep schools.  So that, that was a change in Yale.  For me, it was meeting the easterner.
Story_ID: 177918
Speaker 1: You know, you were talking about Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And you said it was--first of all, it was an exposure to the East [Coast of the U.S.]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and east, okay, so--
Speaker 2: Well, the shocker, in all honesty, was the presidential reception where wine was being served.  If you were from (laughter), you were absolutely shocked with that.  I think my parents were, too.  And a number of parents of any of the kids who were from the South, Midwest, other than the New York [New York] and prep[preparatory] school environs, were also rather disturbed by that because we were clearly under age.  And that should not have been done.  But (laughter), realizing that there was a different message being promoted, but it was also--it was knowing the kids from--yeah, I--the first time I met some kids from New York [New York], and they were (laughter) drinkers.  They were people--I mean they, you know, they seemed to live in a different world.  They also knew much more about that wonderful world of theater and the arts and all of that, which, remember, was something that really intrigued me and I liked.  The faculty at Yale and living among us were residential advisors who were usually junior faculty who, themselves, got very involved with students.  They were wonderful people.  I still remember Hugh Stimson.  I still remember some of the people who had that role--Saint Martin [ph.].  You know, we became the sort of friends later.  They, they were wonderful to me and to, you know, the students they worked with, so it was really a lot of fun in that regard.  But it was really a very, very different exposure, both environmentally and intellectually.  It was the first time I was at a tough school, and Yale was tough.  It was hard.  I had--was aware that my high school education was okay, but I fit in a very large okay group.  It was my first exposure to students who were truly in a brilliant group, in terms of their intellectual capacity and what they could master.  First exposure to those who were trained in high schools that had much more advanced course work.  You know, so that I was one of those students who could--I could hold my own, but it was different.  It was an appropriate eye opener to a larger world, a more competitive world.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you had graduated valedictorian, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, you were at the top.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so were a lot of us.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--so were a lot of us at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you find it hard.  That's right, that's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter). That meant you would be--that meant you would generally be a C-plus student there (laughter) unless you worked a bit harder (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, are you--do you feel--is this really your first year of sort of a year exploration in some respects--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --and trying to, you know, feel your environment out and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how are the professors towards you?  And I'm just, you know, are they equal?  And are you saying that the person who, you know, went to the school to recruit--was he there?  Was that student there or you never--
Speaker 2: No, I never--
Speaker 1: --never met, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I met him when he came to the high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was probably an advanced year student, and I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Meet him, no, he was not there.  Oh, professors at Yale then were just demanding that you do your work.  I mean, I never felt that you're not--I never felt singled out.  There were no favorites.  They did not--I mean, I became known.  I mean, and, and just this way--I mean, people would remember my name because you could pick me out in the twenty-some odd students sitting in a class.  So they had no trouble remembering my name.  I would stand out.  But in terms of the demands of the course, you did your papers, or you took your exams, and there they were.  And they were never, and they were, they were always nice.  Now, I don't know what that's saying--was that saying that--I mean, because in many ways for Yale of that time politically, the faculty was more liberal than the student body.  The student body was probably more middle conservative.  Ultimately, within short order, we all looked alike.  Everybody wore khaki pants which were washable and tweed jackets.  There was a dress code at Yale then.  To eat in the dining halls, you had to have on a jacket and tie to eat lunch and dinner.  So you--we all went around campus--I mean, we'd always have the tie on.  Sometimes you'd put it on right before you got ready to go into the lunch, you know, into the dining rooms, but the--everybody walked around in the same sort of khaki pants and tweedish-looking jackets and looked very, very uniform.  The faculty, and I don't know what the political persuasions were, but they probably were a spectrum.  But certainly, I would probably say on the more conservative, well-behaved, not making waves side of things, was what a Yale student body was like, as probably were the families, because I became aware later that I think when my roommate--we're still close friends--parents, and he was from the Chicago [Illinois] area and grown up in a Chicago suburb.  His dad, I think, had been a draftsman.  And his parents were perturbed by all the talk about the broad liberal education and so on and so forth and the value of that.  And to them, the value of going to a school like that is so you get a good job (laughter).  Forget the other--so you get a good job.  I mean, why, you know, that was the point of trying to go to a higher level school like an Ivy League (laughter) so.
Story_ID: 177919
Speaker 1: Were you aware of that community [black community in New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: It was very small, and I wasn't that aware of it, and I didn't really have an idea of how it functioned although there were Dr. and Mrs. Kaitlin [ph.].  Now somehow, my parents [Kathryn Wise Ballard and Orville Lee Ballard] knew Dr. Kaitlin, and he was a black physician in the New Haven area.  I remember Mrs. Kaitlin, but I remember they--my perception--were older, and I don't know whether, when you're young, you're looking for exciting things to do with people your own age.  So I was really not that involved with that group of people.  I remember seeing them maybe a couple of times, you know, while I was there or you kinda, and, and either talking with them, but they didn't become--say, for example, a second family or anything.  I, you know, got involved myself and, you know, and, and, you know, with, you know, I had friends, roommates.  I, unbeknownst to my parents--Yale's fairly, fairly close to New York [New York].  They had no idea about going into the city, and my being down there till three o'clock in the morning sometimes and coming back, you know, on a week--, on a Saturday.  They would have been, they would have had a stroke if they knew I did that (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: But you were exploring.  You had wanted to see the world outside.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep, yep, yep (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.  You were exploring.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: So, and, and, and New York was--you had heard about New York?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That was, okay, so you heard--
Speaker 2: And I had seen it on the way here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We stopped on the way here 'cause my mother and father had--my mother had lived in New York for three years, and she still--we, we stayed with Mrs. Keller [ph.] who was a lady who she knew and her husband.  And so, I'd had some exposure and it was still--looked so exciting.  And so I, I couldn't just stay in New Haven all the time.  I had to, when I had the opportunity, to come down here.  And what I used to do, as a matter of fact, again, it was the arts.  I used to go to the museums.  I used to go standing room to theater, Carnegie Hall, and I loved music, and so Carnegie Hall at the balcony was two bucks [dollars].  It was actually almost less than going to a movie if you sat all the way up, so I used to do that so.
Speaker 1: And, and in this whole process--I'm just trying to figure out what else is forming you.  And are you--but you're intent on your studies though, too--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --because you have to, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, well, you--I wanted to go to medical school now.  Granted, going to medical school back then was not as not--didn't feel like the competitive, competitive thing that it does now because that was an era when they were also looking for people who might be interested in becoming doctors.  That era, the fifties [1950s] and the early sixties [1960s] was heralded by a national doctor shortage.  And in many ways, they wanted people who would be willing to become doctors.  So, I never saw it as this horrendous process to get into medical school.  However, I wasn't--I mean, I was a respectable student.  I was not a slouch as a student, so I know I got into good medical schools, but it was a different kind of era with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, so I was a serious student.  I didn't want to be not--I mean, I, I, I wanted the, you know, I wanted good grades.  I would--I did not particularly want to make Cs in courses.
Story_ID: 177920
Speaker 1: What were you doing in your summers?  Were you going back home?  Was there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what did I do summers?  I went back home two of the summers, three of the summers, I guess.  Yeah, well, no, I was usually at home in summer.  One summer, I worked, or a couple of summers, it seems like I worked.  First summer, I don't remember what I did.  I remember one of the summers--it must have been after my sophomore year.  I worked at one of the small black proprietary hospitals in Louisville [Kentucky] called Red Cross Hospital [Louisville, Kentucky].  I worked as an orderly that summer in the hospital.  Another summer, I think I went to summer school, and took an embryology course at the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky].  I was--I didn't, hadn't had any embryology.  I was not a science major.  I was a social science major, and I said, well, you know, it could be useful to get a little more science.  I was going to be applying to medical school.  And they said embryology would be a good thing to have.  I couldn't fit it into my schedule up at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I says, well, maybe I can just take it in the summer, and take it at the University of Louisville so I did that.  And so, I was generally back home in the summers during that.
Speaker 1: Are you finding that you're changing sort of as, you know, Louisville is definitely seeming smaller and smaller?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely and totally.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I could not go home again.  I really couldn't.  I, by then, was hooked on the notion of being in a larger urban area.  It just, yeah, I couldn't have done that.
Speaker 1: And you, on graduation, do your parents come--the whole, does the whole family come up to graduation?
Speaker 2: My college graduation?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, except for my brother who was--where was he?  I think he was--he had just gotten out of the [U.S.] military in Germany.  He was married, and I think my niece was about a little bit over a year, and his wife was then very pregnant with a second child, so he--they were in Cleveland [Ohio].  They did not come.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But this was--
Speaker 2: But my two sisters came.
Speaker 1: --it was a big deal 'cause it's the first sort of northern graduate, you know, there, right?  Is your graduation up--?
Speaker 2: Yes, although my sister, Kathryn, who had gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--had gotten her master's [degree] from Michigan [unable to verify].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm sure--then they went up and you know, to her commencement.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I mean, not in that sense.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, I understand.
Speaker 2: --But it was Yale.  It was different.  It was Ivy League and they, you know, so-
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 177921
Speaker 1: Are you--what are you thinking?  You definitely want to go to medical school, but where have you, you know, applied and, and what are you--
Speaker 2: New York [New York].
Speaker 1: New York. New York, totally? You're sold on New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: At that point.
Speaker 2: I applied to, I applied to Columbia [University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], [Weill] Cornell [Medicine, New York, New York]--I think, Albert Einstein [College of Medicine, New York, New York], the old Flower Fifth Avenue Medical School [later New York Medical College, New York, New York].  As I recall--well, I did apply to University of Pennsylvania [Pearlman School of Medicine Pennsylvania] at Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But as I recall, my, my, my medical school applications were, were largely in New York, New York City.  I wanted to be in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you--did you--who, where did you get in and who--why did--
Speaker 2: Why did I come--go to Columbia?  That's where I went.  I got into Penn, University of Pennsylvania.  I got into Cornell.  I got into Columbia.  At that point, I knew that I would choose one of those, so I don't remember about other applications at that point.  And I chose Columbia.  Now, why did I choose Columbia?  It seems to me there was then--my perception of Columbia was that it had--it was better known.  I thought at that point that Cornell's Medical School--it had a different feeling about it and it was funny 'cause it was really based on my experience interviewing here.  My interviewers were fine, and interviewing for medical school was okay.  And I interviewed here.  I had to (unclear), but it's interesting, I--most of my professional career has been here at Cornell.  But I remember at that time, I met a couple of students here.  And I just found them, not fun or something like that.  And it's interesting how subjectively we'd choose a medical school, whereas I--when I was talking to a couple of Columbia students--well, gee, they seemed kind of down to earth, you know, sort of regular sort of guys and, you know, very straightforward.  And then I said, well, I think I'll go to Columbia (laughter), so I went to Columbia.
Speaker 1: Well, those decisions are made that way a lot of times. They are.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 177922
Speaker 1: --You get to medical school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --are you--this is 1960?
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960], Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay.  And are you--I mean, what is, you know, do you find it more aggressive now, you know, undergraduate, you had an aggressive undergraduate, but is it more aggressive--the, the workload and--
Speaker 2: In medical school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, medical school.
Speaker 2: It's harder.
Speaker 1: It's harder.
Speaker 2: It's harder than being an undergraduate, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's right, that's right.  So, are you--I mean, you know, when you see your first cadaver, is that daunting, or is this all sort of things you've--
Speaker 2: Well, that's all very exciting, but I remember, again, it's a step up in the competitive process in the first.  And I'm a social sciences major and interdepart--no, human culture and behavior was my major at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] which is a very fine major.  And I enjoyed doing it because, ultimately, it was a very small cadre of people and small seminars and all of that.  You go to medical school then with its large lectures and it's all science, and you're also there with a lot of science majors.  The first year of medical school was not easy.  I mean, I passed it okay but I certainly was not stellar.  The other thing about medical school for me was the adjustment that I--it was such and it--a complete and total immersion in science.  Everything is science in medical school.  And I kind of missed the history and the arts and other things like that.  And every opportunity I had with a couple of friends of mine from medical school, we were still running down, if we could, to get into standing line at the Metropolitan Op-, standing room line at the Metropolitan Opera [House, New York, New York], something--to break it up, is what I remember a lot about the first year of medical school.  Interesting, but not all that interesting.  Medical school for me got more interesting as you progress through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know--just a little bit about your degree?  Well, how had you chosen your undergraduate degree besides, you said, smaller courses?  What made you interested in that subject?  You said--
Speaker 2: The major?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Human--you said?
Speaker 2: Human culture and behavior which is really a lot of psychology and sociology and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: But are you thinking along those lines at that time?  That's what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I remember thinking that something like psychiatry could be an interesting field.  And I was interested in psychology and behavioral stuff.  And so, I was thinking then that perhaps it could be, but I didn't know.  I mean but it, it intrigued me and it was interesting.  I remember--I guess when I was an undergrad, I remember taking psychology in the second year.  And I said, well, gee, this is fascinating stuff, and then went through the thing.  Well, I still want to go to medical school.  Do I have to major in biology?  And, of course, I realized when I got more information, no, you don't.  You have to major in a science.  You have to take the prerequisite sciences, but you could major in biology.  You could major in history.  You could major in psychology.  You could major in English, whatever you wanted, and so go to medical school.  Once I discovered that, some of the courses that I would take as an undergraduate--one seemed more exciting than just all undergraduate science.  And the other thing is by then, I was--I guess, enough hooked on Yale that I said, you know, I'm going to be studying science all of my life.  I'm at Yale and they've got these other courses that are fascinating, and why shouldn't I take those?  And even looking at my total academic career, by far, the best course I ever feel that I've had in my total education was a history course when I was a junior at Yale called, the Intellectual History of Modern Europe, which was taught by a singularly brilliant professor.  And that was, to me, an extraordinary course because you did a lot of excerpted type readings from great intellectual thinkers starting with [Thomas] Aquinas, I guess (laughter).  And say and, you know, philosophers and historians, and the course was about trying to understand intellectual occurrence and what they were about.  And that, by far to me, I felt when I'd completed that course, that that's education.  That's what education should be about is understanding aspects of intellectual stuff and intellectual occurrence, no matter what the area is.
Story_ID: 177923
Speaker 1: So when you come into medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], you're thinking about psychiatry.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: You're already saying from the beginning?
Speaker 2: Right, yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who is your model because, you know, I even was glancing here, you know, at this book--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this is a new--I mean, it's--there are not a lot of role models in this area--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --that are African American.  And I remember asking, you know, [HM] Dr. [Alvin] Poussaint--who, what were you, where were you--
Speaker 2: Were you thinking of?
Speaker 1: --what, now, where, where were you going to practice?   And, but I know you--that you had--that was not an issue with you but I was just wondering--
Speaker 2: But, I mean, yeah, okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where I, you know, I'm not sure where it came from.  But I mean, but yet--I guess it was, I remember mentioning it to dad [Orville Lee Ballard].  And he says, well, yes, I could understand that because I remember considering it seriously myself, and the fascination with seeing the patients at Saint Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington [D.C.], and it is fascinating.  He said, the reason that I did not want to go into it is that it's not sufficiently developed, and I didn't feel that I could do as much for people.  And he said, this is why I didn't, but as he says, I found it very fascinating as well.  And he said, now one of my classmates, Dr. Prince Barker, went into psychiatry and is in New York [New York], and does practice psychiatry.  I later learned that Dr. Barker was one of the early African American psychiatrists in New York City.  And before there was even a department of psychiatry at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York], I think was doing some things in psychiatry and Harlem [New York, New York], so that it's interesting that there was--
Speaker 1: Right.  I'm just, you know, because--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it was still relatively new and in a community that's still to this day is not totally--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --embracing.  And this is, you know, forty, you know, fifty years ago.  So, I, so you come--forty years ago for you, but, so you--this is for your sense about things.  Or now, do you feel that as a person that you are intuitive about people?  I mean, are you tapping into that sense--or I know you like history--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --and, you know, philosophical discussions but are you--
Speaker 2: I--I'll put it this way.  I mean, am I intuitive about people?  I don't know perhaps, so but I, you know, and I know different people that say--but I was always a listener.  That, I always was and I think people who knew me as friends would see me as a listener type and who--I'm intrigued by people.  I like different kinds of people.  I like people who come from many different viewpoints.  And so, I think I was always--that always sort of fascinated me, and I was taken with that.  I also kind of wanted to know why and why--what makes people tick.  Now, sometimes I've reflected back on what it was about for me, even as a high schooler because, interestingly enough, in junior high school, my junior high school yearbook did a class prophecy.  And my class prophecy was that I was going to be a psychiatrist back in junior high school.  Now, that's interesting.  I don't know what it is about that, but something must have come across, but I know that I was always intrigued by something that I felt was quite unfortunate.  I remember some extraordinary smart kids who were the kind of kids who made "As" in junior high and got to high school, and became next to "D" students.  And I always wondered why--you're so smart, and I knew they were smart.  And I was--I don't know what happened with them.  And I remember that was something that intrigued me--what happened to these guys because they should have been, you know, way up there in the high school, and they were not.  And they seemed to lose a motivation, seemed to lose something that was there earlier.  It was, it was always bothersome, I guess, maybe an early thing about aspects of the African American community that have troubles and struggles, and all of that.
Story_ID: 177924
Speaker 1: You say in medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], you know, you have to get over the sciences, you know, and so that, that's sort of the first--
Speaker 2: Yeah, which were enjoyable--I mean, the second year was enjoyable.  And pathology, particularly, and things, you know, understanding illness.  And I didn't--the decision for psychiatry was not so rigid.  I remember when I was into--after my third year--well, I knew it was not surgical.
Speaker 1: You knew that was, that was--
Speaker 2: Temperament-wise, I knew that.  Well, the temper--, I don't--the temperament didn't fit.  They got up very, very early in the morning to be in the OR [operating room].  They liked a level of tension.  They enjoyed doing a lot of procedures.  It was, okay.  I just said, no, I didn't want to do that.  And I really knew that I didn't want to do that.  So, okay, what is it?  It's internal medicine, it's pediatrics, it's psychiatry as the three possibilities.  Pediatrics was becoming a strong competitor at one point.  I was fascinated by pediatrics and issues in pediatrics, but the thing is they're both developmental.  Psychiatry and pediatrics are both developmental fields, and so that was not an unusual interest.  A number of psychiatrists did have an interest in pediatrics, and pediatricians in psychiatry--I mean, it's not--that would not be unusual.  Internal medicine--well, internal medicine also because internal medicine, if you went to medical school, then, and there are some aspects of it now, that internists felt that, always, that they are the real physicians.  That's a real doctor, the doctor who really focuses on--knows aspects of every system of the body.  They're the diagnosticians.  They are the intellectuals.  I mean, that's kind of the way it was at--when I went to medical school, so that you could not ignore internal medicine, you know, as, you know, as a real possibility.  What consolidated the decision for me was what I was like, even on any medical service, if you--as a student, I probably was the person among the students, if it was my assigned patient, who knew more than other students about issues that--this person has been divorced twice and has had these kinds of problems.  This person--I always seemed to want to know a lot about that.  And I think it was that, that kind of more moved me towards psychiatry as more the correct field for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you, when you graduate in 1964, you know that's where you want--that's the direction you're headed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what, you know, medical school in sixty-four [1964]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is different than medical school now.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, can you describe, you know, is it a little more relaxed?  I'm not sure, you know, I know doctors have a lot of esteem in the community, right?
Speaker 2: Depending, yes, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, that--sorry, but then, they were--
Speaker 2: Does the public like doctors?  I'm not so sure the public cares for doctors at all.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, and then, then they were on a pedestal.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your doctor was on a pedestal.  At least your intern, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm just saying they were on a pedestal, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, medical school was different then anyway because it was not--there was less of the pressure toward early specialty choice.  There is more pressure on students now than used to be the case.  Back then, for example, I took a rotating internship.  It was not unusual for people to graduate medical school, perhaps go to a rotating internship or a mixed medical/surgical internship, something like that, and then decide that, no, I think I'll go into this.  So that in that, the decision-making was not forced on students as early, so there were more people who were kind of exploratory early on.  So I think that was a possibility then.  You had a different sense then of--if you went into a field like psychiatry, you really didn't have to decide then.  I mean you--some people decided to do three years of internal medicine, and then went into psychiatry, or two years be--I mean, you could do things like that more readily then, it just seemed to be more possible.  And so it was a different time, really, in specialty choice.
Story_ID: 177925
Speaker 1: What are you learning about the field of psychiatry and its history in the United States, you know, how, how it developed because someone told me at the beginning that they were--it was all combined.
Speaker 2: Psychiatry and neurology, you mean?
Speaker 1: Or psycho-, and just traditional medicine, and it sort of separated.  Am I wrong about that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: That it, you know, it, then it was--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --that people were looked at as a whole at some point and that they, then it sort of--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Am I wrong?  I'm--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, well, yes, and I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yes and no in this sense.  I mean, because psychiatry, of course, developed really from neurology.  I mean, basically, and early on--I mean, there were mental disorders that were more the extreme.  People were in asylums, in hospitals.  So in a sense, psychiatric patients were separate and they were this sort of--suffered from these conditions that no one quite understood.  So that if you went back to the early twentieth century, there were people who were trying to understand, what is schizophrenia?  What is manic depressive illness, that kind of thing.  They were not necessarily internists or other doctors.  They were a kind of a unique breed that was trying to understand why people had these kinds of conditions.  And medicine, the state of medical knowledge was not very good, and at that point in terms of knowledge of those things.  So that was the early on--I mean, what happened.  And then, at some point as you went into the twenties [1920s] and thirties [1930s] and so on, psychiatry began to coalesce more as a specific discipline to itself, and then really began to split more and more from neurology.  And then you have coming in on it also the psychoanalytic movement, which is Sigmund Freud in the late thirties [1930s] and the forties [1940s] when with a lot of European psychiatrists who got involved in psychoanalysis--many of them coming to New York [New York] and introducing into the field the whole kind of psychodynamic sort of way of thinking and trying to answer, why is this person this way?  So that comes in, so all of these things are sort of part of the evolution of psychiatry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even then in the fifties [1950s], sixties [1960s], there is so much more that we know now forty years later than we did then.  I mean, that--it's still evolving.  We still need to evolve a lot more so there were all these things going on.  Now, at the same time, I would have to say that was intriguing.  I think those of us who went into psychiatry in that day, era, were intrigued by all of it, and we kind of liked the unknown facet of it and liked the mysterious nature of it.
Story_ID: 178148
Speaker 1: You were explaining that you were doing your residency--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at New York State Psychiatric Institute [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, Columbia [University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --which is essentially Columbia University.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were saying and that, so you said that the focus was on, you know, the--I mean, what are the prevailing theories--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as you come out, you know, that are sort of prevailing terms of treatment?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.  Well, a lot of programs of that time were too tight.  If you went to a kind of academic program that was university-based, and particularly, if it were a program in the East, there were, there were programs at say, Columbia, Albert Einstein [College of Medicine, New York, New York], where you largely worked with very ill psychiatric patients who were in the hospital a long time.  And you had a cadre of supervisors who were training you in kind of psychodynamic methods.  In this instance, they were usually psychoanalysts, so that I would say my own training had a distinct sort of dynamic and analytic focus.  Partly because at that time, although we had some psychopharmacologic interventions available to us, there were three or four antidepressants.  That was about it.  There were several kind of medications that you could use in schizophrenia.  That was about it.  There were limitations in terms of what we could do.  And in a training program like that, you certainly learn how to use those medications in an attempt to treat certain symptoms.  But you were still very focused on, there must be some other sets of dynamic issues to explain why this person is presenting with the symptoms that they have.  So it was really a combination, and heavily under an analytic emphasis.  And for Columbia at the time, there was kind of always a message out there that the best of you in the residency will apply to the Analytic Institute [ph.] and become the best of psychiatrists.  So that there was kind of the philosophy that if you really wanted a depth to understanding of things, you had become a psychoanalyst.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at the time, there's no question.  It was probably the best education that we would term depth psychology, yes.
Story_ID: 178149
Speaker 1: Who were the teachers that are influencing you?  Are there any sort of, like key people within the Columbia [University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], you know, faculty?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, what led to certain other aspects of my career is a very interesting thing because you're looking at sort of aspects, aspects of African American history and African American populations.  One of my early supervisors at Columbia was Dr. Elizabeth Davis.  She was the chief of psychiatry at Harlem Hospital Center [New York, New York].  And she was a supervisor on one of my major cases when I was in the first year of my residency at Columbia.  And Beth, you know, I got to know the supervisor--
Speaker 1: She was on the fac-, she's--
Speaker 2: --on the faculty of Columbia, yes.
Speaker 1: --Columbia, okay.  Had she trained--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Harlem [Hospital Center] was in the department.  Yes, she trained there.
Speaker 1: And when did the relationship between Harlem Hospital and Columbia occur?
Speaker 2: It's a Columbia affiliate hospital.
Speaker 1: Had it always been a Columbia affiliate?
Speaker 2: No, that occurred in the late sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: That occurred in the late sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: That was when--
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: --all the public sector hospitals were--became affiliated with medical schools as a result of the efforts of a Dr. Ray Trussell, who later, as a matter of fact, became Dr. Beth Davis's husband.  But he wanted all of the public hospitals affiliated with a medical school.  So Harlem [Hospital Center] became affiliated with Columbia and really in the late sixties [1960s].  The Department of Psychiatry affiliation was even earlier though.  That was more like around 1962 or so, or sixty-three [1963] that Harlem's Department of Psychiatry be, you know, was connected with Columbia.  So that, that's why Beth was on the faculty in the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia and she was one of my early supervisors.  And I think she really was very important.  She was a brilliant supervisor and, but she was also working with an underserved population.  And I kind of liked many aspects of what she did.  So she was a very, very key person for me.  And--
Speaker 1: And what do you mean you liked key aspects of what she did?
Speaker 2: I was impressed--
Speaker 1: In terms of servicing, protocol--
Speaker 2: --by servicing, or her, her dedication to a community and trying to provide services to patients who needed it.  But also in combination with that was a real kind of intellectual prowess in trying to understand what are the psychiatric issues and the psychological problems of patients in Central Harlem [New York, New York].  And she was trying to understand it as much intellectually as well.
Speaker 1: Because there's not--this is an overlooked populations of majority community.  It's not even--I mean, that's not their concern anyway.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she doing some original research there at Harlem?
Speaker 2: She was really, yes, in the sense that she was looking at--I mean, the issues of both providing services and trying to understand certain, perhaps certain dynamic issues and psychodynamic issues that could arise in that particular patient population.  I mean, I remember one of her early papers done with some psychoanalytic colleagues at the time was a paper called "On the Need to be Pregnant," where she was trying to understand why women in poverty were having children--the extent to which they were.  And trying to look at it in terms of the aspects of perhaps feeling great sort of psychological deprivation ended in having an infant as something that another human being who would be attached to them, would love them, and trying to look at issues such as that, and trying to understand that, and not looking at it in terms of--well, they're just trying to get welfare payments or something like that--I mean, which was nonsense to her.  There had to be other issues.
Speaker 1: So was she fighting within, do you think, in the, in the, you know, the larger Columbia community for that, you know, those, those understandings?  So, I'm just saying for that type of--
Speaker 2: I think both those understandings in the provision of services.  Her even bigger struggle and fight was with the City of New York to provide adequate services.  And I was on staff as a training director at Harlem for, you know, I worked there for six years.  There was always a chronic sort of fight in terms of funds and staff, and trying to get what you needed.  I mean, that's the story of public institutions.
Story_ID: 178150
Speaker 1: So, now what is the most significant thing that came out of your residency?  Was a--is it a three-year residency?
Speaker 2: There was a three-year residency, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was it spent mainly at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] or are you--
Speaker 2: No, it's at Psychiatric Institute [New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York].  That's where you were based, yeah, right--
Speaker 1: It's a--oh, yeah, okay.  I keep thinking that, okay, okay then.
Speaker 2: --yeah, right, yeah, yeah, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But did you do any of it at Harlem at all--
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: --even with the affiliation?
Speaker 2: --no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what is the population there?  Is--are there any African Americans there or many--
Speaker 2: The patients at Psychiatric Institute?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When I was there early on--I guess shortly after I became--no, it was, it was maybe even the year I started residency.  They began a floor that was a community service program.  And it was because of the changing and structuring of aspects of mental health services in the city of New York [New York].  But I basically spent a lot of my time on what was in the sixth floor of Psychiatric Institute, which was a community service.  And there, our obligation was to treat every patient who resided--I think, between 165th [Street] and 181st [Street], river to river, something like that.  So the patients there were a variety of patients from people, who were from the old sort of European families who lived in Washington Heights [New York, New York] to a long time, to some of the African American families who lived a bit on the other side of Broadway, to the newly arrived Puerto Rican families.  So, I saw--I had, I treated more of a variety of patients as a result of being on that particular floor.
Speaker 1: And what are you learning?  What do you learn during your residency that, you know, that's sort of has stood, you know, the test of time?  What things are you learning in that process about treatment and how to approach or your manner?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's just--I, you know, I just have to say it's really just basic solid psychiatry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it really is.  It's medicine.  I mean, it's basically what you're learning.  I mean that--
Speaker 1: Okay, right, okay, okay.  Now, at this point, and what--the other question I have, is [HM] Dr. Alvin Poussaint around the same time period as you?  It's--
Speaker 2: He's a little bit before.  Al graduated--
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, either '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950], I know '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: He's a graduate of this medical school [Weill Medical School, Cornell University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's what I thought, okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.  So, he was ahead of me by about four or four years' worth--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay,
Speaker 2: --yeah, in terms of when he came on in the picture.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He was already beginning to become well-known as a--both a junior faculty member up at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and even shortly thereafter became--
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: --an associate dean up there.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Around the time, I was a psych resident so.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, okay, okay, okay.  I was getting my--maybe I was getting my times separate--I mean, different, 'cause I know he had spent time down south, too.
Speaker 2: Yes, during the Civil Rights Movement, yes, right.
Speaker 1: You know, it's during, during Civil Rights Movement, okay.
Story_ID: 178151
Speaker 1: How does Hickam Air Force [Base, Hawaii]--I mean, how did that--
Speaker 2: Hickam Air Force Base?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And you get--don't you get married the, the year you graduate from medical school?
Speaker 2: Yes, got married in December, half-way through internship, yeah (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, right, okay.
Speaker 2: --and then so.  Hickam Air Force Base, why and how did that happen?  Okay, 'cause students even here at the medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] will ask me that or (unclear).  What happened is--I remember the year was 1963.  That, around that time, issues in Vietnam were starting to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they called.  The [U.S.] military came to the medical school at Columbia and wanted to make us aware that, that year, they were drafting fifty percent of the men who were finishing their internship here--that the military needed doctors, and the military was going to be drafting doctors.  If you wanted to have the chance to do your residency, you might, you are best advised to consider basically signing up and enrolling in a plan called the Berry Plan, which would defer you to do your residency, and, if possible, they would try to use you in the military in your specialty area.  But you had an obligated two years of military service.  So a number of us at that time joined the Berry Plan and signed up, so that we would be free--would not be interrupted either doing, during residency, or if there were people who were pulled out of practice--physicians, young physicians who had opened up offices and then received in the mail-"you are to report to so-and-so base" so (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I understand 'cause I didn't see, you know, I thought was it ROT [C, Reserve Officer Training Corps]-, you know, it was--at the beginning, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so--
Speaker 2: --to Hickam Air Force Base as chief of mental health services, which was interesting.
Speaker 1: Right, but that's a sort of nice assignment in Hawaii?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was lovely.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean (laughter).  I (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was lovely, but I remember the threat.  I mean, what happened was when people said Hawaii, but, you know, doesn't--does that mean they're going to put you there one year and then the next, you're going to be in Vietnam.  I didn't know because it was the Pacific--as it turned out, it was Hickam Air Force Base was--is really what's called a headquarters base.  It was the headquarters basically of the Vietnam War PACAF [Pacific Air Forces].  It was where the war was being planned and thought.  And it was there from that base, it was a big brass base--a lot of colonels and generals and people like that walking around.  So, I stayed there for the full time and was a psychiatrist for the Air Force base.
Story_ID: 178152
Speaker 1: In a nutshell, there were these kinds of problems.  First, a lot of youth problems.  This is the late '60s [1960s].  This is the era of protests against the war [Vietnam War].  There were a number of young people who signed up for the [U.S.] Air Force.  When you signed up for the Air Force, you signed up for four years.  A number of young people did that to avoid being drafted into the [U.S.] Army, which was a two-year commitment, but could mean being shot at in a ditch in Vietnam, quite frankly (laughter).  So, they signed with the Air Force.  There, you were at least at the Air Force Base.  And the Air Force has a different structure in terms of the--of how it works.  In the Air Force, your pilots are officers.  People who fly planes are officers.  Your other people in the Air Force are what are called support troops.  The primary mission is to keep the planes going so that this means that you're not going to be in a battlefield so much as a sergeant or whatever it is in the Air Force 'cause you're gonna be at the base involved in some aspect of keeping the whole thing going.  So, some young people were savvy enough to realize this, that it was literally less dangerous for you if you were in the Air Force and got into the Air Force.  However, for some young people, this meant four years.  And a nineteen-year-old, nineteen to twenty-three, or twenty to twenty-four, can give many young people that this is taking some of the best years of my life (laughter).  This is taking my youth, so you saw a lot of youth problems of people who are kind of sorry that they did it.  Maybe it would have been better to take a chance to be drafted.  Should I go to Canada, you know?  I hate this war in the first place.  We shouldn't be in it, so there were a lot of problems like that.  A second set of emotional problems had to do with people who had been in the military and were on the verge of getting out of the military having done twenty years.  And these were people who were often officers and they were now forty-five or forty-six.  And if you didn't make certain promotional cuts in the military, you wouldn't get any farther.  You would be just be discharged with some retirement pension perhaps.  But in other words, if you were a lieutenant colonel, didn't make colonel, you were processed out at that twenty-year period.  So, you couldn't stay on any longer, so this meant colonel so-and-so was going to a civilian world where you are Mr. so-and-so, and in your mid-forties.  And they didn't know what was out there or whether or not they could make it in the "real world", so to speak.
Speaker 2: So were the--were you actually seeing people or were you doing more administration?  Were you--
Speaker 1: No, I was seeing--I was taking care of them.
Speaker 2: You were, you were taking care--
Speaker 1: I was taking care of patients.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you find that, that like on the colonel-level that they were like--I don't want to talk to you.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no.
Speaker 2: You didn't have any of that--none of that?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: No, people who are emotionally hurting want to see somebody who might help them.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: That's true. But you hear some of these stories sometimes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I mean you do.
Story_ID: 178153
Speaker 1: Now, so anything else significant about that period of time out there [Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii] besides having--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --I mean, it's really your--
Speaker 2: It was a growth experience for me.  It was really very--in the sense of there were things that I kind of realized at the same time.  It was a reeducation because, again, if you think I'd been East a number of years, college, medical school, residency, it was another grounding in a sense to also realize that there were people in the American population who came from the heartland who, when they got out of the [U.S.] Army or the Air--when they got out of the [U.S.] Air Force, you ask, "Well, what are you going to do when you get out?"  "Well, I think there's a job back at the local hardware store."  It was a side of life that I kind of lost touch with, being in a New York City [New York, New York].  And in that sense, it was kind of a wonderful sort of, again, re-exposure to another kind of world, and a very real word so I think that was valuable for me.  Administratively, it was good experience because that's what happens in the military.  Young doctors are given a lot of responsibility.  I was responsibility, responsible for the mental health issues for the Air Force base reporting to the colonel who ran the place.  And I had a lieutenant who was a social worker, and I had two sergeants who were my techs.  And so, we were the mental health service.  And so, it was, again--now I'd been a senior resident.  I mean, I'd done some things.  I mean, your last year of residency, you usually have some administrative functions as well, so I hadn't done that.  I mean, and you can develop programs and you can start things and try and be creative.  And you can--had to consult with the other general medical officers who were--we were all in outpatient facilities.  So, I had to make sure I was available as a psychiatric consultant and their patients that they were seeing in the clinic, and all those things because the clinic was mainly GMOs, a general medical officer in the military, somebody who has had a year of internship basically and comes in and does general medicine.  There was one internist.  This would be somebody who had done three years of internal medicine.  I was trained fully as a psychiatrist.  He was trained as an internist.  He, you know, for problems that were beyond the GMO level, he was used as their consultant so I set consultant on the mental health issues.  They were pediatricians.  They had to be fully trained.  They were going to see the kids, but--
Speaker 1: And so, your population was really the, the--
Speaker 2: It was the [U.S.] military.  It's Air Force.
Speaker 1: It was the military, it was the military, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, which people forget has its own diversity--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --it is.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, so any other things that--so you become your father in some--I mean, he ran the--I don't know.  That's what I was thinking.  He had run the sanitarium [Waverly Hills Sanitorium, Waverly Hills, Kentucky].  I mean, you, 'cause it's different running things than just--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, when you have to be responsible.  And you're still relatively young.  That's, you know, but it's good exposure--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --for, for going forward.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  But that's a military model.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So when you came back after your two-year stint, you've done--so that's all you needed to do was to get--you had sort of pre-signed up for two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was the end of my commitment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was your end.  No, no thought of staying with this?
Speaker 2: No, if, if I had stayed, I mean, you get the letter saying, we are promoting you to major.  However, if you wish to accept this, you would have to stay an additional year.  That would have meant three years--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --to make the rank of major.  I was not so much interested in military rank as I was getting my obligation done, and getting back to what I wanted in life.  I think the growth experience, however, was true--occurred in another way.  Hawaii then was to us a very intriguing place, wonderful climate.  We did not live on a military base because a lot of us at a level of captain would not have had available base housing anyway because it just wouldn't have been enough because I mentioned there was a high brass base.  So, we had to live off campus which, to me, is fine.  I did not want to live in a military enclave.  So I lived kind of out among the people who lived in--who were, you know, who were there (laughter).  I mean, in, in Honolulu [Hawaii].  And so that was fun because that was a cultural exposure to really an Asian, an Asian derived culture.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that was fun to, to have and to get a more intense exposure to and to live there.  And it was a beautiful climate.  People are nice.  It was a lovely climate, you know, all the time.  My wife's from North Louisiana and liked the warmth of it all.  However, professionally, and I met psychiatrists there who were civilian psychiatrists because I would have to refer some of our dependents to them.  And where there were psychiatric meetings or something in the evening, I would go.  And I became increasingly aware that there were only a couple of psychiatrists--I mean, I was meeting too many psychiatrists who were ten years my senior who didn't seem to know much more, and fifteen years my senior, didn't seem to know much more.  That's not New York [New York].  Generally, you meet a number of people.  If they're that much more senior to you, they've had that much more experience.  They know a lot more about a lot of things than you do.  That's what I was used to also in terms of my own development and training.  So, I said for my own professional development, I couldn't stay there.  Secondly, I started analytic training.  It was interrupted for the military, and I wanted to go back to that.  And so, I would have to have come back to New York to do that if I wanted to continue with it.  Then, I realized it was just more--it fit more to come back to New York--
Story_ID: 178154
Speaker 1: But how--that was then that I came back to Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] because I had to go through the career issue of what did I want to do?  I knew then that I didn't want to see patients all day.  I liked taking care of patients, but I didn't want to do that morning and afternoon and evening.  I wanted to do something else.  So, that I had talked before I left for the military with, with Roger McKennan [ph.], who ran the clinic at Vanderbilt Clinic up at Columbia [University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].  And he says, you know, you've got very good recommendations from, from junior residents about your teaching skills.  Whatever you do, why don't you get involved in teaching?  So, I applied, through Dr. [Elizabeth] Davis at Harlem, because I thought it would be very intriguing.  Could I get a National Institute of Mental Health Career Teaching Fellowship and Career Teacher Grant, base it at Harlem Hospital, do things between Harlem [New York, New York] and Columbia.  And that's the kind of thing that Beth [Dr. Elizabeth Davis] really sort of, you know, liked very much.  And she was involved in the whole application process, so that's also what brought me back--that's how I came back to New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, it's good.  And when you say, you know, I had interrupted by analytical training, is that in the Freudian school?  That's what I'm trying to understand or is that not?  I'm--
Speaker 1: Well, I'd only had one year of the classes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Analytic schools are a combination of course work and training analyses.  You're in analysis yourself.
Speaker 2: Yourself, that's right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: How many, how many days?  I've heard four--
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: Four days, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what, okay.
Speaker 1: So I had started that maybe, and had maybe about a year and a half or so of that.  And then I had to go off to the military.  And then I'd only had one year of the classes, so if I wanted to continue with the Analytic Institute, I had to come back.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the theory behind that, you know, analytic training, what is the theory behind it?  And what were, what were--I'm trying to understand the methodologies that you were being--
Speaker 1: Taught?
Speaker 2: Taught--that's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: Well, Columbia, I mean was not as, perhaps not your--as orthodox as some analytic institutes.  It wasn't--New York's psychoanalytic then was known as a classic Freudian institute.  Columbia was--had a term called adaptational, which meant the people who started Columbia had kind of rebelled against the New York psychoanalytic group.  And so, they were a little bit more--they, they--we certainly studied a lot of Freudian sort of concepts.  But some were modified, some other theories were considered.  So, it was--it had a bit of a different focus that then was called adaptational.  And, but still in many ways was a--like your classic institute with training analysis requirements and so on.  So, I think it had a bit more breadth--I guess is what I think--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in terms of training.
Speaker 2: And you, you're in, you're in analysis and learning things about yourself though, too.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: That's the whole process.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Is it?  I've heard also that the theory--well, this may be one school of thought, that you can sort of remake yourself and every (unclear), or change fundamentally who you are through this process.  Is that--am I, I guess--see that's all, that's so forth.
Speaker 1: That's a tall order.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: I'll put it this way.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm, I'm --
Speaker 1: I mean, no, that's--I mean, no, it's not what you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a tall order and I can understand how people sort of see it that way.  Well, first, when it comes to change, it is true, that I do feel strongly-that only an individual can change himself or herself.  Somebody outside cannot change you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your spouse can't change you.  Your girlfriend can't change you, whatever (laughter), no matter how much people feel they can do that.  You're not going to change anybody else.  A person can change themselves.  But what analysis is about very often, more than--is really trying to discover and understand what you're about.  And you become aware of certain things within yourself that you may--will want to change perhaps.  Whether you can do it or not depends, depends on a lot of factors.  And you may emerge from it with things that you did change in yourself that you felt--well, gee, you know, this is not, this isn't helping.  I mean, and I keep doing (laughter) it this way.  And if I could look at it this way and change a bit in this direction, it would be better for me overall, you know, and better for personal relations (unclear).  You can do that, or you may encounter things that, gee, I wish I could change this about myself.  And you may even find yourself trying very hard, but for whatever reason, things do not juggle, rejuggle, in such a way that you can.
Story_ID: 178155
Speaker 1: Now you go back to Harlem [New York, New York] after your fellowship, you go to Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm really based at Harlem during much, most of the fellowship.
Speaker 1: Doing, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so it's really a matter of continuing on there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And is, is Beth [Dr. Elizabeth Davis]--you--is she there still, the--
Speaker 2: Yes, she's still there as a, as the director of psychiatry and she--
Speaker 1: She's still there, okay, okay.  Now this is a different population than what you saw and why.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, are you finding that the, you know, the theories that you're being taught--are they working on this population?
Speaker 2: To a degree, yes, but the problem with taking care of the population in Central Harlem had a lot to do with the service issues in that there were such service demands on the staff there that, that largely what had to be offered was more shorter term than long term.  And there were patients that even complained about that.  The services were provided for shorter periods of time, but it's true that it could not manage that.  There were just too many people to take care of.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You could not--it was harder to be in treatment in a clinic at Harlem Hospital for a year.  It just--there, there, there were too many other people to take care of.  They sort of had to do a lot more shorter term work so it was a different setting.  Now, my role there, however, was also more as an educator at that point.  I was in charge of the residency training program.  So our psychiatry residency is what I was in charge of, and I was really working with the psychiatry residents who themselves were training in psychiatry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--and you're--now, at this point, you're doing this, are you teaching still or you haven't--you're teaching?
Speaker 2: That's what training directors do.
Speaker 1: From the, okay, okay.  I say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You teach, you supervise, you direct, you try and organize the curriculum.  That's why I was there for the residents in psychiatry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You also have to be their advocate, making sure that they do not have such patient loads and such service commitments that their education and training gets lost.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So, then, what makes you want to join the faculty of Cornell [University, New York, New York]?  I mean, what, when does that happen?  And I know you were at Harlem [Hospital Center] for--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --six years.  Is--was it--did you get tired of--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can tell you, honestly, what happened--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --is that we were in a bit of a dispute with the City of New York around funding.  There were things--New York in the mid-seventies [1970s] was in a terrible financial mess.  And there were a lot of battles over funding issues, including funding of services at hospitals, how much money the university was going to commit.  I think Beth had struggled for a while to get our pay on an equitable level with other faculty members at Columbia [University, New York, New York] who were doing--she felt that those of us who were there on the faculty at Columbia and working at Harlem--above all, we put up with a lot and were able to do without a lot of amenities in comparison to people at the main university hospital.  But above all, we should not be sacrificing money.  And so she fought very valiantly for this.  I remember there was a time we got a salary increase and it was then progressively taken back.  A number of us got fed with that and we began to think, maybe we should be getting to look elsewhere.  We don't like the way this is looking.  And so, what had happened at that point is that I had been approached even before then about the possibility of taking a job at our, at Cornell's facility in Westchester County [Westchester Division, White Plains, New York].  Now, by then, we bought a house in Westchester [County, New York].  The kids were small.  I said, hmm, what might it be like to work a bit closer to home and to work out there?  And I began--I was offered this interesting job offer as associate director of the adult outpatient department.  The chair of the Department of Psychiatry here at Cornell [University, New York, New York] was Dr. [Robert] Michels, who had been director of education in the department at Columbia. Department centers do that.  A lot of Columbia people came to Cornell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I was basically one of them.  And so, that began my career at Cornell, you know, which was in psychiatry and, and out there at our facility.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Again, teaching, administering--still having some private patients of my own.
Story_ID: 177934
Speaker 1: Do you like your Westchester [Cornell University's New York-Presbyterian Hospital Westchester Division, White Plains, New York] experience?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, is it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how do you see it adding?  I mean, it's, you said you lived out there, but if it's--
Speaker 2: Lived out there--
Speaker 1: --it was easier--
Speaker 2: --it was kind of--
Speaker 1: --it was easier.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, and didn't have quite the commute to New York City [New York].  I was--it was working with a--again, a very interesting group of people intellectually and high caliber, you know, Cornell [University]--that our Cornell faculty in Westchester.  The job was fun.  I liked working with residents.  I liked teaching, so I was very close to the residents who were working, you know, rotating through the clinic, very much involved in supervising and teaching them, and it was a lot of fun.  At the same time, I was doing a lot of other things.  I was very active in the American Psychiatric [Association, Arlington, Virginia]-that, one of the photos you'll see of the committee that I was involved with, and was involved trying to get minority residents involved with the APA [American Psychiatric Association, Arlington, Virginia].  You know, I had gotten--
Speaker 1: How many were involved at that point in the--
Speaker 2: It was a national program.
Speaker 1: No, I know, I know, but how many?
Speaker 2: So we probably started out--geez, I'd have to, think back to the history.  This, our first group--
Speaker 1: It's so many, it's--
Speaker 2: --came on in 1975 or seventy-six [1976]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of these residents, of these, these residents.  And we must have started with about a dozen of them.  And then over the years, they expanded--the program did so.  They're some very distinguished alums of that program--I mean, in terms of their careers in psychiatry so.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Yvonne Ferguson, for example, out in California who's been, you know, president of the California Psychiatric Association Society [Sacramento, California].  I think Dr. Irma Bland was involved at one point.  Dr. Mindy Fullilove up at--who is our faculty up at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  So there, there were, there were some people who've done some--quite some things.
Speaker 1: Now what are people saying about you as a teacher, you know, and as a, as an instructor, and what is your rep-, what is the reputation that you gained, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's good--I mean, because people--I mean, when I was a supervisor, the residents seemed to take to me and want me as a supervisor.  Those who got me as a supervisor were very happy having me as the supervisor usually, and got, you know, reasonable reviews from medical students who had--I mean, they, who, you know, who I was teaching.  So I was not--I was known as a, you know, as, as, as--I was just trying to set more as a good to solid teacher.  I don't know what my evaluations were, but they were obviously enough that I've taught four--they're (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --you know, how many years.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, so you, you get involved in the American Psy-, now the American Psychiatric Association [APA] is sort of like the creme de la creme of the groups, right?
Speaker 2: Well, if--no, it's, it's our major psychiatric association.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It's the society.  It's, you know, it's the, it's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's the major guild organization, I guess, of psychiatrists in the United States.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: About--its membership has struggled of late, but used to have as many as forty thousand members.  It's maybe now, somewhere in the thirties, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Story_ID: 177935
Speaker 1: So you, you spend, isn't it two years at Westchester [New York-Presbyterian Hospital's Westchester Division, White Plains, New York]?  Is it two years?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976] to '81 [1981]--it's five.
Speaker 1: Right, five, okay.  And then that's when you come on as associate--
Speaker 2: Associate Dean here [Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York], Associate Dean for Minority Affairs.  That happened really because my predecessor, Dr. James Curtis, who is a very well-known person in terms of--I guess, what he did here in terms of the early issues and affirmative action and starting minority programs--a psychiatrist and analyst himself, now in his sort of mid-eighties.  By the way, well-worth interviewing for the project [The HistoryMakers].
Speaker 1: And his name, you say again, is--
Speaker 2: Dr. James Curtis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You really should.
Speaker 1: Is he here?
Speaker 2: He's in New York [New York], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Retired now, 'cause he left here and actually at some point, for--did something about a year, then took over as Chief of Psychiatry at Harlem [Hospital Center, New York, New York] and stayed there for a long time.  Jim [Dr. James Curtis], Jim didn't retire until he was in his early eighties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He--but in terms of just the history of African Americans and in medicine--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --now he, you want his view.  He should be taped.  He really--you got to have his viewpoint.
Speaker 1: Right, right, I know I agree with that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was leaving and so, I was invited down--didn't know it was about.  I mean, to have dinner with the Dean of the medical school [Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York] at that time.  Jim and myself, and here in the Faculty Club, and I thought it was about either some conference they were planning or something that they wanted my opinion and faculty input or something about whatever it is because, you know, I'd worked with Jim on some things before.  And then, he said--the Dean asked me, he says, that, that Jim is leaving.  Would you be interested in taking a position as Associate Dean?  And I said, well, it's interesting, but I said to Jim, you know, it's--first, you have to tell me.  I don't know what you do.  I have no idea what an associate, what it was then Associate Dean for Minority Affairs.  I had no idea what his job was with the kinds of things that he did and what, what--and so, you know, first, you had to describe it to me.  I had to negotiate more with the Dean about the fact that I'd be moving back again, you know, and working in the city.  And I had some patients out there, you know, just the negotiation thing, salary and all of that.  But it certainly sounded intriguing to me to do.  And so I took it.
Story_ID: 177936
Speaker 1: What did he say he wanted to accomplish with the position except--was there a--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was there a mission that went along with--
Speaker 2: --oh, yeah, this is 1981--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I think here now, we're going into, again, the [President Ronald] Reagan era and everything else like that.  Basically, it was to try and keep going in our school.  Its efforts, in terms of our minority summer program, that we have and have had for years, which is a program for minority college students.  Our recruitment of minority students to the medical school [Weil Cornell Medical College, New York, New York].  Affirmative action, action issues in general at the medical college.  Issues of trying to see if there are ways we could increase numbers of minority faculty.  All of these things were a part of the minority affairs position which--and at the same time, I would be doing my same teach-, you know, I'd be teaching in the Department of Psychiatry [Weil Cornell Medical College, New York, New York] and doing all the other things and involved with students in general because once you come into the medical school or involved with medical students, whether it's minority affairs, whatever, you will become involved with other students who are medical students in general because they, as students, will seek out various people in the administration for various things.  So, and we had to share with the Student Affairs Dean at the time some of the advisement and counseling issues because they would be over--they, at that time, with the way certain jobs were defined--I mean, could, could be kind of overwhelming to deal with all of that.
Speaker 1: So was it overwhelming at all for you at any, any point?  No, it wasn't.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, you had a clear sort of--now, what--
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  It's fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: More time (unclear)--doing all these things and going to more meetings and, and, you know, more things now with the Association of American Medical Colleges [Washington, D.C.] which I became very involved with and all of these things, and getting involved with issues in terms of policy with regard to minority recruitment nationally through the association.  And I got very active in that, so I was away more.  I mean, I did more traveling.  I, you know, more weekend time away.  I mean, I worked.
Speaker 1: So, what was the--
Speaker 2: My work schedule escalated.
Speaker 1: --what, what, what was the population, the minority population--
Speaker 2: Then?
Speaker 1: --then, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Here in the medical college?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this what--
Speaker 2: We were somewhere between 10 to 12 percent underrepresented minorities.  These would be African American students and a few Latino students and--
Speaker 1: Wasn't that average--
Speaker 2: It's about average.
Speaker 1: --at an institution?
Speaker 2: Well, that was average for this institution, not nationally.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Nationally was a bit below that back then still.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: And institutions were struggling to hold on to that.  It was not an easy task.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The problem nationally remains a real static applicant pool.  There's a problem in terms of minority applicants to medical schools in that the pool of students who are applying doesn't expand substantially from year to year.  It just doesn't.  And there are probably a lot of complex reasons for that, that I could--and which would be another two-hour session, which you know, I can't ever abbreviate but--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --either [HM Dr.] Alvin Poussaint or myself--both of us could, could, could, could probably give you hours and hours of tapes about trying to discuss that issue.  But--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, but it hasn't, but so that, so that my job was to try and continue that, and also be very available for a lot of the personal counseling and advisement of minority students because they really have always needed--I think, no matter what the institution is.  They need a sense of advocacy in terms of themselves, their careers, and all of that within--to come from an institution.
Story_ID: 177937
Speaker 1: And this is, you know, but see, this is what I have a question about.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your sort of feeling about this because you had not had that type of support, you know, coming into an institution--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, as a minority.  And, yet, you seem to have had a very sort of easy flow.  And I'm just wondering, did you--I mean, what was--I know they've been, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you see what--I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I get what you're getting at.  For me, personally, I just think it goes back to more something that is different.  I think that--how to put it, when I mentioned before that it was almost like one social mission--I think you operated differently or something.  I, I don't know if that was a part of it.  I also don't know whether going out of the family that I came out of--
Speaker 1: Of, right.
Speaker 2: --whether that, that was probably the more important part of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We didn't--my sister didn't.  My brother didn't.  None of us felt less (laughter) than, than other people.  I mean, that was not what we were about and there was no reason to.  We--known dad [Orville Lee Ballard] was a physician, grand [grandfather, William Henry Ballard], that--I mean there, there was not--we came--
Speaker 1: You have this history of (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --came from an educated family.  I mean you were, if you gave us a hard time around issues like that, it was crude, ill-mannered.  It was not what--
Speaker 1: You had a sense of place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where you came from, is a sense of place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you were dealing at, you know, with issues where a lot of students didn't necessarily have a sense of place is what you're saying.
Speaker 2: Right, and, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of the students came from backgrounds where they were the first to go to college--
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: --where they were not being encouraged really sufficiently where they were kind of amazed at their own abilities to succeed--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --in something like medicine.  So that this is what a lot of that was about for them.  And that's why I think they needed a lot--I do know that they needed a lot of the advocacy.
Speaker 1: Right.  So have you, so what are the numbers now?
Speaker 2: Our numbers here at the school are--what, we would have to let--we're looking at them efficiently are 18 percent under representative minorities.  Our student body total is about maybe 410, say, or so, the students--415.  Of those sixty students are African American, about a number twenty-eight to thirty are Latino, so we have a fair representation.
Speaker 1: So, are you--why do you think you've had this success here that you've had, you know, with the program?
Speaker 2: It's not a loan.  I mean, we do a lot of work within the office.  I have a, a person who's worked with me for, you know, you know, since I first came down in 1981 who is my, like secretarial assistant type, who's now the Assistant Dean for Student Affairs.  I mean, so that she's somebody who's, who's been very much a part of it all, and helped with a lot of the work.  But we've had a good press from the summer program.  We've had an admissions committee here that's very, very favorably disposed to diversity and the need for minority positions to be trained.  There are a number--there, there's a lot of faculty support in the effort.  The culture of the medical school and the student body is a diverse culture.  If I were to show you a class picture, which I could, you would see it.  Just look at the faces and you would see what a typical Cornell class looks like.  And, you know, half of the students are women.  Basically, white males may have a slight plu-, plurality, but not a majority, because half the class are women.  And then you've got all them, and you've got the African American men, the Asian men, the Latino men--I mean, just so that it's, it's got this diverse kind of culture (laughter) about it.  I think that's happened over time and that's almost what students would expect here.
Story_ID: 177938
Speaker 1: But let me-[HM] Dr. [Bruce] Ballard, because--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you've written and, you know, and I know that, you know, [HM] Dr. [Alvin] Poussaint had, you know, has these issues--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know like racism, you know, as actually, racism as a disease.
Speaker 2: Yes, sure, yes.
Speaker 1: --yes, illness.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that did not go over so well with his colleagues, you know, that he was even proposing that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he took sort of a popular route, you know, in many ways and, you know, his columns and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, in Ebony and things like that.  But I'm just wondering where you--because you know I look at your publications, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --ethnic issues in psychotherapy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Let's see, assessment of psychopathology in minorities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know.  This--there has been also this look on your end, you know, in terms of this area.  And then there were, you know, you--I think about--well, this more--well, the, the trend also with people saying that any of these traditional methodologies really could not, you know, there was the Afrocentric group saying, none of this could really address the issue of minorities because it was totally inappropriate, you know, that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that, you know, right?  Am I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I get it, yeah, with those reviews, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, okay, okay.  So what I'm asking is your, you know, I want to have some of your ideas--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure.
Speaker 1: --about the research you have done and what you think needs to be, you know, done within the--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I get it.  I, I think probably more than--I, I think I, I'm always looking at it more as a cross-cultural, transcultural set of issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In other words, I think a lot of what you people may say is a failed approach or failing aspects of approaches--what isn't looked at enough is that I think--how to put it, when you're dealing with someone with a different background.  And no matter what the background is, the issue in terms of providing services and looking at them involves a lot of trying to understand the world from that patient's perspective.  And that's what the difficulty is, I think.  And that's where--that's why when I've been involved in forums, it's always been the importance of not dismissing things.  The importance of listening to any patient's perspective, also according to the sociocultural background of the, of the person, which means that perceptions of things are not simple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it's always a common--I can still get into arguments with people.  With an African American man in this city [New York, New York], if standing on the Uptown side to catch a taxi can be bypassed.  There's no question about it.  That's New York [New York].  And cabs can pass you by.  They think you're going up to (laughter).  And it's more so with men.  As in [HM] Danny Glover was (laughter) up in arms about at one point.  There are still people who will start arguing--well, is that the only reason?  I mean, is that the reason, you know, they really (unclear)?  I don't deal with that.  I mean, I said, look, what becomes actually, probably the most common is that reason.  In all honesty, I don't think it's so much another reason.  You can see when a taxi says "off duty."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that I mean, so that sometimes in, in these forums, what I'm trying to get people to look at, as you know, for many minorities, these, these things are common experiences.  They're not unusual experiences.  So that, that means you have to start looking with a rather different perspective in terms of views of many things and trying then to understand and comprehend when a patient reports something.  You're not going to take the approach immediately that this person is being, quote, unquote, "hypersensitive".  That's not the case at all.  That's not hypersensitivity.  That's a reaction to a set of reality circumstances.  So a lot of what I'm looking at is not modifying or saying there's something wrong with the traditional approach.  You will misapply it if you don't listen to your patient (laughter).  And you really will if you don't listen to what the patient is telling you.
Speaker 1: So that's why you call it really sort of cross-cultural?
Speaker 2: To me, yes, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's, that's why you say that it's not so much--you're not even painting it black and white.
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: You're just saying that there are a lot of flowers out there, and it's important to understand things from.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And within the black and white, there are too many flowers to sort of think in terms of black and white.  And maybe this is the experience of being in New York City, but black doesn't have--I mean, black in New York City is meaningless when you have--you'd better know Jamaican, Haitian, Trinidadian, Grenadian (laughter), you know, African--which, where in Africa?  I mean, there are so many points of origin that, I mean, there may be commonalities of skin color and commonalities of experience based on that.  I mean, we are that kind of society.  People will look at you.  You get looked at in America and that can determine how you can get treated.  So it is true that there may be aspects of treatment or mistreatment that will just be based on that.  And everybody can experience them, but when you're looking at, at beyond that--gee, the family issues and the cultural traditions, and the role expectations, the gender roles--all of these things come in.  And you'd better really learn a lot about this other black person that you're trying to take care of.
Story_ID: 177939
Speaker 1: Do you find that this school of thought is gaining more acceptance?  And the only reason I say that is, you know, we have this whole thing, you know, within the larger community outside of the community, you know, of diversity.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm not saying it but, you know, diversity and it's a buzz word now for--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, really what used to be affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But are you--but there's a different thing about teaching people that they may be different, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to put--be in someone else's shoes--I guess is what I'm trying to say.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's becoming more accepted in terms of the necessity to do it.  But it--we do struggle with a buzz word aspect of it and difficulties in trying to define, find out work with, develop curricula around it, or to address it.  The buzz word for us is called, cultural competence (laughter).  And you now are hearing about that in health care settings of all kinds and in medical schools, and medical education that--and I'm sure in other disciplines--the importance of cultural competence.  What that means in trying to define it, which will teach students how it's still kind of up in the air, the extent to which people will address it or see it as a problem varies.  It's still--it's got to develop, and there's a lot that has to be done.
Story_ID: 177940
Speaker 1: What is your main interest now as we sort of sit here at this point in your career?  I mean, is it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I don't--
Speaker 1: You're still relatively--I mean, young.  You're not--
Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm, you know, getting close to retirement age there.
Speaker 1: I know what age you are.  Well, it just depends.
Speaker 2: I mean, I could, you know.  I, I haven't--have some choices I've got to think about it seriously the next couple of years.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: What are you going to do with--
Speaker 2: I mean, since I, you know, there, there will always be the issues that, that are involving to me.  I always, I like young people.  I like being involved with young people.  I'm fascinated by young people, their changes, how different groups of students might have thought about different things over the years, what happens to people, I don't know.  I, you know, I, whether I would, you know, I don't think I would be doing more in terms of direct psychiatric practice and so on.  I don't, however, it may be that in a few years, I will not be so much working at a particular job position, but may get involved in aspects of either community service programs or foundation work or whatever.  I don't know.  I'm sort of at that point where I have that interest.  On the other hand, I said, you know, your job has been wonderful, and you've gotten a tremendous gratification from aspects of it.  I wish I could play the piano more (laughter) and had the time.  And I wish that I could get back more into my arts interests and more so, which I've kind of put on hold a lot, you know.  And they were, you know, wonderful hobby interests, so there are a lot of things I'm interested in, so I don't know.  I, I can't, I don't want to be--I don't want to be that focused at this point.  I think I have been focused and I've had a specific interest.  I'm not so sure I want to do that at this point in my life.  I'm looking for getting to a period, a period of life where I can open up and let it be more flexible for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I understand.
Story_ID: 177941
Speaker 1: You had written about the black psychiatrist as an educator.  What--I mean, that is what you've been, so that's what I'm trying to get some--your views about that and how that has--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --changed over the years, you know, and peoples'--well, it doesn't, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, early on when I was giving that particular presentation--
Speaker 1: That was 1985.
Speaker 2: --I remember, yeah, that, that also had a lot to do with, with--I think that was a panel at the--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: American Psychiatric and a presentation I did at the panel.  And what I was presenting, as I recall, had a lot to do with what I saw as the appropriate roles and the coming roles of people who were finishing, who are black and trained in psychiatry--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --who are getting involved with, with medical school faculties and the whole kinds of numbers of issues that are involved there.  I think there--it had a lot to do, I'm sure, and I still feel that way.  I think there's a lot that black medical school faculty can contribute that is unique, different, and it's important to add the diversity.  There'll be perspectives that will be brought into the curriculum.  And that's the real importance to me in having a diverse medical faculty in terms of the education.  The role models are needed for the students.  The students all need to have a sense that there is a diversity at the faculty.  It's important to them.  It's an important kind of reinforcement.  It's an important kind of advisory network.  So a lot of it, you know, it's, it sort of perhaps--it hits on many different areas.
Story_ID: 177942
Speaker 1: Now, and when you look at the black community and you came out of, you know, a very stable one, but what are your--if it's, we sort of looked and we're in this very early in the new millennium.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What hopes and/or concerns do you have about this community and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I have major ones.  The problems are huge.  Regardless of certain aspects of change and certain aspects of things being better, there are tremendous economic problems that are still there.  A too large a percent of the black community is poor.  Too large a percent does not get an adequate education or training to get into the work force.  Too large of the work force is not responsive to doing that.  There is too few African Americans really, including those who are middle to upper-middle class, are progressing in terms of what we would term net worth.  That is to say, even very successful middle-class African Americans, too many are renters, and rent places not owned, are not in areas with their homes that appreciate in value, so that the net worth comes up.  In other words, there is a--they will say, well, the middle-class community is doing better.  If you were to look at the net worth issues, not that much better.  We still lag behind in that, so the economic issues are huge to me.  And I think that has an impact.  I don't know.  I still think, and I would have to check this, but you know the biggest robust and single correlate with a high performance on a SAT is family income.  More than any other single correlate is family income.  Money is important and the economic status is important.  And I think the black community still struggles a lot economically.  Those who are better off, middle class, are better, are middle class because of two incomes.  If there is a real job problem with one, it's very threatening, you know, that kind of thing.  There's too much of that.  The education systems, as you know, are just not where they should be for the kids--not enough of a focus on the kids.  The health problems, particularly in inner cities, are terrible.  And that affects kids' abilities to learn.  The problem of the young men is horrible because there are too many young men who are in the correctional system and not the education system.  And once in the correctional system, they are lost because it's a very fine education in a negative setting at how to be more (laughter)--how to get, how to manage as a criminal is an excellent education to get if you're in a criminal setting.
Story_ID: 177943
Speaker 1: So do you think integration was good?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You do?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what is wrong with this community [African American community] that seems to have problems that persist, you know, the same problems not getting any better?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think, you know, I, I think that's focusing on, on the wrong thing.  In other words, I think--
Speaker 1: The wrong thing.
Speaker 2: --integration was, was necessary.  I think--see, integration and desegregation was necessary because it was an apartheid system.  If you have any system that says you can't do this because you're the wrong color, and you can't walk into this place because you're the wrong color, or you cannot apply for this job because you're, you're not the color we're looking for.  That is horr--.  That should be done away with.  That cannot be (laughter).  It is--because that has other negative effects--to me, are worse, much more persistent.  And, no, you can't, you can't stop people that way.  I mean, it was a--if I had listened--I remember being, you were making, reflecting back on being a kid and I remember another black kid.  I think it was in a Sunday School, and when the Sunday School teacher asked what she wanted to be.  She said, I'd like to be an actress.  The comment made back to her by this black Sunday School teacher said, well, not many black people get to be actresses.  I mean, well, it's still a struggle--I think, for black women to be actresses.  On the other hand, I mean, had that kind of persistent thing gone on, I don't think you would have seen Halle Berry at all.  I mean, that's the only--why would you have seen people like that if that was a continual message?  This is not for you.  So you had to have it.  I mean, it's just absolutely necessary.  The other reason I think it's necessary is that I think, realistically, it's a diverse world.  It's a multicultural world.  Everybody has to learn to deal with whoever you have to deal with when you walk into the door, whoever is sitting there (laughter).  And so, you got to learn that some place, so that I think that's the way the world is, and that's the kind of society that we have to be.  And we're so diverse at this point, I don't think we have any choice.  The issue within black communities is that I know a lot is attributed to the issue of perhaps either a brain drain, or the fact that the pillars of the black community then sort of moved out of it, and then didn't remain within it and, hence, the community itself suffered.  There may have been some of this, true, but I think what had happened, too, is that with that movement out, what was to happen was to not then leave that community so totally behind.  And I'm not referring to the people who are necessarily black who moved out to do other things.  I don't think the society should have then sort of left that community behind.  And I think that's what happened to a great extent.  I don't think it was the issue of desegregation of the community or integration of the community because when the community was segregated, I could have counted on one hand still the black doctors in Louisville, Kentucky (laughter) when it was totally segregated.  Why?  Because the only place you could get and go to school might have been Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] (laughter).  So that it isn't that, you know, it's, it's--I think the sort of--I, I don't think we can be that short-sighted, I think we really have--what has happened is a favorable development for the nation, the culture, and a necessary one.
Story_ID: 177944
Speaker 1: It's wonderful that we do have the psychiatric armamentarium we have now.  We have many more drugs.  We can treat depression.  We can treat the most serious psychiatric disorders, bipolar illness, schizophrenia.  We're better able to do it.  As a system, though, we still are way short.  We don't have enough for the numbers of people who have psychiatric issues and psychiatric symptoms.  Dr. [David] Satcher did the best thing in his entire [U.S.] Surgeon General tenure, to me, when he brought it forward.  As our major, a major, major public health problem is mental health and mental illness.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, when, when did the development start occurring with the introduction?  I mean, there's always been drugs as a part of psychiatric treatment, right?
Speaker 1: Since the early fifties [1950s].
Speaker 2: Early fifties [1950s], okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, late forties [1940s], early fifties [1950s], not before.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Where does that development really occurred and who has been sort of key, you know, the sort of the key leaders in that area?  You know, with the--because as you said, they were, they were used to treat within an institution, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It wasn't--but I'm just wondering what was learned over that period of time, the--
Speaker 1: Well, the early--
Speaker 2: --because it never was viewed that you would treat necessarily with--you know, there were--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --shock, electric shock.
Speaker 1: There was electric and also there was hydrotherapy.  There were attempts, there were attempts to use barbituates sometimes in terms of treatment of the seriously mentally ill and so.  But what happened is one of the key early psychotropic medications, and the Phenothiazine group called Thorazine was discovered serendipitously.  It was not--what happened is that they were looking for a drug for motion sickness.  And Compazine, one of the Phenothiazines, can be effective for motion sickness for people who have, who have trouble going on boats or planes and so on.  And so, that's what they were looking for.  And they noticed that it seemed to have these other side effects of helping somewhat people who have hallucina-, hallucinations.  And so, so, a lot--this discovery was really not an intention sort of happened.  And from there, they began to develop, you know, sort of research studies.  I mean, in many ways, it was the world, it is the world of academia and science that has to do a lot of that work.  And so, I mean antidepressants is the same thing.  I mean, when they were first studying Tricyclics--I mean, what happens in the world of pyschopharmacologic studies and investigation is that those in the world of academia who are interested in the possibilities of new medications.  I mean, that's the kind of med-, that's basic medical research that has to keep going to advance that.  That's why it's so important to have an adequate budget to the National Institutes of Mental Health, you know, for such research.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And in your, your theory about the treatment of mental health now, how does it change then, you know.  And it's, do you, do you, you said [Dr. Elizabeth] Davis actually did a favor by bringing it up front and center--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that this is something that should be--
Speaker 1: Yes, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, addressed as a sort of an issue.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and not hidden.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But what are your sort of views on, you know, you know, do you take a holistic approach to things?  Are you--do you see the mind as sort of separate from the body?  I'm just trying to--okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Yeah, that's a hard, that's a hard topic.  No, I don't see the mind as separate from the body.  And I think what will happen over time is we will know a lot more about the mind as we know more about brain chemistry, brain physiology, brain pathology.  And we will know more, and we'll know more and more about how the brain operates.  It's our master organ in the body and we will learn how it operates in terms of higher functions as well.  That's coming.  We're not there yet, but there's no question in my mind that, scientifically, that's going--we're going to get there at some point--not in my lifetime, but we're going to get there.
Speaker 2: Do you see neurology merging back into psy-
Speaker 1: I think neurology may merge more back into psychiatry.  And there may be a combination of both that could ultimately emerge, although I'm not sure about this particular facet that there's something unique to me about the field of psychiatry that looks at behavior in specific ways.  Psychiatrists are fascinated by and work with behaviors.  Neurologists are less so and I don't know how that's going to play out.  But we--it--the state of knowledge is going to advance and we should be able to do more and more for people.  And even approaches advance--I mean when I was in training, I mean somebody who was severely phobic--I mean there was a way of looking at treating them in psychoanalysis or for several years getting them to try and understand the origin of the phobia.  And once they could understand it, they could begin to overcome it and address it, practically speaking.  The way a number of phobias are treated these days is more by behavior therapy and model and almost a re-conditioning process to try and do it fast and get somebody over it.  And if the person is afraid to ride an elevator, someone--a best approach could may--well, may be a behavioral one where a therapist says, we're going to get in this thing and go one floor (laughter).  Then we're going to learn to go two floors, you know.  And so that it's--rather than understanding or perhaps psychoanalytic depth-psychiatry sort of model of why you should be afraid of this.  That's going to--I mean, that's an example of the way a field sort of progresses so we don't do that anymore.  The same used to be true of the person who was agoraphobic who, you know, could not come--that used to be a similar treatment.  It--now, they are largely treated with a medication--some psychiatric supportive work with it but that, those are examples.
Story_ID: 177945
Speaker 1: Now, would you enter psychiatry again if you had to do it over again career-wise?  Do you--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I really feel-I've thought about that, and the reason I say that is I don't think that still there, there is not another field of medicine that I find as interesting still--not that I know everything about certain of the other fields, but there's nothing else that says, oh, gee, that would be fascinating to do and I would rather do that, no.
Story_ID: 177946
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be--sort of as a, you know, as career-wise, or as a--what.  I've been talking about your career so.
Speaker 2: Honestly, I would want to be known, remembered as a person who had a--very much an impact and a personal impact on the development of young physicians, more than anything else, whoever they are.  I mean, all the former students, I mean, who are out there somewhere, if some of them remembered me as someone who had a particular kind of impact for them and enhanced them personally, their lives, careers, personally, in any small way.  It's that kind of legacy that I would, I would want to leave--sort of to the world, if you can leave a legacy to the world, and to my children to remember me as a sort of what I--this is what dad did or something like that is what I would think, would be for me, would be the--a real legacy.  Personally, to them, I hope I am remembered as a successful father to them, to my wife [Eleanor Ballard] a successful, you know, a husband.
Story_ID: 177947
Speaker 1: You come from, you know, a long lineage.  And your father [Orville Lee Ballard], I noticed, you know, sort of passed away in 1972--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that was the year you passed your board.  You became board-certified, I think, in 1972 or the--
Speaker 2: I guess I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--but he did see you, you know.  And this, and you were his, you were the one that everyone said you were like him--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, in many ways.  So I'm just--but your mother [Kathryn Wise Ballard] saw more of your--she died--no, she died early, no, did she--
Speaker 2: Later.
Speaker 1: Later.  That's right, in--
Speaker 2: eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: --in eighty-nine [1989], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she outlived dad for quite a while.
Speaker 1: So your mother also saw more of your--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, success.  So, what do you think, you know, what do you think there, you know, because they were hardworking people from a lineage of hardworking people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, what do you think their sort of view of you, you know, was?
Speaker 2: Well, you mean both parents?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, dad loved the notion, dad loved the fact that I became a doctor first because he really wanted my sister, Kathryn, to become that.  She didn't want to do that.  She became a research physiologist.  But he--there is no question in my mind that he wanted one of us to become a physician.  So, I think he was delighted that I became a doctor.  He knew that I had trained in psychiatry.  Maybe I have the years off a little bit by, by a slight--I have to look up another date because I think I may have been already boarded or something like that.  But at any rate, that was not an issue.  The fact that I was trained and a doctor and working and successful, and all of that was more important to him.  And I think that was, you know, that I was, again, I was somebody in the medical life.  Mom was just, mom just wanted us to be able to take care of ourselves and work at a decent job and not have to ask anybody else for any money or (laughter).  She just said that was what she was about (laughter)--being respectable and just all of that.  She wasn't, you know, she--we could do what we wanted to do as long as we were not, you know--
Speaker 1: Dependent--
Speaker 2: --able to take care of ourselves, not dependent, yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's sort of the legacy of the family in many ways, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Period on both sides, so--
