Story_ID: 16396
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to start out by slating it, the interview.  And my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Ruth Corinne Beckford.  R-U-T-H, C-O-R-I-N-N-E, B-E-C-K-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: December---oh, today's date is Easter Sunday, March 30th, 2002 and I was--is that correct?
Speaker 1: She said March 30th, right.  Is it March 30th today?
Speaker 2: [off-camera voice]: 31st, the 31st.
Speaker 1: 31st, thirty days have September, April, June and November, all the rest have thirty-one except the second month--.  Okay, March 31st, 2002.  I was born December 7th, 1925.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have the address that we're at right now?
Speaker 1: This is my home. 150 17th Street, Apartment 102, Oakland, California 94612.  Okay, and your profession?
Speaker 2: Used to be profession.  I'm a ex-dancer.  My career is dance from three years old up.  I studied all forms of dance.  In those days, you were a dancer only if you could everything.  You didn't say "I'm a ballerina, I'm a this."  You said, "yes, I can dance.  I can tap, I can do Spanish, I can do hula, I can do baton twirling.  I can do acrobats."  So I studied all that for seventeen years.  I became a professional at age eight because they had many vaudeville shows and competitions.  And, and I used to do--contortions was my specialty.  So I would always win.
Story_ID: 16397
Speaker 1: Now, I have 5 questions I ask of everyone.  They're sort of ";People Magazine'-ish" so just bear with me, but short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Chinese.  That's, that's--when I was a little girl, a good dance lesson, my mother would say, "we get to go out for Chinese food."  I love Chinese food.
Speaker 1: And this is the real deal out here.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Gee, all bright colors.  I'm in gold today.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Jamaica, Ocho Rios.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.  I like autumn clothes and I like the feel.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase.  "Let go and let God."
Speaker 1: (whispering) I'm always so impressed with my HistoryMakers.  They just go right to it.
Speaker 2: With what, babe?
Speaker 1: With the HistoryMakers. They all, you know, have their favorite sayings, and I'd be sitting there like this--(laughs)
Speaker 2: No you wouldn't--yes you would--because you know, you know what has brought you through and "let go, let God" has brought me through, brought me through this surgery, brought me through everything.
Story_ID: 16398
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out with you talking about your father.  And if you'll give his name and talk about, you know, what you know about his growing up and his background?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Felix Beckford.  He was born in St. Mary's Parish, Ocho Rios, Jamaica.  I don't know that much about my father's background.  I know that he was a courageous, independent man.  And I know that many people in Africa and in the West Indies are all entrepreneurs.  They very seldom work for somebody.  They usually--even if it's the street marketplace, they usually have their own businesses.  When daddy came here, I think it was just a very strong move for a man to come all the way to California.  So Daddy never worked for anybody here.  Daddy had a car wash.  It used to be called Felix--in those days Felix the Cat [cartoon character], Disney's comedy person was a great thing.  Daddy had a red, two-door Ford [automobile] with a rumble seat.  I remember that.  And on the top, he had a cat and it was Felix the Cat Simonizing [wax polishing].  And Daddy would go to the wealthy, wealthy people up in Piedmont here in, in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California].  There's a Piedmont area of very wealthy people.  And instead of going to the car wash like we do now, he would go to their homes and do their car.  When they got up, their car was simonized and there.  And Daddy was always a dresser.  And he was always very straight and very--of course, always had an accent.  I never saw my father in a soft collar shirt.  He always had the starched collar attached and always wore--he always dressed elegantly.  When he went to work, he'd put the smock like, it wasn't a, coveralls or anything.  It was like a smock.  And so Daddy was always very much together.  And, and so that's what he did, was go do that.  And then we opened the first miniature golf course.  That's when golf was very, miniature courses were popular, I guess in the '30s [1930s] cause I was a little girl.  And because Daddy had been associated with some of the wealthy whites and the gardeners and stuff, they would give Daddy beautiful plants from the garden and stuff.  And our, our own backyard was beautiful with fish ponds and things, but our miniature golf course was really--people would come just to see how beautifully it was laid out.  And that was right in north Oakland [California] about three blocks from where I grew up.  It used to be on 36th and Market which is a church there now.  But the golf course was, Sunday afternoons it would be packed.  People playing miniature golf.  And so--but Daddy always had his simonizing thing.  And Daddy was a member of, one of the founding members of St. Augustine's Episcopal Church.  And I know Daddy would always dress in homburgs and spats and carved cane and gloves and always very dignified and always stood very straight.  And people used to always say "you stand just like your father."  And so, Daddy was a real character, a real independent person.  And I remember when they did the first United Nations signing over in San Francisco at the St. Frances Hotel.  Daddy went.  And Daddy said that they thought he was one of the dignitaries, and ushered him right into the front.  And he sat right in front.  That was so funny.  We all got a kick out of that 'cause Daddy used to dress and he wore the part.  So he was something.
Story_ID: 16399
Speaker 1: Your mother, what about her?  Her name?
Speaker 2: My mother [Cora Beckford] was a, a free thinker too.  I think I got my creativity from my mother 'cause my mother used to make all my dance costumes.  I can remember her sitting up at night sewing glitter and stuff.  My mother's family--my mother was born in Atlanta, Georgia.  And when she was six months old, three other families chartered a train and got the whole, all their families out because they felt that their young men would not live past the lynching.  They came out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So my mother grew up in Los Angeles.  And my mother was just amazing.
Speaker 1: Did she talk any about her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother had sisters and brothers, I don't know how many.  I remember my aunts here cause they moved up into the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California].  And now the MacArthur Freeway runs over where 35th Street, between Market and West.  That's where my grandmother grew up in north Oakland [California] which was three blocks from house.  So my aunts were really, we really had extended family right close and having aunts, elderly around you, you know, you get pampered as a child.  It was wonderful.  And my mother always said, she said when I was a fetus, she said she used to hold her stomach and say, "you are God's most whole and perfect child."  And I heard that until my mother died at eighty-six.  So between my mother's gift to me of that and my father's gift of being a Marcus Garveyite [black nationalist] and telling me how proud to be a black woman and everything, I grew up with everything you could get.  We didn't have a dime I'm sure, but I didn't know it.
Story_ID: 16400
Speaker 1: Now, do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know how they met.  I think they got married in Detroit [Michigan] and came back out here [California].  And one of the pictures in my Legacy book shows how my mother had big plume feathers on.  They dressed and they were at the San Francisco [California] nineteen--1915 World's Fair.  So I don't know how they met.
Story_ID: 16401
Speaker 1: Now, which--
Speaker 2: I was a late--I was the last child.  I'm the youngest of four siblings.  My sister [Roselyn Beckford] is still alive.  She'll eighty-four in June.  I had twin brothers [Felix and Fowler Beckford].  My sister is seven years older than me.  My brother is five years older than me.  Both of my brothers are now deceased.  And then I came along.  I was a change-of-life baby.
Speaker 1: And how much, how much younger were you from the, the, the boys?
Speaker 2: Five years.  Oh, from, okay.  So your, your sister's twelve years older?
Speaker 1: She's eight years older.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) She's eight years older, okay.
Story_ID: 16402
Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: It was north Oakland [California], I know that.  And just, I think because--my mother [Cora Beckford] used to say I used to kick to the rhythm of the beat in my crib.  So I've always had dance.  It was just a part of my life.  I never thought it was special.  My mother never let me think I was special cause I could dance 'cause she used to always say, "you know, there's always somebody who can kick higher than you."  So it kept me grounded.  But dance has always been a part--and family because every Sunday we used to go to my grandmother's [Rosa Fowler] house three blocks away.  And it was always--in those days they had what they called family socials.  And people used to recite Paul Laurence Dunbar [poet]--my aunt was a great Paul Laurence Dunbar reciter.  She could do the dialect and everything.  And my piano teacher, who quietly told my mother, "save your money," 'cause I was such a bad pianist, 'cause I didn't want to practice.  And the only reason I took it was because my dance teacher said, "if you're going to be a dancer, you have to know how to play--you have to know music."  So I struggled along, but they lived on the corner so they would come do piano recitals.  So my grandmother's house was like a meeting place on Sundays.  And we'd have teas and, you know, hors d'oeuvres and stuff.  And, and we would always--my sister [Roselyn Beckford] used to play the piano.  She was a good pianist.  My brothers [Felix and Fowler Beckford], one played the violin and one played the saxophone and I danced.  So it was always a little due--
Speaker 1: And that was, that was your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes).
Speaker 1: --and all the socials.  And they, you said they were originally from Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Atlanta.
Story_ID: 16403
Speaker 1: If you take yourself to that--back, back to that time of your childhood, do you--can you tell me what sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: North Oakland [California] where we grew up was very--there were a lot of Japanese kids who were our friends.  There were only two black people on our street.  When I went to grammar school, which was one block away, we never had a black schoolteacher, through junior jigh, high school and college.  Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] was my first teacher ever, black teacher.  It was safe.  I mean the lake that you passed to come here as we were members of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], we would do skates around the lake at night.  And roast hot dogs and marshmallows at night.  You felt very safe as little kids.  I know my best girlfriend and I, we put up tents in the backyard and sleep out, out at night.  You never had to worry about anybody coming in and harming you.  So I feel it was a very safe time that I grew up, and so close to the extended family.  And neighbors in those days knew you as you were growing up.  So you were always safe.  And I think that's what missing with children today.  They don't feel safe, not only children, anybody.  But we, we could walk home and walk each other home in the dark safe.
Story_ID: 16404
Speaker 1: And what else about your, you know, your family life in the, in the community you grew up--you said there were several, you know, Japanese families.  I mean I'm just wondering what, what was that whole experience for you.
Speaker 2: One of the smells of the neighborhood, about two blocks up from our door, from where we lived, was a very close neighborhood of Italians.  And they would always make wine, red wine.  And they used to give my father big jugs of red wine.  And when you were, when they were making their wine, that's all you smelled, was red wine being made.  And so that was a lot of fun too.  The Japanese kids were close to us until World War II when it was like science fiction, when it was just (whish sound), one day they were there, the next day they were gone.  And we cried and carried on and it was tough.  So it was really, the kids--I didn't feel discriminated against I guess because I had such a firm family background.  If some white child would say something, I would think, "isn't that sad.  They don't know what they're about."  So, and the teachers in those days, at least where I went to school, they would, they were very caring.  They loved to teach, and then you just happened to be black till you got to high school.  And then they would say, "you don't need to go to college.  You need to be a secretary or something."  And I would tell them, "no, I'm going to college."
Story_ID: 16405
Speaker 1: Now, what were you like as a young person?  Were you--
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: --were you well behaved?  Were you precocious?  Were you--I mean, what, what, what were you--
Speaker 2: I think I was well behaved because you were expected to be well behaved.  You did not want to disrespect your family.  You went to church.  You sat down.  You went to events and you were very polite.  You called all of your adult parents' friends "Mr. and Mrs."  You didn't say, "hey, Julie, hey so and so."  And that was just expected.  And all of our friends.  That's, that was the era of politeness I would say--where people were gracious to each other.  And you had manners.  So that's, that's what I grew up under.
Story_ID: 16406
Speaker 1: Now, you started dancing at age three. How did that even happen?
Speaker 2: As I said, my mother [Cora Beckford] and father [Felix Beckford] were sophisticated enough to recognize I had a gift.  And in those days all black children took tapdancing.  I mean they went and took tap.  And, but Daddy's contacts with the wealthy whites from doing their cars, told him of Florelle Batsford's [dance] studio in downtown Oakland [California].  She only catered to the very wealthy white kids.  I was her only black student.  And we knew we could not afford the take lessons.  So my mother--I told you my mother was very creative.  My mother went to her and said, "we'll clean the studio for my daughter's lessons."  And it was always done late at night, and they [fellow dancers] never knew that's how we paid for my lessons.  And I can remember as a little girl that my job was to empty the ashtrays and straighten the magazines.  And so that's how I paid for my lessons the whole seventeen years I was with Florelle Batsford.  And I just wonder how many parents today would do that.  So my mother was way ahead of her time, all the time.
Speaker 1: Now, you're absolutely right for lots of different reasons.  Now, with--do you remember reading, I mean your first sort of introduction or do you have memory of going there and, you know, impressed you as a child or--
Speaker 2: I always took private lessons so I never came in contact with the other students except at recital time.  And Florelle Batsford really cared for our family, and really cared for me a lot.  So she would always feature me in the recitals with an acrobatic dance or come out and dance on point in ballet.  And I did all those things.  And I can remember backstage, the little, other little white children looking at me and, and some would touch--you know, they, they weren't exposed to black people who were on their level to pay, they thought, for dancing classes too.  And my mother made all my costumes and so they never knew.  But, and then I, I was determined to outdance them also.  So that when I'd go on the stage, they would have go "whoa" cause Daddy would always say, "do your best, do your best."  So I always worked at it.
Story_ID: 16407
Speaker 1: So what did she--what, what kind of dance were you taking at the beginning and how did that sort of change over time cause you were with her a long time?
Speaker 2: I took all those, I took all those things with her [Florelle Batsford, dance teacher] all the time until I went and auditioned for Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer].  And I said, "they're dancing barefoot.  They're dancing with drums."  And it was just like a whole new experience for me to just dance with other people cause I had been a soloist.  And my specialty was acrobatics and that's, I graduated--after I took ballet and got on point, then I did acrobatics on ballet, on point.  I did toe tapdancing.  I used to tap on my head--'cause see vaudeville then was about acts and having unique stuff.  So I remember they would build a, like a platform here with four poles and one at the bottom and I'd put a pillow on the bottom, do a headstand and tap on the top.  So it was like that.  So that was also a gimmick that always got a lot of applause.  And when my brothers [Felix and Fowler Beckford] were little, much to their chagrin and everything, they took tapdancing.  We had a team.  Of course, they were twins so that was a big gimmick, right?  And they didn't like to do it.  And they didn't stay very long, but, but when we did it, and we would go to amateur nights cause movie theaters in those days, you got two feature films, you got a news reel, you got a comedy, you got a serial.  You got a live talent show and you got a dish.  They used to have dish nights where the whole family would come and you'd get a plate.  So you'd come every week and get you a set of dishes.  And so my brothers and I we were always the only blacks on the show, and Hal Morris, who was the MC [master of ceremonies] and produced the show really liked us.  So he'd always put us on near the end.  And the first prize was twenty-five dollars--fifteen, and ten.  Well, $25, I thought I was the richest thing in the world.  And we would get that $25.  We would always win.  So we always had a lot of fun.  And then my brothers said "no more of this," and I continued on.  But I studied all those forms of dance all those years.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--you were attracted to acrobatics.  I'm just wondering what attracted you and why, why did you have a specific gift in that area?
Speaker 2: Cause I was extremely limber.  It wasn't, "I'm going to do this."  It was just that it came so easily.  I mean I was just--I think, there's a picture, later I'll show you.  I just could just do splits and stuff easy.  It's like Cirque du Soleil [French circus], acrobatics and contortionists, they, they're amazing.  I couldn't do some of that stuff they do.  But acrobatics came easily to me.  And then from there I said, "well, I want to"--those days, it was [Bill] "Bojangles" [Robinson, tap dancer, entertainer], tapping and Eleanor Powell--I wanted to tap with top hat and tails.  So my Dad's teacher, we had a duet where we wore tophat and tails.  So it was fun to tap.  And then I wanted to use castanets and so I had castanets on.  And so it was, it was just exciting.  I loved to dance.  And it came easy so I never had to work at it.
Speaker 1: And so your parents--do you think they were, you were running around or you were--I mean what made--that's what I'm just wondering at age three.
Speaker 2: At age three, it just--I don't know, they just--as I said, they were smart enough to watch and know that I had a gift beyond where kids just kick and toddle and everything.  But I could, I can remember--cause at our house we, we used to give a lot of social parties.  They used to call them socials where people would come and dance and all that.  And, and I would sit on the stairs and watch them do the dances and when the company's gone, I could get up and do it.  I could get up (laughter).  I mean it was a line, and I think it was called heel toe or something, and I could do that dance.  Nobody taught me.  So all that stuff I think mounted up together since kicking in the crib and then watching the heel toe and, and just dancing when music was on.  So they said "let's take this child somewhere."
Speaker 1: Now you had recitals, right?
Speaker 2: I would be in Katherine--I would be in Florelle Batsford's recitals.  That's what they were called where she would show off the students that she had.  And that was, that was fun cause you got to wear lipstick.  You got to wear a costume.  And people would applaud.  And I loved all that.  So I'm an exhibitionist.
Speaker 1: And a contortionist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a contortionist. (Laughs)
Speaker 1: (Laughs) I wasn't around, well, if it was around, I didn't know about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have never seen anybody do the stuff I would do, but my Dad's teacher.  I can remember the, the step that would always stop the show, is I would pull a big powder puff out and lay it on the ground.  And I would do a bend back which meant you bent back.  And I'd place my chin on the, on the pillow, on the powder puff.  And then I walk my feet around, and turn and walk my feet around, turn and walk my feet around.  The audience would go "ahhhh!"  I loved it. So all that stuff, it was just--I just had fun.  But I never--my mother let, never let dance become quote "serious business" like dancers now. "Oh, I have to go over it"-- (shakes head for no).  It was just a part of my life.  I played tennis.  I played basketball.  I played hide-and-seek.  I did all these other things.  Dance was just a part of my life.
Story_ID: 16408
Speaker 1: Now, elementary school, give the name of your elementary school.
Speaker 2: Longfellow Grammar School [Oakland, California].  It was a block away, and that's when they were very strict about school.  Our teacher in the morning, you had show your nails were clean.  You had a clean handkerchief pinned on your outfit. And, and that's what--we had spelling bees and I can remember every Thursday morning which we hated, but I'm happy that it happened then.  Our principal would have the whole school go into the auditorium and sit and listen to an hour of the Standard Symphony.  And the Standard Symphony would have a children's hour where they would say, "what is playing now?"  And you'd say, "that's an oboe."  Or "what's playing now?"  "That's the cello."  And so that's how I got educated into symphony music.  And in those days they, we thought it was horrible.  We'd have to go sit for an hour and be still.  The whole school listened to the Standard Symphony Hour.  But because of that, it gave us a great appreciation for symphony music, classical music.
Speaker 1: Now what teachers, were there any teachers influencing you there in elementary school also?
Speaker 2: Mostly teachers in those days taught by fear.  If you don't have your homework right, we'll call--that's when teachers called your parents up.  Spoke to your parents.  And, of course, I had to come after my sister [Roselyn Beckford] and after my twin brothers [Felix and Fowler Beckford].  So we all went to the same school.  So their history was ahead of me so they knew there was one more daughter coming.  So I had a lot to live up to, but teachers were very concerned.  And they would call your family up and say, "they didn't do their homework" or "they didn't this."  Teachers now beat the kids out of the school.  They're gone before the students are gone.  So I'm lucky that in those times, when you had to do penmanship, when you had to practice writing correctly and all that.
Story_ID: 16409
Speaker 1: Now, you said at eight you had your first professional performance.
Speaker 2: Started getting paid, that was wonderful.
Speaker 1: So can you describe that?
Speaker 2: I can remember, my mother [Cora Beckford] used to say that as a little girl I was very--(laughs)--I was very clear on what I wanted.  And my mother would say, I would go to, like, folks had a lot of teas and things in those days, and my mother would say, I'd say, "that floor's not clean.  I can't dance on that floor."  My mother said, she'd be so embarrassed that I would, I would say, "no, I can't dance on that floor."  And they would have to clean the floor.  And then they would pay you two, three dollars and I'd be happy camper.  "Oh, no, I could not dance on that floor."
Speaker 1: Now, but, no, what, what happened though at eight.  That's what I'm wondering, when you, when you had your first--
Speaker 2: Well, because I had already studied now five years remember.  And I had private lessons.  That means it concentrated on my training.  It wasn't like a class you divided--so by eight I was pretty good.  I was like a twelve-year old dancer, I would imagine.  So, and there, in those days there were a lot of civic and social clubs.  People had civic and social clubs.  All kind of names.  I remember my aunt was a member of Meat and Eat, Meat and Eat.  They would play one game of bridge and then the rest was meet and eat and talk and have a good time.  And so there were many little social clubs.  The, the Dukettes and the--what, I was one in called--what was the name of our club?  Spellman's.  So there was a lot, but there were a lot of fraternal organizations.  There was big Black Masonics and big Black Elks.  So there was a lot of social clubs, and I would perform at those places, if, if they were something I thought was worth it--and a clean floor--and they would pay me--at eight, nine and ten.  And that carried all through my career 'til I ended.  I said, "oh, un-un, we're not going to go down there and dance."  Oh, the night clubs, because nightclubs then were big stuff.  They had big shows with dancing girls and comedians and all that.  And Slim Jenkins here on 7th Street [Oakland, California] was a big nightclub.  It was the hot spot, and we people would come out here from back east and perform there.  And Slim would ask me to come in and dance.  I said, "un-un, I'm not going to dance here, in a nightclub."  I didn't want to dance in front of drunks.  I wasn't going to do a strip and I knew they wouldn't appreciate what I was going to do, a Spanish or a hula or something.  So I said, "no, no, no, I won't dance there."
Speaker 1: What of that training in those early years did you, well, going forward, you know, when you went on more to your career, were there any like critical things you learned or technique or, you know, other things that would bode you well for the future?
Speaker 2: I think my career was basically influenced from my home training.  I knew from home training to have goals.  I knew from home training your word was your bond.  I knew from home training, be on time.  I knew from home training to be always your best out there.  Don't do anything half stepping.  So that I carried into my career, and my career didn't influence me that way.  I brought all that good home stuff to my career.  And I think that's why I was successful because I went into my career with, with such high self-esteem, which came from home.  So when you're made to feel wonderful at home, but not to have a big head, but you knew that you were gifted, and that God loved you and the family loved, you went out and nothing would bother you.
Story_ID: 16410
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other subjects you liked in school or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Sports.  I was good at sports because I was a good dancer.  So basketball, I could jump higher, and I was really into tennis.  My brothers taught me how to play tennis.  And my brothers taught me how to swim.  And we were, we were close.  I always--I used to hear brothers and sisters fighting.  I would say "why do, why"--we were not allowed to fight because my mother would always say, "you love our brothers and your sisters."  So we, we didn't get--I've never been hit.  I didn't get spankings, not that my--my brothers got spankings.  But I never got a spanking because I'm such a crybaby.  But they would say--they would start talking to me, and I would go into drama crying.  And so I never got spankings.  So I have never--and in school, in junior high school when girls would fight over some boy or something, I used to say "that is so dumb.  I'm not going to get out there and fight and get all scratched up in the face over some boy."  So I have, I have never been hit.  I've never been in a fight.  And I'm--it's hard to get me angry cause I always feel, it's not worth it.  This too will pass.  So I had that philosophy way back when girls would say meet you in the lot after school.  And I would just get--I don't know if it was because I had twin older brothers or I could run fast or what.  But I never was challenged.  And I always made friends--in those days north Oakland and west Oakland--west Oakland was more, concentration of blacks.  And they had some tough girls in west Oakland.  And I can remember when I went to Tech High School [Oakland, California], the girls who came to Tech, which was in north Oakland from west Oakland, they were some tough girls.  I said "I'm going to be friends with them."
Story_ID: 16411
Speaker 1: Now, you know, I want to--this whole with your father [Felix Beckford] being West Indian and your mother [Cora Beckford] southern, you know, I sort of think that's just--
Speaker 2: Well, really Mama was from, really California--
Speaker 1: Oh, California (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She grew up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], yeah, she grew up out here.
Speaker 1: But was there any messaging in your house from your father about work ethic.  You know cause typically people of, you know, West Indian and Caribbean background do things and approach things in a different way
Speaker 2: I guess just by osmosis I just watched that Daddy would get every morning and go with his Felix the Cat [cartoon character], red Ford [automobile] and work and come home.  And that was just, that wasn't any big deal made out of it, he just did it.  Mama was a stay-at-home Mom.  It was just--everybody was stay-at-home Moms cause everybody didn't have to have-- own an apartment house and have the latest designer clothes.  I mean you made your own clothes.  I made all my own clothes and still to this day, I design my own clothes.  I just don't make them anymore.  But I used to make all my own clothes.  That morning, get up and make a dress, wear it to the party that night.  And then I used to knit a lot.  So I had hand-knit cocktail dresses and stuff.  In fact, my teenaged clubs, my Modern Dance Honor Society in the City Recreation Department, the girls who had auditioned to become into the Honor Society, their year project was to knit a club sweater, said "you got a year to knit your sweater."  And when we'd go out as a group, we'd have on these powder blue, hand-knit sweaters and dark skirts.  We'd walk in with perfect posture and folks would go, "who are they?"  Those girls can knit to this day.  And when they got older, into the young adult group, the DuKays, they had to make their outfit, dress.  And it was sort of camel colored and so.  So I always was concerned that they learned basic skills, life skills because one out of all of them would ever become a dancer.  But they'd all become women.  So I always believed in not following the trend if you don't want to or have to, just because they say, "this year we're wearing red."  If you don't like red, don't wear red.  So, I wanted to teach free souls.
Speaker 1: Freeing one's soul.
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Free your spirit.  See you don't have to follow [Gianni] Versace [fashion designer] or somebody.
Speaker 1: But how did you know, did you, do you think from the beginning you were a free soul and sort of your own person from the very beginning?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause my mother was. the Fowler Girls, we called my, all my aunts.  And my mother used to say, when they were younger, they were called the Fowler Girls cause they were always very elegant.  And they would make their own stuff.  So, I said, you know, you go to the store, it's not going to fit my curve and bump and lump and straight.  And when it's hand-tailored it fits you, and you can, say " I like pockets on this side" and the store doesn't have pockets.  And like this, they're not going to have this (points to neckband).  I had the material to do--I wanted to do this.  So you just--my mother was a free spirit.
Story_ID: 16412
Speaker 1: Now you went to Herbert Hoover--
Speaker 2: Junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you--
Speaker 2: That was three blocks from home--
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, everything walking--
Speaker 2: Everything, yeah, one block to Longfellow [Grammar School, Oakland, California], so , so the kindergarten class, we all went to Hoover.  So we all stayed together.  We all went to Tech cause we could walk to Oakland Technical High School, which--so it, it was a little community and you were all close because you went all through school together--
Speaker 1: Now, do you--
Speaker 2: --'Til the war.
Speaker 1: Do you--what was--was there anything that period in junior school or anyone who influenced you there.  I mean you have a strong family that's influencing you, I see so--
Speaker 2: And all the neighbors, you  know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My extended family, my, my aunts' friends and my mother's friends and daddy's friends, a lot of them lived in, you know, you'd see them at church, you'd see them at socials.  And they watched out for you and were concerned for you.
Story_ID: 16413
Speaker 1: And can you tell just some anecdotes about, you know, just growing up, just a--you know, some other memories, some other--cause you, you tell very good stories--
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: Just say, what, what other memories do you have of that period?  You know, whether these are around your dance recitals or home life or school?
Speaker 2: I can tell you one of my fun dance recitals.  As I said, we were all members of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], the black YWCA, which was based in west Oakland [California].  And, but the white YWCA was at 1515 Webster Street where it still is.  And in those days, as I said, most of the kids took tap dancing, everybody tapped.  And I always did all the other stuff.  So I told my mother I wanted to give my own recital cause I had this repertoire of stuff, right.  And so we said "well, let's use the Girl Reserve Club."  So the whole Girl Reserve Club under, our leader then was Jesticia Davis, my music teacher.  And she played the piano very well.  So we put together this show.  And we did it at the Y[WCA] on 1515 Webster cause they had a stage and everything.  We sold out the house.  And I would do my little solo dances and then the Girl Reserves would come out 'cause some could sing.  And they would be like the background doing the hula and I would be in front doing my hula dance solo.  And I can remember we did a real cute dance called Chattanooga Choo-Choo, the song where we were shoe shine boys and then we'd get up and we'd dance--oh, it was hot stuff.  So that was my solo kind of performance.  And then in the last number where I had this ballet--no, it wasn't the last number.  It was the last number before the intermission.  I had an on point classical ballet piece to do with a tutu and all that, and sprained my ankle, early in the dance.  And here's my mother in the front row, my dance teacher, Ms. [Florelle] Batsford, and all--a house full of people.  And we'd prepared and worked this hard.  And those days, you said, the show must go on.  I went right through that number and nobody ever knew I sprained my ankle.  At the intermission, I was back there crying, and they called my mother back there and Ms. Batsford and said--and my ankle by then was getting bigger and bigger.  And they were saying, "well, you have to stop the show."  I said, "I can't stop the show.  We've rehearsed and put this all together.  The house was full.  I'll do the rest of the show."  I did the whole show.  And no one knew my ankle was swollen and sprained badly.  After we went to the hospital, I walked on a cane and blah, blah, blah.  But that was the determination to do what you said your word would do.
Story_ID: 16414
Speaker 1: And I can remember my birthday, my sweet sixteenth birthday, I'd had a wonderful sweet sixteenth birthday party, which was a, which was a Saturday.  The next day we all were going to the neighborhood movie theater where everybody went on Sundays.  And in the middle of the movie, they stopped the movie and across the screen they put, "all military personnel report to your base, the United States is at war with Japan.  Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] has been bombed."  We didn't know anything.  "Where is Pearl Harbor?"  We knew nothing except we were at war.  And they stopped the movie, and everybody ran out.  And we all ran home.  We didn't know if--we thought we were going to be bombed any minute.  And I can remember asking my father, "where is Pearl Harbor?"  We didn't know where it was.  And Daddy told us and everything.  And everybody was just scared and the whole neighborhood was quiet.  And that was the first day of the war [World War II].  And then at Tech [Technical High School, Oakland, California] the next day, people had written, "go home Japs, dirty Japs."  And here were our Japanese friends with us, and we were crying and--it was a time.  And here on the West Coast, especially in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], where military bases were concentrated.  And we had block wardens.  And I thought about 9-11 [terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and Pentagon], and I said, "we lived through that," you know, where you didn't know--when the air raid siren would blow, and you had to turn out all the lights and pull down the blackout curtains, and fill your bathtub with water in case the water mains were broken, and get your sand out in case there were incendiary bombs.  And, and just be frightened to death, and quiet--the streets were real quiet cause the car would park until you heard that all clear signal, then you'll go "whew--we aren't bombed."  And because we lived on MacArthur Boulevard [Oakland, California], which used to 38th Street until the Bay Bridge was built, and then they moved all the houses back fifty feet and made it MacArthur Boulevard, all of the servicemen going overseas would all pass our house in convoys.  And we would hear this rumble way off, with all these big trucks coming with these boys where they were sit open in the truck.  And you could see them.  And we would hear the, the trucks coming.  And everybody would run out to the sidewalk to wave goodbye to the guys.  And they would wave goodbye and we would wave goodbye.  And they would all pass in front of our house.  And that was, that was something.  And then, of course, gas was rationed, sugar was rationed, meat was rationed.  Everything was rationed.  So those were some scary times.  And then--cause at night you would hear these, all, raid, air raid sirens going off.
Story_ID: 16415
Speaker 1: So really, you know, people talk about the Depression, but this was period of time that was very frightening, especially in all of this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean, you know, the other part of the country, that's different.  But the concentration that you had of Asian population--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right here. And, and I would go dance and entertain the soldiers through the USO [United Service Organization].  And we had a black USO at DeFremery Center [recreation center, Oakland, California] which was one of my offices when I taught for Modern Dance.  And that was where all the advanced dance students took lesson.  But back in the war [World War II], that--first, it was a private home of a wealthy family.  And they lived in that mansion cause west Oakland then had many big mansions.  And my Latin teacher at Tech[nical] High School [Oakland, California], that's the house she grew up in DeFremery Park.  And so that became the nice girls USO cause we had to have our parents there as chaperones and it was really a great USO.  And we would take shows from there out to the various military bases around here and entertain the soldiers.  And I remember they would give us meat.  And we'd say, "oh, we got meat," you know, cause they had all these rations in the, in their kitchens and, and it was just fun.
Story_ID: 16416
Speaker 1: And do you--the community, you said people left from your community.  Did those, did--who ended up eventually moving back, you know, where the Japanese had left--because they were gone for awhile, right?
Speaker 2: Right. Black people became, began moving in because this was the influx coming out.  And they were working in the shipyards and things.  I can remember, we had a big--our house sat up, so we had a two-car garage underneath cause we always had two cars besides Daddy's [Felix Beckford] business car.  We had--in those days, it was a big Buick.  It was a seven-passenger Buick [automobile] where we had flower vases on the side, inside, and you pulled the shades down.  And it had jump seats, and the tires, wooden spokes and then they had running boards.  And cause I remember we would go over here to Yosemite National Park [California], which is one of the "Seven Wonders of the World."  And I can remember Mama [Cora Beckford] packing all the cans and the cooking utensils and tents and things on the running boards.  And on top of the car, we would put all the mattresses.  And we'd go to Yosemite, and up there on a dime.  My mother used to say, "I hope we don't have to coast home on the gas."  (Laughs).  But Mama was an adventuresome soul.  And other parents never went, but we went everywhere.  We went everywhere.  And so the car and it was just--so the blacks began to come in and the neighborhood changed slightly then.  But still, we never had a black school teacher.
Story_ID: 16417
Speaker 1: Tech[nical High School, Oakland, California] in those days was a very wealthy--that's where the wealthy white kids went.  They went to Tech and they went to Berkeley High [School, Berkeley, California] mainly.  And in Tech in those days, we had to wear uniforms.  We had to wear a white middy and a dark skirt so that everybody looked equal cause these kids would come to school in chauffeured limousines.  Tech had very few blacks.  I was the first black valedictorian in the graduating class, me.  And I remember I spoke on the arts.  And I was such a crybaby--I, I was always the class speaker or the class president from grammar school, junior high and high school, and I would cry at each one of them, could hardly get my little speech out before I'd be crying and carrying--and my mother used to say, "please, don't cry.  Please don't die crying cause if you die crying they're going to have bury you face down.  You look so bad when you cry."  So I was up there struggling not to cry.  And I would always cry.  And so that was funny.
Speaker 2: So what courses were you good at in school?  I mean what classes did you like or what subject matters did you like?
Speaker 1: Um, public speaking.  I liked public speaking.  I never took acting in school.  I didn't ever take dance in the dance group cause they were doing amateur dancing, I thought.  And I'd already passed that stuff.  I was just an average student.  I had to work hard for what I got.  My brothers, I always said they all got the brains and I just got the brawn cause one brother went into, graduated from [University of] Cal[ifornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Cal in biology and the other one was in law.  So they were the brains.  And when I went to Cal, they would guide me on what classes to take and I was the baby sister.  I used to, oh, I used to die cause I'd see these cute guys and I'd come home and say, "Mama, Beck said, introduced me, 'this is my kid sister'" and I would die.  And I was their kid sister.  And it used to always bug me because they were both Alpha [Phi Alpha, fraternity] men.  And so the Alpha guys would come over, and I'd get all excited--"this is my kid sister."  And I'd say, "there it goes."  But anyway I had a good time, and they guided me through.
Speaker 2: And when it was time for you to graduate, was there any thought that you would go, you know, straight on or were there other things that you--
Speaker 1: You mean from college--I didn't graduate--
Speaker 2: Oh, not from college, from high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, I knew I'd go on to Cal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was just automatic.  Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But Cal only had--they had no dance majors at Cal.  The only dance major here was at Mills College [Oakland, California], which was a private, all-girls school of the very wealthy.  So when I went to Cal I had to physical education, which was the closest, but I always liked tennis and sports anyway so it didn't bother me.  So I did that.
Story_ID: 16418
Speaker 1: I want to ask you of the things that you did, whether it was the hula--I mean did you like doing the hula hoop--hula hoop, right?--
Speaker 2: (Singing) A little brown gal, in a little grass skirt, in a little grass shack, in--oh, yes.  I loved it all.  It was dancing.
Speaker 1: It was nice just now. (Laughs)  You got any more of those?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  See, I'm a frustrated singer.  Let me tell you.  I said when I--I have met Nancy Wilson [singer].  And I said, "oh, in my next life I want to be singer" 'cause I said, "you don't have to sweat.  And you can come out looking sharp.  Dancers are puffing and blowing and sweating and tired."  She said, "I want to be dancer."  I said, "oh, boy, but if I could be singer."  And I, and my friends used to ask, tease me about wanting to be singer cause I said, "boy, that's a cool way to make it up on that stage and be cool back."  And so I always feel you should never die and not have done your secret ambition.  So I went to--this is later on--I went to Merritt College [Oakland, California] and took a voice class.  My girlfriend was teaching so it was a big joke.  So, but when it came time for the end of the semester, a school show, she said, "now, you've been in this class.  You've got to do something."  I said, "girl, I can't get up there and be singing and"--this was fun.  "You have to do it."  So we had this big show at Laney College [Oakland, California].  I said, "well, let me change my name so they won't know it's Ruth Beckford up there singing," right.  But all my friends knew I had always wanted to sing.  I just think that's so cool.  So I called myself Corinne which is middle name.  And I talk/sang 'Nobody Loves You When You're Down and Out.'  So, you know, I was acting by then, so I was just acting, "nobody loves you."  And when I came out on stage, and I had this dress split up to here and down to here.  And I had put a, a hanky in my ring.  Oh, I was ready.  And it the scene, that was a night club scene, so on stage with tables and people sitting.  And I came out with this hanky.  First thing I heard in the audience, "hey, that's Ms. Beckford."  My cool was blown.  Didn't bother me.  I said, "this is my chance to be on stage and sing," and I sang, 'Nobody Loves You When You're Down and Out.'  I tore that up.  I had the best time.  So that was my secret ambition.  I said, "I don't care if I'm good or bad"--and I was on the stage with the Edward Hawkins Singers who were great.  I mean these were serious singers.  And that was their profession--and here I come.  I had more fun than they did.  I just had a good time.  So that was my secret ambition.  But when I come back, I'm going to be a singer, a cool singer now, not a hardworking singer.
Speaker 1: Now, the Edward Hawkins Singers, what was that, what were they doing?--
Speaker 2: They did 'Oh Happy Day,' that was their big hit.  He lives around on the corner now.  So they were very popular and they came out and sang.  They, that's why the house was packed, I'm sure.  But it didn't bother me cause nobody knew it was me.  And I was Corinne.
Story_ID: 16419
Speaker 1: Now, you know--before I get--what are toe acrobatics?
Speaker 2: Toe acrobatics.  You have to be, you had to be in an advance class of classical ballet or en pointe in toe shoes where you dance on your toes.  And I incorporated that with my acrobatics.  So I would do flips and things en pointe, instead landing flat, you would land on your toes.  And I have a picture to show you about that.
Speaker 1: Now, was that something--that's not what I hear about very--you don't hear about that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was vaudeville days, where you had acts.  You always wanted to be different and one up on somebody else.  So someone else would come out and do a ballet dance en pointe.  Somebody else would come out and do an acrobatic dance.  I put them together, so who won? (Laughs). Yeah, got that right.
Speaker 1: Now, now can you talk about the vaudeville days, just a little bit, you know.
Speaker 2: Again, I only, I only did it in, in theaters--
Speaker 1: Right, in theaters where--
Speaker 2: I didn't do it in nightclubs, wherever it was clean.  I didn't do it in nightclubs.  And even as a little girl, and until I retired, when I would go back stage in the dressing rooms, which were always horrible, I would always spread my towel out over my area, and put my makeup out and have it really like a nice little clean area.  I think--Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] always had wonderful dressing rooms and always set up for her.  And so I had my, my dressing room.  And--but vaudeville, they never had good back dressing rooms so I always made my own thing good.  Now, also, doing a variety of dances made me be accessible to the theaters where I could've done shows in clubs.  I chose to do them in theaters, movie theaters.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the vaudeville, what was it like and how many acts would be on, you know--
Speaker 2: A show would have like ten acts.  They'd always have an accordion player.  That was my only competition.  If the accordion player came out and played, (singing) "lady of Spain I"--you know, they did that fast song.  I'd think, I'd say "oh, Lordy, don't let them win."  And they'd have comedians, they'd have tap dancers, they'd have magicians, all--a real variety show, a variety show.  And I'd come out, and my brothers and I would come out and do our bit.  Then they'd hold their hand over each act.  And the audience would applaud and we'd win.
Speaker 1: Would you get prizes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty-five bucks, first prize.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter).
Speaker 2: Fifteen and ten. $25.00, it was like $500 today.
Story_ID: 16420
Speaker 1: Now, talk about meeting Ms. Dunham.
Speaker 2: My brother, one of my brothers was still at home.  And he said, "you need to go and audition for Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer]."  I had never even heard of Katherine Dunham.  I knew 'Cabin in the Sky' was playing in San Francisco [California] starring Ethel Waters [actress] and, and Katherine Dunham.  And so my mother [Cora Beckford] got tickets, and we went over to the Curran Theatre to a matinee in San Francisco.  Curran is still there.  And we saw the show.  And I had never, ever seen black people dance like that with all these elegant costumes cause Mr. [John] Pratt was her costumer and did fabulous costumes.  So when the show was through, we, we went down the stage entrance and went in, and asked to meet Ms. Dunham.  And she was very gracious and said,--well, this is the mat--this is between show, the matinee and evening show.  So most of the dancers would go eat and kind of rest.  But she had her entire company go sit down in the audience, a darkened theater and I did my acrobatic dance for her company and her.  And I had a finger cymbal dance where you put round finger symbols and you would play them yourself.  That was my only accompaniment, was my finger cymbal.  And I remember I had on a kind of Egyptian outfit with balloon pants and a gold top and a gold--did my little dance.  Got through.  Ms. Dunham came back.  The company then went on to eat or whatever they were going to do.  And Ms. Dunham came back and said, "that was just wonderful."  She always talked soft.  "I would like for you to sign seven years contract and dance with the company."  And, of course, I was overwhelmed and flattered and carried on.  And, and I said, "but I"--she said, "well, just think about it.  Come back tomorrow, and in three weeks we'll be here studying repertoire.  You can learn the Dunham Technique, learn the repertoire.  And we're getting ready to go up to Canada.  And we'll be gone for just three weeks, and you can come along and do that, study here for three weeks, tour three weeks."  And I was so excited.  We could hardly get home.  That night at dinner, at dinner table cause we always sat down and had dinner together.  I said, "Ms. Dunham said I can sign for seven years and travel with them, and oh, that was going to be so great."  And I asked Mama and Daddy [Felix Beckford] "what should I do?"  And they said, you do what you think you should do.  And I knew education was always the highlight in our family.  Get your education, get your education.  And if I had not had an education and got injured in dance, where would I be?  A dumb ex-dancer.  So I went back that next day, my mother and I went back over to the studio and said, "I'm sorry, I won't be able to join your company.  I have to go to college."  And because Ms. Dunham was scholar herself, I think she respected that, and said, "well, would you like to learn the technique and travel with us up to Canada for three weeks?  Can you get out of high school?"  Well, that was my Senior year.  I was seventeen and I knew I had finished all my requirements.  So Mama said, "yeah, you can do that."  And so Ms. Dunham said, "but your mother will have to come with you cause you're too young for the company."  I don't think she knew I was seventeen cause I looked so young.  And so Mama toured with us.  And Mama became the company Mother.  And I was like the pet of the company cause I was the baby and Ms. Dunham always kind of sheltered me.  So I had a good time for those, for that tour.  And when we got back--well with that tour, let me say, that was my first time to give autographs.  I was so excited.  It was the first time to get flowers backstage from people I didn't even know; first time to, you know, people would be lined up in the stage entrance, you know.  So it was really like a superstar, and that was a thrill 'cause here I was always the only black dancer in Florelle Batsford's recitals.  So that was really an eye opener.  First, of all dancing with other people on the stage, dancing my culture, dancing barefoot with drums.  And Ms. Dunham featured me in some of the numbers.  So that was wonderful.
Story_ID: 16421
Speaker 1: Now, 'Cabin in the Sky,' it's--her [Katherine Dunham's, dancer, choreographer] legs were supposed to be insured by some--
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: For how much--they say like--I had read like a quarter of a million [dollars].  I mean I've heard different things.  I read a hundred thousand. I've--
Speaker 2: A million.
Speaker 1: A million!
Speaker 2: I think it was a million.  I'd have to look in my book on her.  But she and, and Marlene Dietrich [actress], I think, their legs were insured for that with Lloyds of London [insurance company].  She had great legs and she used them well.  And beautiful feet.  She had high insteps on her feet.
Speaker 1: When you, when you first saw her dance, was that--I mean you saw the whole show--
Speaker 2: Show.
Speaker 1: --the whole show which would be an experience really, but what were the feelings that sort of came out of you because you had been doing vaudeville, which was different, a totally different production--than 'Cabin in the Sky.'
Speaker 2: I always solo dancing.  So it was just, I can remember just being in awe of seeing these beautiful dancers, black, those bodies looked so good under the lights.  And the drummers, and I'd never seen anything like that.  So I was in awe the whole time.  I would go to classes and learning her technique, and I had never had that kind of bar technique.  I'd done ballet bar, but not ever a Dunham bar, which was tough (laughs).  She had a tough bar.  But I, I--my body was more flexible than her dancers because I was a contortionist so I could do all that stuff.  So it was just applying myself.  Then I learned all of those dances, and I can remember I opened the dance for 'Tropicana' because I could kick really high.  And I remember I had this big basket of fruit on my head.  And I would kick and turn and have this fruit, and I'd be--I'd cross the stage by myself, whoa, talk about exciting.  Those were fun.
Speaker 1: And, so you, you were--where did you perform again?  You said--
Speaker 2: With her?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Well, before we went on tour, we did a show at the Sir Francis Drake, at the Sir Francis, St. Francis Hotel in Union Square in San Francisco [California].  I can remember doing that.  And then we went on tour.  So we did Seattle [Washington]--all that on up into Vancouver [British Columbia] and Victoria [British Columbia], Canada and back down.
Speaker 1: And people's reaction to this whole, you know, the Dunham Technique and--are--
Speaker 2: She would leave them standing, cheering cause they'd never--the audiences had never seen anything like that either, you know.  This was new on the West Coast.  And she was the first person to ever incorporate anthropology and dance.  So she was a door kicker open herself.  So by the time she got out here, she was all, she had already been the European, you know, superstar.  So, and she had a studio in New York [New York] where she invited me, after I left the company and after I had founded the Modern Dance Department here, to come there and teach Modern at her studio.  So I got a leave of absence from my job here and went to New York.  And that was fun.  Taught at her studio there.  And they used to have studio parties, which I brought out here and did at my studio.  We had studio parties where everybody who took classes and all their friends would come and just have a big party.  That was a lot of fun.  So I used to have them, mine were called mambo sessions, studio parties and they would be packed, just jammed with people, just dancing and having a good time.
Story_ID: 16422
Speaker 1: Now, when you--was there anything else you learned about working with Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer] or that exposure with her?  I mean you, you've even said, "we're different types, but I always had her respect"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I'm just saying, was there anything else that you learned or that--.
Speaker 2: I think the one thing I learned was that I did not want my company to be my living.  I did not want my company to depend on me for their mode of living 'cause I, I never believed in being a starving artist.  I always wanted to eat good, eat good, drive good, look good.  So I was not a dramatic, you know, for my art--"oh, oh, oh, for my Art."  I'm sorry I touched that.  I was never that type.  I, I wanted to do what I wanted to do, but in comfort.  I said, "I cannot create hungry or worry."  So I learned that from her, but she was always struggling for the next engagement, the next engagement.  And I didn't never want to do that.  So I learned that early.  I also learned that I didn't want to live out of a suitcase all the time.  And so I learned that from her.
Story_ID: 16423
Speaker 1: Now, also, let's put into perspective, her dance within the United States, just period, you know, at this period of like the 1940s because and, you know, in that sort of period of time.  And where was--because--
Speaker 2: In that period Modern dance was becoming "the" dance.  When I went to [University of] Cal[ifornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I had already, now just left Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer] to go to college.  And I can remember they had Beginning Modern Dance.  I said, "well, let me sign up Beginning, 'cause I don't know nothing about Modern dance."  I signed up for Beginning Modern Dance.  When I walked into that great big gymnasium at UC Berkeley, when I went to get my leotard from the check-out thing, the lady on the checkout desk went (mimes wide-eyed expression).  I said, "I'll take one leo"--that set me off, right?  Said "I'll take one leotard for Modern Dance."  Took my leotard, put it on, walked up the ramp to Room 230--I'll never forget the room.  It's a huge--it's one of the biggest rooms in the women's gym.  And when I walked in the room, all around the wall, long room (unclear) there were about a hundred-fifty white girls warming up in Modern Dance.  And when I opened the door and walked in, it was science fiction.  The room went (makes whooshing noise).  It froze.  (Laughs).  They had never seen a black dancer at UC Berkeley.  I walked in, went and sat on the floor against the wall and just relaxed and watched them--pretty soon they all went back to warming up.  And I know they wondered, "why isn't she warming and getting ready."  I just sat there, and said, "that's warming up?  They can't kick, they can't"--so the teacher walked in.  I got up and got on the front row, center, had never done Modern dance.  But I said, "you can only kick it so many ways and arms so many ways and I know I can do that, right."  Got on the front row.  The class was such a breeze and it was so easy that after class, the teacher said, "Ms. Beckford, may I speak to you?"  All the class was, they were going down the ramp to get into their--change clothes.  So Ms. Caryl Cuddeback, who I owe a lot to, she's passed on, she said, "it's evident that you're too advanced for this class.  I want you to come and take the Advanced Modern Dance class."  So, same thing happened when I walked into the Advance Modern Dance class.  Now, they could dance, but I said, they're still, haven't got the years I had.  So I got on the front row again and did the class easily.  It was just another way to move your body.  So after the class, Caryl Cuddeback said, "you're really too advanced for this class too.  I want you to come to San Francisco [California] and study where I study, at the Anna Halprin-Welland Lathrop Modern Dance Professional Studio."  She said "still take this class."  And so every Thursday, we would drive over together.  And I would go to Anna Halprin-Welland Lathrop Dance Studio on Union Street in San Francisco, now, which is a plush street, but then it was just Union Street.  Of course, when I walked in there, the students--(mimes wide-eyed expression)--a black Modern dancer.  Well, Anna Halprin and Welland Lathrop just embraced me cause they wanted dancers.  And Anna and I to this day are very close.  Her granddaughter is named after me.  I mean she's Jewish; I'm black.  We just embrace.  She's just a good soul and we've been friends since forty--the early '40s [1940s].  So when I went to their school, I got on the back row there cause these were pros.  I said, "mm-mm, I'd better get in the back. This is no college group."  But I worked very hard and got into their company and was the only black in the company.  And when we'd come out on stage, cause they were the top.  And Welland and them had beautiful costumes too.  And I can remember we were doing [Johann Sebastian] Bach partite and I had a solo.  And I came out in the center of the stage with this beautiful bronze, fitted and in a full skirt, and you could hear the audience go--(inhales deeply)--"what is a black woman doing up there doing this?"  And, of course, that just made me kick harder, turn better, do everything.  So I credit them with being very courageous to put me as one of their featured people in their company, which was top stuff.  And everywhere we'd go, we had to, "what is this?  What is that?"  Didn't bother me because of my home training.
Story_ID: 16424
Speaker 1: Now, several questions I have for you.  One is technique because there's technique involved in each type of dance and often--well, I'm more familiar with ballet to Modern or whatever, but people don't, are not always able to go from one technique to the other--and pick it up.  And it seems like you have the gift in that.  And I'm just wondering--
Speaker 2: Well, but you see my talent was truly a gift.  This was a God-given gift.  I never--when I was doing tap, you never knew I did something else.  I would get in there and, you know, tap dancing was swinging and smiling and all.  I would do that.  When it was time to do flamenco, I was into that.  When it was time--it was just a gift cause you can see--when, when Modern was really popular and I was teaching Modern dance for the City of Oakland [California], Modern dancers almost had their, their own style of dress.  hey would wear the pony tail and the barefoot sandals and that was the '60s [1960s].  Hippy thing I guess.  But, you realized that they could never do ballet because they were Modern dancers and Modern, ballerinas would look strange trying to do Modern dance.  I never had that problem.  I just did it.
Speaker 1: And when you--but this is back regarding Modern dance, who were your audiences at that point in time because it's a new art form.  That's why I'm just--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a Modern dance professional company.  I had an African-Haitian dance company.
Speaker 1: Right, but, no, I'm talking about when you were performing with--
Speaker 2: [Anna] Halprin [dancer, choreographer]?
Speaker 1: Halprin.
Speaker 2: [Welland] Lathrop [dancer, choreographer]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, of course they were well-known, and Modern dance was hot.  And they were two of the best modern dancers so their audiences were ready made. And though I established the first recreational-based Modern dance department in the United States in 1947, we didn't have to worry--cause it was children.  It was from six years old up through adults.  And the classes were free.  So our audiences were ready made.  We had parents and friends and all that so I never had to worry about audiences.
Story_ID: 16425
Speaker 1: When the war [World War II] was on, they were always telling everybody, "V for Victory, free a man to go to the front line, take a job."  So we were seniors in high school.  So someone came to the school and said, "we need people to work in the canneries and free these men up to go"--we ran home.  "Mama, we want to work in the cannery.  They told us to work in the cannery."  And I can remember my mother saying, "you'll have plenty of time to work.  You don't need to go work in the cannery.  That's hard work."  "Oh, no.  We can buy our own school clothes," all of our girlfriends.  We all got on each parent.  And I guess the parents got together and said, "let them go do this once."  We all got dressed with our aprons and the little thing you put on your head, keep your hair.  We went to the cannery.  I can remember going into that cannery, we opened the door and the steam and the noise 'cause all these machines.  And we said, "we got to go 'cause we, we told our parents we have to work."  And I can remember going in there, and it--and they were working peaches.  And what we were supposed to do was take a peach out of the box, run it over this knife, hit a lever and the lever was going to come up and pick the peach and throw it down the assembly line.  Well, now it was, you were paid by the piece.  So that mean you had to go fast.  And these other little ladies next to us were just--(mimes working quickly)--and we were going--(mimes working slowly)--hit the lever.  I guess--we were so bad and so pitiful and the steam and the noise and we lasted a half a day.  When we came home (laughs), we were, all--we could just see our clothes that we were going to buy floating out the window.  And we came home and told our parents, "we can't go back and work in the cannery any more."  And they laughed at us.  And I never asked to work again 'til I got to [University of] Cal[ifornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, California].
Story_ID: 16426
Speaker 1: And summertime, they [University of California at Berkeley] would, asking recreation directors.  Well, I was very good at sports and I said, "well, I'll go teach tennis, you know."  So when I went down to apply for the job, they said, "we don't--we're, we're all filled up with recreation directors.  We're looking for someone to teach rhythmics."  They didn't know what to call it.  I said "I can teach that."  And they said, "well, how do you know?"  I said, "well, I'm a Modern Dance Honor Society," which was 'Orchesis' at Cal, "and I've danced all these years."  So they said, "we've never had this before."  I said, "I'll establish the program."  And at that time, I took the accompanist at Cal, Ms. Lovejoy, 'cause I said, "I'm, I will not have a class with canned music," because kids heard canned music all the time.  I wanted them exposed to pianists.  So I made sure my budget would allow for pianists.  And, took Ms. Lovejoy.  We went down to west Oakland [California], and nobody knew--hadn't heard of the word Modern dance 'cause this was the projects, shipyard children, needing something to do after school.  And I did lecture demonstrations.  I would do, by myself, dance and explain it, and get sign-ups.  I also won the parents over because I said, "this is something for your children to do.  We'll give a show at the end.  It's all free, costumes will be free."  So all the kids came.  And they were so successful.  And they were in west Oakland, and I, my nickname in the whole community was "here come the Dance Lady".  So the "Dance Lady" would come.  By the time I got to the center, all these were like--would all be there ready to take dance.  Well, I also established the philosophy that in recreational dance, it's training the person, not the activity.  So dance was not my goal to make great dancers.  I wanted to make strong, self-esteem high, confident little girls.  And it was all black children then.  So that the little girl who was, who was very fat, I would never let them make fun of her.  I said, "oh, we can't dance to today."  "Oh, Ms. Beckford, we want to dance today."  I said, "oh, no.  We need to sit down, and we need to think about what we've said."  And I said, "we can never do that again.  We can never call anybody out of name.  And because, if you want to be a dancer, you can't do that, cause if you do that, I'll have to put you out of class."  And we always had waiting lists.  They knew that.  And, "and we can't fight cause if you fight, you can't be a dancer, and I'll have to put you out of class.  You have to have clean fingernails.  You can't bite your fingernails."  And the mothers would come and say, "how did you get my daughter to stop biting her fingernails?"  I said, because I said, "you scare me, oh, you scare me.  You have to stand on the last row."  The next week they'd come and show me a little bit, "oh, you are so beautiful you can come up"--.  So this kind of self-esteem.  I had my hair, and that was strange.  And I wore bright colors and that was strange.  And I didn't live in the area cause I lived in north Oakland and not west Oakland, and, and I became friends with all the people on the street and everything, and the pimps and prostitutes.  They'd all go, "here come that Dance Lady," and they wouldn't let any people curse around--it was funny.  It was funny.  I had a grand time.  And, I can remember one time there was a, two gangs were rioting.  What were they called, the Chucoes and the something else.  And at that time, I had a, a convertible Cadillac [automobile].  And I can remember there were fight--it started with two little kids.  They went home and got the big brothers, big brothers went home and got the mother and father.  It was a whole riot almost.  And I was in the bathroom and the other recreational directors were in the office.  And one of the guys came and said, "come on, Ms. Beckford, we're getting you out of here," one of the gang folks.  And I knew the other recreation--some of their cars had been damaged.  When I got out, these guys were surrounding my car, not a scratch, not a dent, no canvas cut.  They said, "you get in your car and you leave."  So I had the support of all of the bad ones and the tough ones 'cause I was teaching their sisters.  So those kind of little stories that come along.
Story_ID: 16427
Speaker 1: With, with UC, I mean with Cal [University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California],--I keep calling it UC, that Cal, what was that experience like for you and why did you end up not finishing?
Speaker 2: Okay, they had no dance major, first of all.  I did not want to be a PE [Physical Education] teacher.  The Physical Ed Department really hated the dance girls.  And so once I got in that Advanced Dance class, then they had what they called the Orchesis Modern Dance Honor Society, which was a national organization.  And that was saved for the very best dancers.  And I was initiated into that the first year.  So there was really nowhere else to go.  I stayed two and a half years at Cal cause I knew the body sciences were also important to know, for teaching dance.  And I knew I enjoyed teaching.  My first teaching experience was when I was fourteen.  And I had said we had a big two-car garage cemented.  And I made that a dance studio on Saturday afternoons.  And for fifteen cents, no, it was ten cents cause you got five--okay, you got fifteen minutes of tap dance and fifteen minutes of ballet ten cents, dancing classes.  Always--pay for what you know.  So the neighborhood kids would come and pay ten cents and take ballet and tap.  And I knew I enjoyed teaching and could break it down to make it easy.  So that old saying of "those who can't, teach," was a joke to me cause I performed and taught. So I enjoyed teaching.  So after I got into Orchesis and had already been in Advance [Dance, class at Cal], and I'd taken my body sciences, there was no reason for me to stay at Cal.  And I'd walked into this job [teaching recreational dance classes] with the City [of Oakland, California] which was really what I wanted to do.  And there was no one's footsteps I had to follow because this was the first in the whole United States.  So I made my own philosophy.  And my philosophy was to train the individual to have the same kind of self-esteem and assurance and confidence that I had received in my family.
Story_ID: 16428
Speaker 1: So the little girls--I would watch them blossom out.  I wouldn't let--every year we would give a concert.  And every year I would tell them, "we cannot dance about a story that's already written.  We can't dance about Cinderella.  That person made up that story.  We can't dance about things that"--so I'd make them make up their own stories.  This is six year-olds up, "stand up in front of the class and tell us your story."  So they were learning public speaking.  I would tell the audience, "a good audience is respectful and doesn't laugh at someone's"--so they learned how to sit quietly.  This person stood at six and told their story.  Then we would vote on which dance we wanted to do.  So in my Legacy book, you'll see the program of, of the 'Wind Dance' and the 'Egg Dance' and all these strange little dances.  But they were their originals.  So they were the creator.  So I taught them, "you're more valuable creating it than doing 'Cinderella' or the 'Three Little Pigs.'"  And so that by the time we got to the concert, they knew--I did eyeball control.  I never had to act crazy with them--I said, "you know, we're ladies."  I used to call a lot of them their last names. "Ms. Brown, Ms. Smith, is that the way"--so they began to stand straighter.  And their parents began to see that so all the parents were just--they would just love me to come and teach their children.  So that you could tell a Modern Dance girl walking down the street cause she had an air about her.  She had an aura about her.  And a lot of these girls now, 'cause I started teaching when I was twenty-one.  And I always looked a little younger so they--I had to start them calling me "Ms. Beckford" right off because I knew if I let them get that familiarity, I'd never get it 'cause a lot of these girls I taught had babies and they'd been out there a long time.  And I was just little old me from north Oakland [California].  So I, I started them calling me "Ms. Beckford" right off the bat and being very constant.  You couldn't be mean one day--so that got the respect of the classes.  They couldn't chew gum.  They couldn't curse.  They had to have their hair combed.  They had to have deodorant.  I told them all, "go home, get your parents to buy your own deodorant cause dancers ought to smell good.  Wash your own leotard every week."  So these are things that, life skills.  And those girls to this day are close.
Story_ID: 16429
Speaker 1: Do you know what also what, an interesting thing that was developing within, or you were tapping into, very organizational skills and starting up, because it's one thing to be a dancer, but dancers are not always known for organizational (laughs)--
Speaker 2: This is true.  This is true.  This is true.  And they felt that they owned--they earned that as an "Artist."  And I said, "'Artist,' you just, that's just your job.  You know, you just happen to be good at dancing.  Don't let it bother you.  Somebody else is good at typing.  You all can't type and, you know." So I was never allowed at home to think you were so way out, but artists, they felt that.  A lot of them feel it today [2002].  It's crazy to me.  Artists today, though now,--I was on the National Endowment for the Arts Dance Panel where we distribute the money, which was really so weird to me because when I was coming up, you danced 'cause you liked to dance.  But now I found that as a dance panelist, I began to see choreographers choreographing for the trend that would get them a grant for their company instead of, I want to make up this dance about that.  So to me, they're not really true to their art.  And at one of my banquets for my own award ceremony, I just asked them, "how many of you would still have a company today if you didn't have grants?  How many of you would dance just for the pure love of dancing?  Not being paid to go to rehearsals, getting a stipend at recitals, sitting up late at night and getting these costumes sewn and ironed and pressed.  How many of you would still be a dancer?"  I said, "just think about that," because one of my play daughters, Deborah Vaughan, whose the artistic director for Dimensions Dance Theater here [Oakland, California], are getting ready to celebrate their 30th Anniversary which--folks don't stay married thirty years and they've been successful that long.  She's also head of the Dance department at Contra Costa College [San Pablo, California] for that period of time.  And I just look at her and weep because half of her time is spent writing proposals for--pardon me, for grants to get money so her company can go on.  But all the company, they get paid to rehearse.  I said, "paid to--we rehearsed free, just for the joy, and we'd always have fun."  But now you can't dancers to dance if you don't--"how much am I going to get?"  "Well, what dues have you paid?"  But in a way, it's a waste to me because she was 'til two the other morning doing a grant.  She could have been creating another dance.  That's life.
Story_ID: 16430
Speaker 1: But you know, when, when you're--your exposure that you're getting at this point is, is it unique in terms of, of this area or was it just that okay.  I mean that's the way it was.  And I ask that because I remember talking to some of the other [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] dancers and they were saying that most of the original troupe ended up marrying white men.  And, and I, when I first heard it, I was like, "this was not"--you know, this is 1940--this was not the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  And Julie a black man,--keep going--
Speaker 1: (Laughs) That's right--we were both ways--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes, okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, I just find it, you know, what was that world like because here you are, you know, it's one thing with the vaudeville, but once you start with this Modern dance, you're swept up in a different type of world.  And I'm just wondering, you know, what that world was like, sort of--
Speaker 2: Because, I think, because with Dunham anyway, the audiences were primarily white and the exposure--that's when you're on the road, that's all you're seeing.  That's who's coming backstage so that was the only exposure, I think, was to a lot of white men.  I know when I, my company, the audiences would always be all-white until the last performance--my first concert was at [University of] Cal[ifornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  My last concert was at Cal.  We'd look out through the curtain and we'd see all white people, but remember people thought I was crazy cause I had my hair cut short.  People were still uncomfortable saying "African."  People were still uncomfortable with a lot of stuff we take for granted now [2002].  So the blacks did not support the company until they saw Ruth Beckford's last performance.  Everybody was there then.  Of course, we were already well known and everything.  But so who comes back stage to see you, white wealthy men.  And so that's who they had.  It didn't faze me cause I knew I wanted a brother and that's who I had, two of them.  Married twice, good friends with both of them.  But you're exposed to that, and they're very seductive if that's what you go for, you know.  Everybody's got their own taste, but that's like all you see.
Story_ID: 16431
Speaker 1: Now, what are your parents [Felix and Cora Beckford] thinking of this, at this time.  It's one thing as a little child.  Are they both happy with it?  Are they both happy with--.
Speaker 2: They both died very happy.  They both died very happy, that I was making a living at something they knew I loved and I still loved.  And even when I started with the recreational department [of Oakland, California], part time, I remember I was so excited, I bought my mother--what did they used to call them then?  They didn't call them stereo then, a combination where it was a radio and record player.  Oh, that was hot stuff.  And I bought her that with the money I had earned.  So they were very pleased, and thank goodness, my mother at least lived long enough to see me get in [dance] Hall of Fames and stuff.
Story_ID: 16432
Speaker 1: Now, then, you're doing, you do the Parks and Recreation [Oakland, California], that's, you were, you--that was an institution--.
Speaker 2: That was twenty years.
Speaker 1: That's a long time.
Speaker 2: '47 [1947] to '67 [1967].  So a lot--I taught millions.  I mentored millions of little girls.  And I kept it just girls because I knew boys had coaches in sports.  And little girls had nothing to make them feel good.  So sometime I would get to class on a Saturday morning, and little girls would have been out there waiting for a 10:00 class at 8:00 in the morning, cause their mothers said, "go to the park.  Ms. Beckford'll be,"--you know, they try.  And I would comb hair, lotion, we're not going to have the ashy legs.  Their parents would give them a quarter to buy breakfast and they'd come with Cokes and potato chips and stuff.  And I would teach them about nutrition.  "Get an apple, get an orange."  So I was really--I didn't have children by choice, which was unheard of in those days to say you didn't want children and married.  "Oh, you don't--oh, you'd be a wonderful"--I said, "I'm too selfish.  I didn't play with dolls.  I grew up dancing.  I didn't want to be bothered."  And I was smart enough to know that.  And a lot of the children I taught, their parents should have said like I did.  Because I didn't have to come home to children, I could truly nurture and give them the hugs and the stuff that they needed.  And so I didn't have children for that reason and it--and people used to say, "when you get older, oh, you're going to be so sorry you don't have children."  I'm seventy-six.  I'm happy as a lark because I see that if you're seventy-six and your children are fifty, you're still worrying about them.  And I am not going--you know, I'm just too selfish for that.  So it freed me up to mother, nurture, give the self-esteem, and give the attention to individual children that oftentimes their parents were too busy to do.  So like my book, 'Still Grooving,' I dedicated it to my eight play daughters who are still close and I still mentor and we have a good time.  That was one you heard on the phone just now.  So they generally love me and I love them, but I didn't have to sit up with them at night, cleaning up, upchuck and--(laughs).  So I knew I didn't want to do that.  And fortunately, the prerequisite for being married and both my husbands felt the same way.  So that was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Well, this is, it's--'cause you don't meet many and true individuals, you know what I'm saying, okay.  Never mind.  Now, okay (laughs)--you know, I'm thinking the hair--.
Speaker 2: But I, but I, I'm still not happy--I mean I'm still happy cause people say, "you been married two--you've been married," 'cause then it was get married and have children the next year.  "You've been married and you two look so"--I said, "I'm fine."  "But you should have children."  "No, I shouldn't."  And my mother and them gave up because I said, l"ook, you got other grandchildren.  You all look at them, be happy with them cause I'm not giving you none."  So they just knew I was strange and we went on our way.
Story_ID: 16433
Speaker 1: "Don't come late.  I plan my lesson."  Honey, they'd be in that dressing room ready to hit that floor at 6:00 and start.  So--and then they'd say, "well, I hear, I hear you're,"--you know, signing up--"I hear you're, you're so strict."  I'd say, "honey, I am.  So you need to go down the street cause I'm going to take--don't talk when I'm teaching.  We're here to learn and in twelve weeks, I guarantee you'll learn something.  But I'm going to put up with"--I don't know how they--and they would come.  I'm telling you, they'd line up and sleep out.  One girl used to hitchhike every Saturday morning from Santa Cruz [California] up to the class to take a hour beginner class and hitchhike back to Santa Cruz.  I told her "that is dangerous."  "Oh, no, it's--I don't, I, I just have to come."  And I'd be, "don't talk in class.  Have on your clean leotards, smell good."  And I'd always have three drummers.  So it was fun, and, and I would open the class, the advanced class, to an audience because it was educational.  It was building the fans who understood that you don't just get out there and twist, that it's a technique and it's a hard technique.  And it's a lot of work.  So I wanted to educate at the same time.  I would not let anyone watch beginner or intermediates because that was unfair to them, as struggling along, "what to do."  And I didn't feel audiences needed to see that level of dance, but they would line up on Monday nights at 7:00 for the advanced class.  When the audience would come in, my husband said, "there you go."  I'd tell the audience, "I'm inviting you into my studio.  I don't want to hear any talking.  I don't want to hear any laughing.  I don't want hear anything.  You're sitting there as statues.  Otherwise, I'll wait now and you can dismiss yourself."  They'd sit there like this through those classes, honey (mimes a person being silent).  When they'd leave, they'd be educated about what it takes to be a dancer.  I did that for, how long?  I had my studio seventeen years.  So people never mess with me cause they, they know I really mean it.  And I live what I say.
Speaker 2: And that you, you wanted perfection.
Speaker 1: I wanted perfection.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: Do your best.
Story_ID: 16434
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you, you went to the--you spent a year or almost a year teaching dance at her [Katherine Dunham, dancer, choreographer] school or--
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was--this was just before her school on Times Square [New York, New York], it was right at Times Square, before it closed.  So I was there for about three months.  I took a three-month leave of absence from the Recreation Department [Oakland, California].  When I came back from there is when I opened my own studio and started my company.
Story_ID: 16435
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go to Haiti though, to study?  You went there--
Speaker 2: In '58 [1958], was the first time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why did you feel that you needed to do that or wanted to do that?
Speaker 2: Because I, I wanted my company to be as authentic and from the authenticity, then I would do my creativity.  And I had never been to Haiti.  I'd only had that experience with Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer]; I knew she had gone there.  And so I said, "it's important for me to get the original, and from that create."  So I went down and saw all the voodoo I could see and all the surroundings.  Like I had a little dance of just the street sounds.  And it opened with a big oil jug on my head hollering "oil."  I was the lady who sold the oil.  And I would come down--you know, they sort of sway.  They don't walk, they just sort of ooze down the street.  And I'd have this big oil thing on my head, and I would holler "oil."  And I would, I was the first one on the stage.  Then there'd come the man who used to shine shoes.  However, most people in Haiti had no shoes, but the elite wore shoes.  And he would tap on his drum, on his shoeshine box a rhythm so you'd hear that.  Then there'd be another man selling sweets.  So all these vendors would be coming down into the marketplace.  So I did a whole dance on just the marketplace.  But I would have had to have seen that to know this was authentic.  So from that I created into a, a little dance.
Story_ID: 16436
Speaker 1: Now, what was your most favorite dance that you created?  What are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: You mean in my own company?
Speaker 1: In your own company.
Speaker 2: Our closing dance was called 'Bamboche,' which was a party dance.  It was just a good time dance.  And, boy, we used to just tear that one up.  That was the, the picture you saw in my 'Legacy' book of me jumping.  That was a series of jumps and splits and just a good time.  That was the last dance of the show, and you just extended whatever energy you had left, and it left the audience jumping and screaming and shouting.  And I always closed every show with 'Bamboche.'
Speaker 1: Now, who when was the dance created, what, what year?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I started the company in '53 [1953] and ended in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay, but that, but 'Bamboche.'
Speaker 2: 'Bamboche' was always my closing dance from the beginning--
Speaker 1: It was always your closing, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 16437
Speaker 1: I choreographed, very strangely, you know, I'm a bed person.  I'm the only dancer I think who lies in bed and creates dance classes 'cause I always believed in having your dance class organized.  Don't go to class just 'cause you've taught ten years and just teach it off the hat.  So I always wrote out my twelve weeks of a class, what I was going to accomplish in each class, although I knew it, but it's just being organized.  And I did all my choreography in bed 'cause freakily I could see all the ten dancers and I knew their bodies well and I knew what could--and I'd go to rehearsal and just put it on the company and we'd do it.  Where--when I was Anna Halprin [dancer, choreogapher] and Welland Lathrop's [dancer, choreographer] company [Halprin-Lathrop Dance Studio], they would work with the group.  So you'd get there.  They'd say "well, let's try this and let's try"--but I would say, "why are we trying this stuff.  Why don't they come with it ready?"  So at my company--'cause when I was in their company, it was before my own.  So with my company, they would come to rehearsal, and I would say "okay John you take five here, Robert, you do"--and we--and it would be exactly how I wanted it.  But what, what is funny, U[niversity of] C[alifornia at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] did a weekend with the artists down at Asilomar [Conference Center] in Monterey [California], beautiful, right on the beach.  And they had an artist who was a painter.  They had an artist who was a composer.  They had an artist who was a writer and they had me as the dancer.  And I took my partner and we did demonstrations.  Well sitting in the audience, that painter said, he sees a blank canvas and he just sees it.  And then he just paints it.  And a composer said he hears all the instruments and he just writes it down.  I thought "gee, they do all that?"  And then I got up there and said, "and I lie in bed and see all the"--so I said--"I'm as weird as they are."  Because I, you just see it, and you feel it and you know it's going to work.  So I never had to say "let's try this, let's try this, let's try that."
Speaker 2: So you, would you start with any music before?  Would you start with the visual and the music would come?  I mean people have different--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I started with, with, with the movement.  That's why I always liked live accompaniment cause then they could do whatever we wanted.  So my drummers, you know, I'd start the beat and that's how it went.  And in the Recreation Department, my accompanists all had to be able to improvise.  So if it was the wind, they were the wind.  If it was the 'Popcorn Dance,' they were the popcorn.  So, I always had good musicians.
Story_ID: 16438
Speaker 1: Was 'Bamboche,' [dance created by Beckford] was it developed before or after Haiti?  Was it developed--
Speaker 2: After Haiti.
Speaker 1: Haiti.  Now, you know--,
Speaker 2: Well, before Haiti.  Before Haiti.
Speaker 1: Before Haiti.  Huh.  And do you think anything about that Haitian experience was significant?  I mean that, you know, you, you took to Haiti in a different way than Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer].
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it totally captured her--it captured me as a outsider looking in, as a tourist having a good time, as a sympathetic person to the starvation and the poverty there.  But I was not swayed to become a Voodoo Queen.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Were there things that you appreciated about the culture or that you incorporated within your, you know, within your dance, especially because 'Bamboche' was created before--.
Speaker 2: Before I went to Haiti, my company--before I went to Haiti, I had my company half Modern, half Haitian.  And then I said, "no, I don't like that cause there was a lot of Modern dance companies.  I'm going to stay only African-Haitian, which is unique and we, we'll be the only kids on the block."  So that's why I settled into--we never performed the Modern.  I was just doing it.  So that my repertoire didn't expand until I came back from Haiti.  So 'Bamboche' I had created, but when I went to Haiti, everything then just blossomed out.
Speaker 1: Now, when you said you did half Modern and half Haitian, was--or African-Haitian--what--are you saying you did, you know, within the repertoire you would do the whole gamut--
Speaker 2: Um-hum. At first like we would dance to spirituals 'cause I could create Modern dance.  And so we would do dances to spirituals and we did a comedy on the 'Three Bears' and 'Goldilocks' and so all that.  And then I said (makes contemplative sound) "everybody can do that, so I'm going to take that out of the repertoire."
Story_ID: 16439
Speaker 1: And why did you separate your--the classes?  You know, you were saying that "only in my private studio would I teach the African-Haitian."
Speaker 2: The reason for that is I wanted my Modern dance girls to be free to create.  Anything they did was beautiful.  "Oh, that's the best green elephant."  And they could be an elephant any way they wanted.  African-Haitian dance is a technique.  You either are doing Damballa [dance style] right or you're not.  What about the little girl who would never be able to do Damballa?  So she would become insecure and pull into herself.  So I never wanted them to know "there's only one way you can do that."  At my studio, there was only one way you do it, and you'd better do it right.  In recreation, there was a thousand ways that--every way you do it is just wonderful.  That gave them confidence.  In my studio, I did not take children.  You had to be a late teen into adults.  Recreation I took children also, besides young adults.  So the freedom to create.  Modern dance is a creative thing.  African-Haitian is, do it right, from that rightness; then you can create.  So I never wanted little girls to think, "I can't do Yanvalou [dance style]."  But you can do a purple tree and be wonderful and have the audience applaud you.  So she gets esteem.  So I never wore those two hats.  And after I retired and they began to do that in the [Oakland, California Recreational] Department is when I saw the Department fall down.  Now, they don't even have dance.  Very sad, little girls need it.
Story_ID: 16440
Speaker 1: So, now, I volunteer and Deborah [Vaughan, dancer, choreographer], the Dimensions Dance, she has a Rights of Passage Program for girls eight through eighteen.  And she wanted them to--'cause she grew up with, through the Recreation [Department dance classes taught by Beckford, Oakland, California], she wanted them to experience some ways of speaking on stage.  So I volunteered down there, what, four years ago, to do monologues for Kwanzaa.  And they had to learn to stand and do their monologues.  Then a play that I had done back in Girl Reserve [part of the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)] days, I did that play called 'Rhythm at Ms. Van Sloppins.'  However, I incorporated--so they were always musicals.  Then I wrote another play for them--bootleg playwrighter--'Girl, You've Got Choices.'  And that was a cute little play that I set, had auditions.  The actors had to audition, but I made it a musical so all the dance classes, they had West African, hip-hop, tap, all those would be incorporated in 'Girl, You Got Choices.'  I'm now directing a play called 'A Flight to Planet Arug' which is an outer space show, which opens, which we do it the last Saturday in April at 3:00 and it would be like a 150 little dancers and eight actors that I wrote the play for, 'Planet Arug,' where they're all at a slumber party on the stage with big, king-sized pillows.  And they're just kicking back, doing nails, talking in the slumber party.  And one of the little girls says, "I saw on the Internet, they just discovered a new planet.  And we can get there and back before our parents know we're gone."  So one little girl said, "how we gonna go to no planet, we can't even date boys yet; we're talking about going to some planet."  "Oh, no, we can go"--so they--she convinces them that they can go to Planet Arug and get back before the slumber party would be over.  So, they get in the spaceship and they go off and they land on the planet.  Well, they find that there's a star in outer space that has a twin to the earth.  So they land on West Africa.  And so all these creatures come out and then they begin to do their West African dance.  Then they land on a, Cuban, and they land in Haiti.  When they land in the United States, there's hip-hop and tap.  And I have--and they land and, of course, they're scared, and all these creatures come out and they start doing their dance.  And then they're frightened because they don't know if these people are friendly or not.  So they say, "let's start singing."  So they start singing 'We Are the World' and I did new words to that.  And when they start singing, all the creatures become friendly and so they're singing 'We Are the World.'  And they begin to dance, and the creatures begin to do a line dance and they're happy--they have a good time.  All the stars are there dancing.  The West African and the Haitians, the hip-hop, everybody's together 'cause they are one world.  Then they say, "we'd better get back.  It's going to get time."  So, then they blast off and come back to the slumber party and they say, "that was such great fun.  I don't want to stop dancing."  So it ends with them still doing, 'We Are the World.'  So I wrote that and so rehearsals on a Tuesday after school and Thursdays and the show would be April 29th [2002].  So this is my third play to write, a musical.  So I always call it bootleg, like--well, Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] made me write that, but like that book ['Katherine Dunham, A Biography']--.  And then I started acting.  I took it as fun 'cause I, that's not my gift.  My gift was dance.  I'd already had success so I didn't have no qualms.  I'd say, "yeah, I'm going to do this play; yeah, I'm going to do this movie.  I'm going to write this book cause I don't have to be good."  I already was that.  Luckily, I've been lucky, but I always call it bootleg.  So I'm a bootleg playwright.
Story_ID: 16441
Speaker 1: Now, was there--I want to know the difference between West African and Haitian dance.  Is there--the two--the origins are--
Speaker 2: Well, you see all the roots, that's why I said African-Haitian because the roots were from Africa.  And so that's why I always say that.  I don't, I didn't never do straight African dance, never went to Africa, and really was not moved to go to Africa.  If I ever went to Africa, it would have to be with a fabulous safari, where they'd beat the--get all the bugs, all the snakes, all the everything out of my way.  I want good bed sheets.  I don't like lizards running up--so see I'm not supposed to go.  And I want 4:00 breaks for martinis and tea.  And I want--so you see, I'm not, I'm not "with the people" as they say.  So, and I was very honest about that when people would say, "girl, you mean you don't want to go to the Motherland?"  "No, Haiti gave me enough of Africa."  If they didn't tell you, you were Haiti, you could say "I'm somewhere in Africa" 'cause they have thatched-roof huts.  People were nude, you know, same thing.  And I, and I knew I didn't like lizards and things then.  So I didn't need to go there.
Speaker 1: You know, and I just, I just actually went to Haiti about, I don't know, maybe seven, eight years ago.  That was a different time, but you're right.  It seems just like--
Speaker 2: You think you're in Africa.
Speaker 1: -- Africa.  It really is, and so close to the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't have to go to Africa.
Story_ID: 16442
Speaker 1: Now, with--was there--did it get to a point where having your, your own studio was too much or you got tired of it?
Speaker 2: No, because I always believe that you should quit at your top.  When I left the Recreation Department [Oakland, California] in 1961, I--in '67 [1967], I mean, I had given enough.  And it was time to move on and let somebody else.  I worked one year longer 'cause I had gotten married.  And my husband said, "you can quit if you want to.  You don't have to work."  But I knew I wanted that legacy to move on to one of the girls who'd come up with that same philosophy.  So I worked a year longer 'cause one of my girls was getting her master's at Mills [College, Oakland, California].  And I knew to compete in this world today, you better have your master's.  I don't care how good you could kick and turn.  Those who know "how" will always have a job.  Those who know "why" will always be the boss.  I told my girls "you got to be the boss."  I was the boss here.  So you got to get that master's in your dance.  Of course, their parents were not too pleased that I was influencing them to go into the dance field.  "You should be a social worker, a teacher and a nurse."  I said, "when you get your master's, you'll be making more money than those other people."  All those girls head dance departments now.  And so I worked a year longer, put myself on the Social--Civil Service Board to question and give the tests.  I said "'cause none of these Civil Service people know about the"--got her my job.  I retired.  In 1961, when I retired from performing with my company, everybody said, "you're too young to retire the company's so great."  I said, "well," I said, "look, I started at three.  We've been successful.  There's nowhere else I want to dance.  I'm through performing.  I have reached my goal, and I'm not going to do it anymore."  The next day I took all my costumes and sold them to the ragman.  I said, "I'm through performing.  I've been lucky.  It's been successful.  It's been a great trip.  I don't need to get on any more stages."  Some of these people said, "oh, but you"--I said, "you didn't start at three.  Most folks don't get on stage until their late teens, early twenties."  I had already--so when it became, "oh," when, when it got to where I said, (wearily) "we got another show"  instead of (excitedly) "oh, we got another show", time to get away.  Same thing with retiring from the Recreation Department [Oakland, California] in '67 [1967], same thing when I closed my studio, because when I retired from there, I only taught three days a week.  So that's no work.  I taught just enough for myself to think "I'm going to stay in condition and still have fun."  I didn't want to do it every day.  I could have.  So in 1975, I said, "okay, I've had a good run.  I made my living.  I've gotten all the accolades.  It's been wonderful.  It's time now to retire and get out of this and move out of the way.  Get out of the way and let somebody else come on in."  So people, "oh, you can't, there's no where else to go."  "You'll find somewhere else."  'Cause I always said, "put your hand in a bucket of water and splash around and they say, 'woo, that water's splashing.'  You take it out, it's still neat.  They don't know you were there."  So I choreographed my own retirements to suit me.  And it has worked fine.  And when I retired in '75 [1975] and said "I don't want to see no more leotards and sweat," that's what I meant.  And then here come Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] getting sick in '76 [1976] so Caryl [Cuddeback, dancer teacher] and I had to come out of retirement and teach.  But I have not taught since that.  So I'm not into--I, I don't even really--I only go to--I used to go to Alvin's [Ailey, dancer, choreographer] dance company, shows when he was alive.  I don't even go see that anymore because I'm just "dance-burnt-out."  And personally, Alvin was the spirit of it to me.  So the company to me had a different spirit [after his death in 1989].  They were always great technicians, but gymnastics serves great technique.  So if you don't have the soul and the spirit to put on top of that technique, to me I'm not thrilled.  So I began to not enjoy it as much.  So I don't go there anymore.  I go to Deborah's [Vaughan, dancer, choreographer] because they have the spirit still.  And they're good technicians too, but I want to see some more than just--I'd say "why do they do that?  They don't even know why they're doing it."  So I want to see all of that.  I get that with Deborah.  I don't get that any more with Alvin.  I see great technicians.  I say "Lordy, they are impossible," but I don't go to dance for that.
Story_ID: 16443
Speaker 1: Now, when you first saw him, what did you think of the troupe because it was really people like yourself and Ms. [Katherine] Dunham [dancer, choreographer] who had sort of led the way, is what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Alvin [Ailey, dancer, choreographer] and I were good friends.  Alvin used to be-we took--in fact, Alvin came a couple of times to Anna Halprin-Welland Lathrop [dance] studio.  And at that time, I think he was dancing in some club in Frisco [San Francisco, California].  I think he and Maya [Angelou, poet, author, director] I think were dancing a duet or something.  And see I would never go do that.  Alvin said, "come on, we can do"--"I, I'm not going to dance in no nightclub with you.  Un-un."  So Alvin and I were good friends.  Alvin is a Horton studio for male, his influence is, is [Lester] Horton [dancer, choreographer].  And so he was such a great--I think his "time capsule" dance is 'Revelations.'  I said "that should be put in a time capsule, and I don't care how much of it you choreograph, it'll never be that great."  And he used to come out here--one of my students, Naizi Cayou, headed up the dance department at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California].  And she would have Alvin come and give master classes.  And he would give this Horton.  I said, "honey, my body's not built for Horton.  This is too hard for me," and he would always laugh.  But we were good friends.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did he ever talk about how 'Revelations' even came about?
Speaker 2: No, but I still think that's their best dance ever, ever.  Now, these new technicians do it, not with the same spirit.  I told somebody I think the last time I saw it, "they all need to go down south to an old Baptist church and watch the sisters, how they fan."  You know, this is great technique (mimes fanning herself), but how do they--Alvin had that into it, plus great technique.  So I think too the person who has the vision always is the best company.  So people said--when I dropped my company and closed my school--"well, why don't you have someone else take it over?"  I said "because it--they have to do their thing.  And they'll never do it the way I would want it done.  And I'm too ticky and particular so they need to do their own company."  So I closed the studio, closed my company and bowed out. (Pause). Happily.
Story_ID: 16444
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about what you did because you've not let any grass grow under your feet.  So, I mean what were you doing, you know--
Speaker 2: After I retired?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Well, I told you I was on the National Endowment for the Arts Dance Panel.  So at the time Oakland Ensemble Theater [Oakland, California], the director was one of my students.  He taught at Merritt College [Oakland, California] in Drama, Ron Stacker Thompson, who's like a brother to me.  And he and his wife started Oakland Ensemble Theater.  And they had me on the board because I knew about National Endowment for the Arts and all that stuff.  So he said, "oh, girl, we're getting ready to do a play, you need to audition for this play."  I said, "un-un.  Actors are too strange, dancers are more disciplined.  And dancers are this and actors are strange," and I went through all this, right.  And he said, "no, girl, you got to audition for this part."  I said, "Ron, I could never memorize all those words you all have to say."  He said, "well, you can memorize every step for two hours when you're on stage."  I said, "okay, I'll audition."  And the play was 'Happy Ending.'  Douglas Turner Ward's play.  And it was these two sisters who worked for this wealthy white family.  And as we said, every time I'd buy them two chops, I'd buy ten for us 'cause I ran all the business.  So it was really a funny play.  And they were going to get a divorce, and we could not let them get a divorce.  There goes our silk, our satin, our everything.  So that was what the play was--and 'Happy Ending' was we kept them together.  So I auditioned for this part and got the part.  And I told Ron, "I can't do this play."  He said, "you got the part."  "I can't do it."  I said, "I cannot memorize all of this."  Well, me not wanting my ego to be hit, I started memorizing that play, honey, and did the show.  And the critics came, and I got written up in the paper.  You'd think my name had never been in the paper before.  All these years I've been written up.  I was so excited.  I said, "oh, I got a good review."  Ron said, "you always get"--I said, "not acting 'cause this is not my stuff."  So I said "for a bootleg actor, and I got a good review."  That was the bug.  I started doing plays from there.
Story_ID: 16445
Speaker 1: Maya [Angelou, poet, author, director] came and saw 'A Happy Ending' [play featuring Beckford].  And, 'cause she was living here [Oakland, California] then, and we've been friends over fifty years.  And, 'cause she always wanted to dance and I was the dancer, right.  So then Maya got a chance to direct a play down in Hollywood [California] at the old Charlie Chan Studio so it was this big--she said, "I want you to come down and be in this, in this movie."  I said, "girl, now you know I've only done one play.  I cannot do no movie."  "Oh, yes, you can do it, you can do it."  So I go down and I do two movies with her she directed.  What was it, 'Circles' and 'Tapestries.'  And doing a movie, you know, I was knocked out 'cause, you know, you get pampered with a movies and I loved being pampered.  And dancers don't get pampered.  So, honey, I laid back, and I said, "whew, they do your hair, they do"--I had a ball.  And so then that was that bug.  I said, "hey, I don't want to do plays.  Plays you have to do your own stuff; movies you get all the"--.  So I came back and I did more and more plays, of course.  And then I got to join SAG [Screen Actor's Guild] from doing those movies.  So then I had a agent.  And I would go out and audition, and I would get a lot of industrial movies--that's trade training movies.  And I got commercials, and I--first I started as extras and everything.  And so I began doing--"this is great, you know."  And so, I just saw in the paper, the movie 'The Principal' that I did in 1987 with Lou Gossett, Jr. [actor] and ooh, I forget his name, the other guy [James Belushi, actor].  I was his secretary.  I auditioned and got the part.  Until Gossett, I said, "I'm not going to ever do extra work anymore.  If I don't have lines, I'm not going to do the movie."  So I told my agent, "don't call me for no extra work no more," 'cause see, you can do that when it's not your living.  And I, I never wanted to compromise myself.  So I said, "I don't think I want to do extra work anymore," although it was fun.  I used sit and knit all the day and pray they didn't call.  They'd say "we need fifty."  I'd sit down and the other people would run up there to be at the beginning--.  Anyway so, so I enjoyed doing movies and commercials and industrial film.
Story_ID: 16446
Speaker 1: And then I'd stopped doing plays.  When Ron [Stacker Thompson, producer, director] and Cle [Thompson, musician, producer] left from Oakland Ensemble Theater [Oakland, California] to go to New York [New York], then I stopped acting because they, the people who came in didn't have that same excellence I did, that Ron and Cle and I agreed with.  So then, so then I did stuff like that.  And then I said, "there's no plays around here that I would want to go audition for cause I don't curse.  And I don't want to be in that kind of play."  So I said, "I think I'll write my own play."  So I wrote, 'Tis the Morning of My Life,' which was a very wealthy black family, older woman, younger man romance.  Boy, it hit this town, the--it sold out before we opened.  It sold out before we opened.  Well, I wrote the first draft and had the concept.  Then Ron, who's the real writer, wrote the finished product.  And I was the producer and the writer and the star.  So I--being the producer, I didn't have auditions.  I picked the best-looking young actor I knew, and I picked the other people.  It was my daughter-in-law, her husband, one grandchild and my lover.  So it was a small play.  I knew from having been in other big plays like 'Richard III' and stuff, I didn't want to be around all that drama and stuff with actors.  And I said, "that's too many people in a show."  So I said, "I'll do my play with just a small cast."  Plus, as a producer, that's fewer costumes,--you know, you think about all that.  And it was such a fun play, and the play locally had never seen real love scenes.  I played real love scenes.  And we dressed sharp.  And most theaters, small theaters have, I call "early Salvation Army furniture."  I said, "I can't have that."  I went out to, what was the name of this place, Abbey Rents, told them, "I will put your name in the programs, 300 people will see your name every night.  Just let us borrow the furniture."  He said, go on (unclear)."  I had brand new white furniture.  I had brand--every, it was a great set.  And not that painting that I did, but I painted another painting that I did to hang in the show because Roxie who was my aunt's name--I had all my characters, aunts, Roxie was a painter.  And she went to the senior center every--and painted.  And, but in shopping in the same supermarket, you talk to people in supermarket you wouldn't talk to out on the street.  And this young man was always trying to read a recipe and trying to--and it came that he was newly divorced and trying to cook and we would start talking in the supermarket.  And, and he was trying to figure out how to cook cornbread.  And I said, "hey, young man, you can come--I live near here, and I'll show you how to cook."  And in the supermarket I always had on loose clothes.  So when he came to the house, I had my apron tied, and he looked at some curves and things.  And so, but my grand--but my son was a real chauvinist pig and grandmother was grandmother, no makeup, gray wig, loose clothes, come back the cake and go home.  Go join the senior center, that's what you're supposed to do.  So my grand--his wife, my, my daughter-in-law, said "Roxie, you need to get out, you're still young.  You got a life, you look good, almost better than me.  You need to get--."  "Oh, no, I couldn't have a man, but--."  So this young man, when he came to the house and brought a bottle of wine and I cooked--and we enjoyed talking together and he said "Roxie, I haven't had such a good time"--
Story_ID: 16447
Speaker 1: So the play I wrote and produced and starred in ['Tis the Morning of My Life'] and because I have a reputation of, in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], of not wanting to associate with anything that's not first class, it was sold out before we opened.  And it ran five weeks.  And so then people said, "oh, but what happened to them you know, did they"--so we had to repeat Part I again the next year because so many people hadn't seen it.  And women were coming four and five times just to see Billy [Hutton, actor], my co-star, get autographs, and, you know, so it was really the talk of the town [Oakland, California] cause it was a real love story.  And it ended up where he really did love her, and when my son [character in the play] found out--the only way he found out about Billy was they, they worked out in the same health club together.  So they called each other nicknames in the health club.  And he said, "man, I have met this woman.  She is fine.  She's twenty years older than me." My grandson says, "twenty, she's old enough to be your mama."  Oh and, the audience would fall out cause the audience knew all of this was going on.  So it was like a [Alfred] Hitchcock [director] thing.  Hitchcock always let you know who was--but you'd sit there and worry.  So they were worried that my son was going to find out about my lover.  And so the son told his wife, "what's wrong with mama?  She ain't been over here lately.  She ain't been taking us no cakes or nothing."  And my daughter-in-law said, "well, you know, she's just been busy at the, the senior center and everything."  And my granddaughter says, "oh, but, but"--what was his name?  "Oh, but Ken, Ken's, oh, he is so fine, and he comes to grandma's house."  "Ken?  Ken, who?"  "Oh, you know, Ken.  He can basket, oh, he plays basketball.  Oh, he's so nice."  "Ken?"  My granddaughter--my grand--my daughter-in-law then gets nervous 'cause she knows I'm with Ken.  And that's where I've been.  And my grandson said, "I'm going over there. I, I'll find out what's going on with this Ken."  And my granddaughter says, "don't go, don't go, don't go, don't go."  In the meantime, Ken and--has been coming over and everything.  This is the first we're going to get it on.  And so I have on this hot pink peignoir set you can see through.  He's coming out of the bedroom with his shirt open and with a bottle champagne and two glasses.  And my son, who has a key to the door, which all younger people do, opens the door and comes in.  And they said, "Skeet," cause they called--and so they have a big set too.  And it ends with me saying, "I'm going for happiness, doesn't matter what you all say.  It doesn't matter if Ken's around, you--I'm going for happiness."  That's what the name of my book is.  That's out of my (unclear) book.  So audiences could not believe it, you know, a younger man and I'm doing all this kissing, neck, ear, toe and everything.  And so then we wrote Part II.  And Ron [Stacker Thompson, producer, director] was in New York [New York] then--and he came back out and directed it again and did the second write.  And that one was, Ken opened, he was an architect.  So he had his own money.  He didn't need my money.  My son said, "he's just after your money."  "No, he's got his own stuff."  So he opens this new office.  And my son and him become friends.  But my granddaughter goes to the office to see, cause they're still moving in and I'm helping to put furniture and stuff.  And then the granddaughter says, "ooh, you ought to see that new secretary.  She looks like she just stepped out of 'Essence' [magazine]."  Well, I get nervous then, thinking "what does this woman look like because Ken is staying at work late," not knowing that as a new business, the secretary's gone.  He's just getting things started, but I'm thinking this 'Essence' woman.  So I get my daughter-in-law and I, we sneak in the office looking for clues.  And so we find this red baby doll.  And we say, "ook at this, this is going to be a gift for her."  And so I'm crying and having a fit.  And my son and my, and my then husband [Ken], walk in on us.  And I'm crying and carrying on.  And he says, "how could you not trust me," we go through all that.  Ends up, I'm trusting him and we're back together.  So the last one we had to do cause we, it, had to do a trilogy cause people were still wanting to know.  He inherits this big house which we find is haunted.  It's a big, beautiful house.  We did it at Mills College [Oakland, California] and they did a beautiful set, two stories and everything.  And the haunting in the house was because the house had not had love.  And that, bring in love, the spirits would be happy and leave.  Well, of course, we were madly in love.  I had gotten secure enough to not worry about younger women and my granddaughter was getting older.  And so we came into this house and doors--and we had wonderful special effects.  Rocking chairs would rock, spirits, the pictures would come down, fireplace would light up.  All this stuff was going on.  People had not seen that on the stage, not here.  And it was so well produced and everything, and so the spirits in the house were beginning to age my husband and my son.  So they would began to say, "man, I used to do laps.  I can't hardly do laps."  And you see them aging in front of you, getting gray.  And so my, my granddaughter read in this book, the only way we can get rid of the spirits is to really show love and do this ceremony.  So we did this Voodoo ceremony kind of thing and dispelled the spirits because everybody in that house was love.  And the spirits left and we had the house and everybody lived happily ever after.  So it was a trilogy of plays.  And I produced them, every one of them was sold out.
Speaker 2: And you did that over what periods of time?
Speaker 1: From eighty--when did we do the first play?  '84 [1984] to '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 16448
Speaker 1: In '88 [1988] I had--Melv and Billy [Hutton, actor] did it [Beckford's play 'Tis the Morning of My Life'] on film cause I really wrote it for a movie cause it was written in little vignettes like that.  And we shot it on location.  And it was really good.  And I just talked to Ron [Stacker Thompson, producer, director] this morning.  I said, "Ron, we got to do 'Tis' as a movie," cause Ron produced 'Funny Valentines,' [television movie] did you see that? Okay. He was the producer.  And he wrote the stage, the screenplay, California wrote the book.  And I sent the book down to Ron and said, "you got to look at this."  He took the book ['Funny Valentines'] and made it into the thing, and that picture there is at the premier in Hollywood [California], we did at Magic's theater [theater chain owned by Earvin "Magic" Johnson] with Alfre and them.  I love all--I told you I love all that pampering.  Girl, walking on the red carpet and the limos and thing, I said, "I'm a movie star tonight."  I had a ball.  It was wonderful.  And Loretta and I are still really good friends.  She's just--it was just a joy.
Speaker 2: Loretta Devine [actress]?
Speaker 1: Yeah. And we shot it in Wilmington, North Carolina, and I'd never been in that part of the South, and, and we were there for a month and it was hot.  And the mosquitoes ate only me up, nobody else, maybe because I got this good California blood.  And we, it was just a joy.  And Ron and I say--"since OET [Oakland Ensemble Theater], and we'll be for OET."  So we did 'America's Dream,' the trilogy [TV miniseries].  Did you see that too?
Speaker 2: I didn't see that.
Speaker 1: Okay, Maya [Angelou, poet, author, director] did [wrote] one [part of the trilogy].  Danny did, Danny Glover [actor] did another one.  The one I was in was with Wesley Snipes [actor], and it was 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black.' And this little boy had painted Christ black and the school superintendent who was a staunch racist said, "we can't have no black Jesus and you know need money."  And Wesley was almost going to sway and then he came on back in.  And I was the, the piano player and everything.
Speaker 2: I know, I did see that.  That was, wasn't that HBO [Home Box Office, premium television channel]?
Speaker 1: It was a trilogy.  Yeah, it was HBO, oh, Showtime [premium television channel].  No, HBO. It was HBO, cause HBO did a big party up here for us, and it was a grand--
Speaker 2: Because actually I was given that and, the tape.  I didn't see it on HBO, but I saw that recently.  I saw it recently.
Speaker 1: Well, that was me.
Speaker 2: You played what role?
Speaker 1: I was the piano player, and I talked--and Wesley and I.  And everybody thought I could play the piano cause I made it look so much like I was playing the piano.  Thanked was my piano teacher from back then.  And so that was fun too.  We shot that Dallas, Texas.  And I'd never been to Dallas, Texas.  And I told Ron, 'cause he's got another movie that he's working on.  And I don't have to audition for him.  He writes parts for me.  So this one will take place in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I'll be a roots doctor.  I'll be an eighty-year old--I told him, "eighty?"  (Laughs).  So I'll be an eighty-year old roots woman.  And all the people in the community come to me to get their herbs and things.  And I said, "why you going to do New Orleans," well, it's okay, New Orleans, but I'm sure it'll be in the summer and the mosquitoes and things will kill me again.  I said, "we want some wintertime shoots," but anyway, I'll be happy to do it.  It's going to be fun.
Story_ID: 16449
Speaker 1: But you know, I go back to the fact--there are a couple of things.  One, you make all this seem so easy.  And I know you say, "well, people are afraid to try," but sometimes even people who, you know, want to can't, but--
Speaker 2: I'm very disciplined, and like for this 'Eternal Voice' thing, I wake up at four [AM] and work on it.  And other people say, "I'm not going to work on this thing at four--."  And a volunteer too, don't get a dime.  And it's like a full-time job for me because I said, "I'll be president [of the African American Museum Library Coalition] for two years.  And I want to make this debut something people will stand up about."  So last year, it was memberships.  And I gave a thing [award ceremony] I called 'Honoring Our Own.'  I always think hometown celebrities never get the recognition.  They need the border and the red carpets rolled out.  So we got all the local people who should be really respected as celebrities: doctors, educators, ministers--we had business, religion, politics, arts, visual arts, all these people.  And see everybody knows I was very outspoken, so I, I write the letters.  And my letters said, "now, if you can't be there, you're not going to get no award cause I'm sick of people sending a representative. So if you can't be there, just forget it.  And this is my phone number and call me by this date."  They said, "we knew you meant business."  I had left a message for one of the judges, and, at 6:00 in the morning.  And Gordon called up and said, "girl, what you doing up at six o'clock leaving messages?"  I said "'cause I wanted to know are you coming, cause if you're not coming, you're not going to get no award."  We had fifty-seven celebrities there getting their awards in the City Hall rotunda [Oakland, California] where they had the big double staircase.  And I had choreographed it so when their names were read, I had them have an assistant, 'cause when you're a celebrity and you leave town, you always going to assign somebody to take care of, you know.  So I had trained local young women and men how to be an assistant.  You don't call them their first name.  You hold the--"would you like water; here's the restrooms."  So they were treated like a celebrity.  So they were just in awe.  And each assistant had them on their arm and came down that white staircase and it was all televised and blah, blah, blah.  And so it was, and it was packed 'cause everybody knew if I was going to do it, we were going to do it right or we're not going to do it.  So that was my first year.  Now, my last year is this 'Eternal Voice' thing.  And I know when we debut in September, it'll be packed.  And it'll be successful 'cause I ain't going to get out there, half stepping.  If it, if it means I just have to be up at four in the morning, that's what you--you do what you got to do.
Story_ID: 16450
Speaker 1: Now, let me--you've played a, a primary role in sort of shaping the artistic community here [Oakland, California].  And I'm wondering if you could describe San Francisco's [California] artistic community.  It's not a New York [New York], but it's not, but it--
Speaker 2: Are you talking about the black artistic community?
Speaker 1: The black artistic community.
Speaker 2: All right.  San Francisco blacks have always, Oakland blacks and Berkeley [California]--(unclear)--were always the focal point.  When San Francisco had Fillmore Street jazz and stuff, that was hot in the '40s [1940s] and '50's [1950s].  But Oakland always had 7th Street and more, it was a more cohesive community.  We always had black politicians and we always had black--and its teenagers.  The teenagers would want to come over here to party cause our parties were great.  All that kind of stuff.  So the artistic community is more here than in San Francisco to me.  If you read the [San Francisco] Chronicle [newspaper], you don't know there's any blacks in San Francisco other than [Mayor] Willie [Brown] and, and (pause) Glide [Memorial United Methodist] Church.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Memorial Church, I was gonna say--(laughs).
Speaker 2: Right, I said "what kind"--I don't even take the Chronicle no more.  I said, "I don't know anything about these people"--there are black folks that are doing something, I hope.  But you don't ever hear about them.  And the activity of and the bustle is here in Oakland.  So I've never had a, a desire to go to San Francisco.  And the art community, all my students are, they would all come over here from San Francisco.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking then the Oakland community, sorry.  You know, 'cause I keep thinking of them being so similar, you know,--and I know that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they, because they come over here.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 16451
Speaker 1: But the Oakland Bay Area [California], I think there's no theater here any more.  After Oakland, after Ron [Stacker Thompson, producer, director] left, and he had such excellence, then other people weren't willing to put in to make--keep those plays.  We had seasons, we had season tickets and, and we had all kind of plays.  We did 'Flash Gordon.'  We did 'Native Son.'  We did '[The] Cotton [Club].'  I mean we did everything.  And so when directors came in and, either they weren't as skilled or they didn't want to put in the time.  And they began to only do "dis and dat" plays, and I said, "we, I'm not going to be in no 'dis and dat.'"  So it began to go down.  And now there's no more Oakland Ensemble Theater.  Now, there's no little theater where you can buy a season ticket and go see good drama.  The Berkeley Repertory Theatre [Berkeley, California], which is pitiful cause they keep saying, "we're community."  And that's a downgraded way they say it--they think community, you can be bootleg.  And so when Ron was here before, I know we went out there and said we would volunteer to pull it together.  And then, about five or six years ago, just before I went in for this hip [surgery], I remember cause I was going out there in pain.  I said, "I will call in all my actor friends who started at OET [Oakland Ensemble Theater], now SAG [Screen Actors Guild] and Equity [actors union] and all that and have a workshop and train your actors how to act, how to direct, how to do PR [public relations], how to produce, how to do--all this.  And none of them didn't want to do it 'cause Black Rep[ertory Theatre, Berkeley, California] did such tacky, worse than PTA [Parent Teacher Association] children shows.  I said, "well, we've got to help them cause they got the building and they're going to be here and, and they can't keep on this way."  They didn't have seasons where people bought season tickets.  So I got all of them to say, "yes, they would come."  None of them wanted to come, but I said, "yes, you'll come and you'll volunteer."  So when I got up there and one day, I went in the office and they were just beginning to send out the flyers.  I said, "these should have gone out three weeks ago--your people need to know they need to be here."  I said, "and,"--so I sat down and addressed them myself and got them out.  I was able to call in markers and got the press out there for the press release for the beginning of this big workshop.  I'm always early.  So I get there early, and the lobby is dirty.  There's greasy dirty dishes in the sink.  The table was sticky dirty.  I said, I told them, I said "you come out here and vacuum and this floor."  I told the lady to go get some soap powder and do those dishes.  And I said, "get me some cloth.  We got to cover this table."  We got all together when the press came.  And I'm saying to myself "we're volunteering and I'm working like a dog and then--."  So when the first workshop started, it was two guys that I had talked into doing scene study.  Melvin and Hansford said they got there and they, they didn't see anybody around and everything, so the guy showed them to their room.  Not one student came.  They had not recruited their own people even.  Melvin and Hansford said, "Ms. B, we waited around, waited around."  We said "well, let's go on downstairs."  When they went downstairs, all the staff had gone, left, left the building unlocked.  They didn't know how to lock up nothing.  They just closed the door and turned out the lights.  I called them up, and, and Hansford didn't want to call me cause I'd gone to the hospital.  And after, you know, they got me and said, they didn't--cause they was supposed to give them bridge tolls, gas, that was all.  He said, they said that they couldn't get the board to sign the check, and they got to find somebody else to sign the check so we didn't get the check for the bridges and all that.  I was so upset.  I called the mother, who runs the thing.  I said "you have disrespected these actors who are SAG members, Equity members, came to give free workshops to your students.  And you couldn't respect them enough to be there, and then couldn't sign off a $10.00 check."  I said, "we're canceling the rest of the workshop."  "Oh, Ms. Beckford, we can't do that."  "Oh, yes, we can." I said "because you have not stuck to your word.  You, you were going to have all these classes filled with people.  These people don't need to come here for that."  She was crying, "oh, Ms. Beckford, but you're a leader in the community."  I said, "I know exactly what I am in the community, and I'm not going to let my people go up there.  Cancel the whole thing."  I said, "I will never walk in there again."  She says, "oh, but, Roscoe Dellums loves you,"--she was Ron Dellums's daughter.  "She was a student of yours and she wanted to come."  "Tell her I'm not coming."  She was crying and carrying on.  I meant that.  Haven't been back. They got this building, nothing--embarrassingly bad plays where they're reading a script and walking up the--please!
Story_ID: 16452
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk just briefly about the, you know, the Katherine, the biography ['Katherine Dunham: A Biography'] on Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer] and how that even came about.
Speaker 2: It came about, Ms. Dunham called me up and said, "oh, Ruth, I just read another biography and, and I don't know who they're talking about.  So I want you, a Dunham student and a friend to write this book."  I said, "now, you know, I don't know nothing about writing no book and I don't want to learn, Ms. Dunham."  "Oh, no, Ruth, you can do this, you can"--I said "I can't do that."  I said, "I can't spell the word book.  I didn't like doing term papers in school.  I cannot do this book."  "Oh, yes, yes, you can."  I said, "and besides that, I'm in a play."  This was 'Happy Ending.'  I said, "and I've got to memorize all these lines, and I cannot do no book.  I tell you what.  I'll call Maya [Angelou, poet, author, director], my good friend, and she'll write you a book."  "No, I want you."  She said, "when is the play going to be through."  I said "three months."  "All right."  Three months, she called up.  What could I do?  I said, "now, you know"--she said, "it's three months."  I said, "okay.  If I write this book, you have to answer everything I want.  You got to go along with everything I want 'cause you know I can't write, blah, blah, blah."  "Oh, once you write, you'll never stop writing."  "Yes, I will."  So I went down to East St. Louis [Illinois], interviewed her there, went in her basement, got all the pictures.  She said "take anything you want."  Came out, tape recorded everything, hand transcribed it myself, long hand.  Would go so long, stop cause I'm a yellow tablet in my bed.  Got it all transcribed and everything.  Well, I didn't have to do much, much editing because she talks great, you know.  So then, then she was in Haiti.  I had to go to Haiti and do some more interviewing.  And then finally got this book done and got a publisher in New York [New York].  And the guy let me design the cover and I wanted, blah, blah, blah.  So I guess they said "the woman ain't no writer, might as well give her what she wants."  So the book got out and Ms' Dunham--I got Maya to quote on it and Ms. Dunham was pleased.  And that was that.  I told her, "don't ever talk to me about a book again."
Story_ID: 16453
Speaker 1: Then it was so funny 'cause then I wrote my cookbooks ['A Little of This and Some of That'] and I wrote my three plays ['Tis the Morning of My Life' trilogy], plus all these children plays.  And then I wrote 'Still Groovin',' now. 'Still Groovin': Affirmations for Women in the Second Half of Life' came out in '99 [1999], I guess, yeah.  And that was funny, because the way that came about, one of my real writers in Chicago [Illinois] said, "girl," 'cause my answering unit always has a affirmation.  Says "you ought to put all those into a book."  I said, "don't even say the word book to me.  I'm not putting anything in it."  "Oh, no, you should put it in a book." I said, "okay, I'll see what comes out of it."  Well, a lot of affirmations came out.  So I began to put them in sections, health, inner peace, self empowerment and romance.  And so I didn't have an agent, if you don't have an agent in--.  And I said, "ain't no book agent going to get me.  I'm not a writer," but I called up this woman up in Seattle [Washington], and she said, she's not an agent anymore.  But she has a friend down here who is.  So I called the friend up, and the friend says, "well, what have you written?"  I said, "I'm telling you now I'm not a writer.  I'm a bootleg writer, but I can tell you some of the quotes in my book."  And so I told her the one about, in romance, that "you may need a nip here and tuck there, but don't worry about it.  His eyesight's not so good any more either."  She fell out.  She said, "do you have some more like that?"  I said, "yes."  She said, "well, send me the book."  I sent her the book.  She said, "I'll be your agent."  And there was going to be a big bookseller, publisher thing they go to.  And she was there for a week, and in one week we had three publishers.  And she said, "this is unheard of 'cause you"--I said, "I'm a dancer."  I always tell everybody I'm bootleg.  And so they bought the book, Pilgrim Press [publishing company, New York, New York].  And I, and so, again I--I told them, I said, "I don't want to change."  I said "'cause these are my words and this is a 'I' book."  So the two publishers came out here for some conference.  So they took, my agent and I to dinner.  Little square men from--where is Pilgrim Press?  Somewhere back east.  So we went to dinner and I ordered a Bombay martini on the rocks.  They had never had that.  I said, "you guys so country."  I said, "get two Bombays."  So they got two Bombays.  And so it was just a great love fest.  And so they didn't mess with me.  I just got everything I wanted.  And my agent said, "you don't know, you talked to those--did you realize they were the publishers?"  I said, "yeah.  You know, and I was a Dancer.  You know, they're good at that.  I'm good at that," but I, I bootlegged the book.  But I think it's just what I mentor my girls about all the time and other people call it.  So I said, I "just put it all together."  So--it's a beautiful book.  It's on acid-free paper.  It's two-colored print, you know.  And, and they hired me three agents out of South--out of down in Laguna.  They, one of them came up here for a half day to train me how to do television.  I said, "okay."  I said, "you know, I've done movies and things."  She said, "I know."  She said, "but I'm going to just interview you like you were on somebody's show."  I said, "okay."  So I had fun.  Then my agents down, down in Laguna Hills [California], the other two were really good agents.  And they said, "oh, you've got such a good"--she said, "we can just sell you, and don't worry about the book."  So I had made other writers tell me they're lucky if they get one.  And then I told my publisher, I said, "now you know the way to sell this book--I can sell the book, but you've got to send me on a book tour.  I don't ride in cabs and I don't sleep in funny hotels.  And I like good"--my agent said, "oh, did you realize you were talking"--'cause you know, they don't usually do that.  So when they brought me to New York [New York] and they were going to put me in the hotel, and Maya [Angelou, poet, author, director] said, "no, no, no, you got to stay in my apartment."  I said, "I want to stay in the hotel."  "No, stay in my apartment."  So I stayed in her apartment.  And every--there was a [Lincoln] Town Car [automobile] to pick me up every day to go to this T.V. station and that T.V. station and all that junk, 'cause I told them "I don't ride in cabs."  They sent their lady to be my assistant, and she was going to get there one day late.  So Maya calls up Pilgrim Press and says, "Ms. Beckford can't be there a whole day without an attendant.  So I will lend her my attendant."  So, (unclear) comes over and she takes care of me for that first day, going to all these T.V. things.  And I just had a grand time.  I was just having fun, it's fun to me.  It's funny to me.  I have a good time.  And then it went paperback the next year so they were happy.
Speaker 2: No, it's a beautiful book.
Speaker 1: And the marketing was smart because the paperback was a white cover and the other one was black.  So all the writers, buyers, now are white.  So they don't know I'm black till they get to the back cover.  So it's still doing okay.
Story_ID: 16454
Speaker 1: But, but then I wrote a book that I know will never get published, and that's okay.  It's called 'Love Dance,' short stories, romance.  I love black romantic novels.  And because, now see, 'Groovin'' ['Still Groovin': Affirmations for Women in the Second Half of Life'] is a true story cause that's me and Dunham's [Katherine Dunham: A Biography] is true.  But fantasy, I'm too direct.  So I get right to the business.  I don't write about "the sun was coming over the top," you know, like writers do.  I set up the scene so they could all be plays.  But they're really cute stories.  Nine short stories, very different.  Two girls on a cruise, who said, "this is it."  A young man who knew he was homosexual from four and hiding it from his parents and then his love experience.  Next door neighbors who were both married and they knew it was going to be a one-night thing, and they got it one night and they was just happy.  A minister who really secretly loved one of his parishioners and her husband died.  So really cute little stories, but I don't think it'll ever be published cause it's not like writers write.  My agent said I do dialogue well, not that other stuff.
Speaker 2: Well, dialogue, there's nothing wrong with dialogue.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it goes right to dialogue.
Story_ID: 16455
Speaker 1: You've mentioned your friendship with Maya Angelou [poet, author, director], and I'm wondering if you could talk about that friendship and how you met and--
Speaker 2: Maya was here, well, she lived in San Francisco [California], she said, when she was sixteen when she had Guy, her son.  At sixteen, I was playing tennis and (laughs) far from anything like that.  But she knew of my dance studio and then she knew about Alvin [Ailey, dancer, choreographer] and all that.  So she said she was my groupie because she always wanted to dance like I dance.  And so we became friends in our early twenties.  And then we just remained friends.  And then when she got married, and I was, I was her matron of honor and we've just been friends all along.  And we're very different, but we're just good friends.  And to this day, I just talked to her last week because, you know, she was just honored with Hallmark.  She was commissioned to do her poems and things for Hallmark Cards.  And a tremendous contract.  And they just unveiled it, January 29 [2002].  I was in the hospital and couldn't go, but Ruth went.  And she said, they had set up little set-tea sitting rooms with pillows and everything, and her poems framed on the wall, all those little scenes all the way around.  Not only her poetry on the greeting cards, but poetry framed, poetry on note paper, poetry on mugs.  I have, she gave me this, this sleepwear, with 'Phenomenal Woman' on it, her new, her play, 'Phenomenal Woman,' but you don't know it's there until you read it cause it just looks like pinstripe.  And what else was all on there, so all that, and, and they unveiled with a big do, to unveil.  "Maya Mosaics" is what it's called.  So I missed out on that do cause I sure wanted to go.  So I used go down to Maya for Thanksgiving.  She always does a big do.  And I couldn't go this last year.  And then she invited with her to go to [Nicholas] Ashford and [Valerie] Simpson's.  They have a big annual "White Party," they call it.  I told her, "what kind of a white party?"  "Well, you have to wear white.  Everybody's in white."  And, oh, their home in Connecticut is a mansion.  They live near Martha Stewart [television personality] I heard so the grounds are big and it's a gorgeous place.  And, and they are a wonderful couple.  They are just down to earth and wonderful people.  I really enjoy them.  And so, I've been to two of their parties this last one and it's always 4th of July and so, of course, I was on crutches and couldn't go.  But they are great and so I meet a lot, lot of wonderful people there that I've just read about.  And they're just great people so.  So Maya and I, you know, over fifty years you have to value friendship like that.  So--through thick and thin.
Story_ID: 16456
Speaker 1: Now, speaking, I want to go back and just ask you some sort of philosophical question, what, what do you think makes a true artist?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lordy.  I feel a true artist has the gift, and then respects it enough to train it and hone it better because I was not born knowing first position, second position, fifth position.  But I took what I had and studied and made it better.  That's a true artist to me, to recognize the gift they have because talent is first.  People can study and be good, but there's always something that's special.  Everybody can dance on the stage like the Rockettes [Radio City Music Hall dance group], but you look at one.  That's the one with the talent.
Story_ID: 16457
Speaker 1: Now, what about black people and their role in the U.S. Arts movement.
Speaker 2: It's always going to be second.  That's why everybody had a fit with the Oscars [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Awards] this time [in 2002, African Americans Denzel Washington and Halle Berry won Academy Awards for Best Actor in a Leading Role and Best Actress in a Leading Role, respectively].  They said, "okay, five, fifty, more years."  But that's always going to be there.  It's just not going to go away.  And we have to understand we have a different skin and, and people still have their idiosyncrasies.  And I'm sure that it boils down to dollars and cents in a lot of cases.  And if you can draw in that box office, we'll give you the box office.  But it's still going to be there.  You always have to be better than.  You have to be better than.  I learned that as a little girl.  That's why when I walked in [University of] Cal[ifornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I said, "I'll out-dance every girl in this room."  And so I don't think that'll ever go away until hundreds of years from now, and everybody's intermarried and everybody's tan. Which is getting there quick.
Speaker 1: It's getting there.
Speaker 2: It's getting there very fast.
Speaker 1: And people can--never mind.  The young whites can dance too.  I've seen that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Speaking of which I want to--
Speaker 2: Everybody's not born with rhythm.
Speaker 1: I know--
Story_ID: 16458
Speaker 1: But I wanted to ask you what I thought was very interesting is about the play you're working on--
Speaker 2: 'A Flight to Planet Arug?'
Speaker 1: Where it was, you had West African, Haitian, hip-hop and what else did you--
Speaker 2: Tap and Modern.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I, and I was wondering--
Speaker 2: That's cause that's what they teach in the studio.  So I had to take what was there.
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering what your take is on hip-hop?  You know, as a continuum of dance.
Speaker 2: It's not an artistic thing, I don't think, because there's no real technique for it.  And it's fun to do, it's fun to watch.  I think it'll stay around, but until it develops a technique where it can be passed on down, down, down, cause there is no correct way to hip-hop.  Where even Modern dance, there was a correct way that you did falls and things and all that.  But I think it'll stick around because it's fun, and you don't have to be a great dancer to do it.  Anybody can learn hip-hop.  They won't learn it as good, but they can learn how to snap and pop and all that.  It's fun.
Story_ID: 16459
Speaker 1: And when you look at the whole continuum of U.S. dance, where do you see it right now?  What do you think its future is?
Speaker 2: The thing that makes me unhappy about U.S. dance, black, white, everything, is they are hung up on technique.  Everybody is a great technician.  I think they forget that art, dance is a performing art and it's a performing art.  You are there to inspire and excite your audience because of the inner spirit that you're projecting out.  I think now it's more like excite the audience because "I can hold my leg up there ten counts."  I'd let be only held two counts and come down with some emotion to it.  I feel that the emotions, the inspiration, the excitement is, is kind of out from what I've seen.  It's just they're all such great technicians, and that's where they put their energy and they're starving themselves to stay skinny.  And it's just sad to me.  I really don't go look at dance anymore, except Deborah [Vaughan, dancer, choreographer].  And I told her, as soon as she retired, I can get through with all that, but I go every year to their--week before their show and give critique and, and I enjoy their concerts thoroughly 'cause they dance with spirit and joy and fun.  Looks like fun.  But these people come out all pained and--please!
Story_ID: 16460
Speaker 1: Well, when you look at the different art forms, do you have any preference now?
Speaker 2: In dance?
Speaker 1: No, period.
Speaker 2: Period.
Speaker 1: Dance was, dance was your start, but do you have any preference?  Do you see anyone, you know, whether it's music or theater or--
Speaker 2: There's no theater here in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] to see.  I've always--I just like people who are artistic and free and creative.  And I've done many kinds of artwork, all these stained glass pieces I've done.  I've done ceramics, I've done leather, I've done these earrings I made and designed.  These are scraps from my stained glass class.  So I just do stuff that pleases me.  Somebody said, "those are some ugly earrings."  I said, "don't you look now 'cause I like 'em."  So I made all my daughters' earrings and all and all my daughters--I asked them what was the color scheme of their house, and I made them all stained glass windows.  And I'm sorry I can't go to that class anymore because it's on the second floor and there's no elevator so I can't hike those stairs any more.  But I've always enjoyed crafts and art and I got paint--all the paintings in my house, I've done.  They aren't great masterpieces, but I did them and they're in my color schemes and that's what I wanted. So I hang them up.
Story_ID: 16461
Speaker 1: Do you have hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I have concerns in that the gentleness has left.  I don't like people cursing and it just seems common.  You'll hear some mother telling a little two-year old, calling her all kind of names--and I don't like that.  The gentleness that I was brought up in and the respect that you had for your elders and the respect for each other.  And it was like a disgrace.  There'd be maybe one girl in five years who'd have a baby.  And then she'd leave town and "go to the aunt" or something, as they would say.  But now it's so common, and I was telling my girlfriend.  I said "the whole thing now is sex.  You never hear anybody talk about about make love."  So they just have sex.  So to me the girls are on the short end of the stick.  These little teenagers--she doesn't, she--I'm sure they never have an orgasm 'cause what does the boy--he's not concerned about her, just "go."  And "if we have a baby, okay."  They don't think about AIDS [Auto Immunodeficiency Syndrome].  I said "all of them need to go to an AIDS ward and watch people on that last lap."  It would scare them to death, but they all say, "everybody got to die, got to die some time."  I said, "it's the way you die."  I teach a life skills class once a week to young adults who are parolees and probationees and "welfare-ees" and they're learning construction work.  And I teach life skills from eight [o'clock'] to ten [o'clock] on Fridays.  I'm now going to cut down where I just teach toxic relationships 'cause I find that is so big--and where it's, it's no big thing if you die that way or if you die with emphysema.  I said, "it's not the cancer so much as you can't breathe."  And they're smoking.  I said, "and do you"--when I teach budgeting, I--and they see how much money they spend for cigarettes a month.  They say,  'I didn't know it was that much money."  I said "and you in here broke and poor and you're going to spend this much money to kill yourself?"  So I teach life skills and the toxic relationships is these women who are battered and the guys are batterers.  And some of the guys are battered.  And so I teach them about "love should not hurt" and all these things.  And, and if he pushes you, get going there, 'cause I open this thing with a poem about, "he sent me flowers today.  And, for no reason, he just sent me flowers, and said he was sorry he pushed me yesterday.  He sent me flowers today.  He only blackened my eye, but he sent me flowers and said how sorry he was." And she goes through him beating her more and more and finally, "he sent me flowers today.  They're laying on my casket."  Honey, the room gets quiet 'cause I perform that.  I perform that poem. And I make them understand that you don't have to lose all your friends 'cause they'll pull you away from your friends, pull you away from your family, tell you what you can wear and what you can eat, you know, begin to control her.  Then he's got her so, and so that's toxic relationships.  And many, many young teenaged girls are in that.  In fact, Oprah [Winfrey, television host] did a whole show on that just a couple of weeks ago.  And girls were saying they would have bruises and tell their mother they fell down the stairs or something.  Teenagers!  So I was telling Deborah [Vaughan, dancer, choreographer] about it.  I said "we're going to do a session on that for Rights of Passage girls" 'cause these teenaged girls are so hungry for attention and to be seen cause they didn't get that self-esteem at home.  So in our classes, we're busy telling them how great the show is going to be, how great they can be and everything.  And another thing I think that loses the finesse of life is when they started dress-down Fridays, where people don't respect their job enough to come dressed professionally to me, old time, but I--it worked.  I went to the Oakland [California] School Board to speak for a dance teacher who needed me to speak for her.  I looked in there.  I didn't know who were the teachers and who were the kids and who was the board of directors.  Everybody was in sweats, shirts hanging out, didn't look like they were the professional teachers and doard of direct--how, you know, you'll fight when you're dressed funny.  You get dressed up and you say, "oh, no, don't, don't mess with the clothes."  And you act differently.  So when the school teachers come to school looking like the students and looking unprofessional, there's no--not anything for the student to shoot to, to be a role model to 'cause everybody looks the same.  They call the teachers by their first name.  They call adults their first name.  They'll curse in front of you.  All of that has lowered the morale and respect for each other.  That's why "it doesn't matter to shoot you, you ain't nobody.  It doesn't matter."  Have a baby, "it's okay, I can do"--now, they can't do welfare as long.  But it's been generational.  And it's just sad to see the rappers still calling girls by the names and the girls talking about, "it's okay to say that."  You're hearing it on television now.  I remember when television, you couldn't say "damn."  They're saying everything which lowers the respectability, so people begin to treat each other differently.  And so the respect goes out the window.  So it's nothing, "yeah, I'm going, yeah, I'm pregnant.  I want his baby."  You hear these talk shows.  "It's my baby," "no, it's her baby."  "Well, whose baby is it?"  "I don't know."  "I slept with his brother the night befire," "I don't know whose"--they're not making love.  The girl's not enjoying it.  I said, "you should charge money."  It's like being a bootleg prostitute.  But these little girls are so hungry for someone to say "I love you," whether they mean it or not, they will do whatever it takes.  So it's a very sad outlook to me.  Something has to happen.  They've got to get some self respect back.
Story_ID: 16462
Speaker 1: Now, when you think back on the young girl, the young Ruth who danced--you know, whose mother [Cora Beckford] took her to dance before Dunham, Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer], and look at your life and where you've come, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I think it's been a great ride.  It didn't come easy.  I always was the first or the only.  But that did not bother me cause I knew I was going to open that door wide enough.  And that I've had the satisfaction of seeing it happen 'cause like I say, my girls head all the dance departments in these schools, colleges, here [Oakland, California], Atlanta [Georgia], everywhere.  So it's been a good journey and I've had a good time.  I've lived good.  I've had blessed health and friends and family so.  Couldn't ask for any better.
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: "She had a ball."  My legacy is really all of my girls [former students] who are left here.  And, and I've brainwashed them to the point that they understand this too (laughs) because one of my [surrogate] daughters, she just said--the one that teaches at Contra Costa College [San Pablo, California]--said "Ms. B, I'm going to get on the train 'cause"--break is next week--"I'm going to get on the train and go down to Santa Barbara [California] and have massages and stay in a hotel.  I'm going to get a suite in the train and just have a good time by myself." 'Cause I always say, "you work for your pleasures."  And ff you just work and work and work and work and never have a good time, you might as well not work, cause you can always hustle up a meal or two.  But I said, "you have to work, and work to have a good time."  So she's going to go have a good time for a couple of days a weekend. Right now, they're down to Hearst Castle [San Simeon, California] having a good time.  I said "you got to have a good time."  And they know I've always had a good time.  I believe in good parties, good everything.  And I believe in traveling young.  I told them, I tell my girls, "travel now while you can hike the pyramids, climb the steps in the castle, eat any food, get sick on the water and still live, fall down and get up."  And so I did all that young.  I, I have no desire to go back to Europe and everything.  So now I said, "I think I'll see USA now."  And the only place I can go back and back and back is Ocho Rios [Jamaica].  And now, now it's about cruising because cruises are easy in my physical condition.  I don't have to pack, unpack and they got entertainment and everything.  So I always did what I wanted to do when I felt it was time.  So my husband and I used to travel all the time, and cruise and do everything and I've, I've done it.  And it's been a great, great journey.
Story_ID: 16463
Speaker 1: What, one other question, just because you've nurtured a lot of women along, what do you think the power or the beauty of, of the female is?
Speaker 2: Well, they always say, "we're the mothers of the earth," all but me (laughs).  They're the mothers of the earth and, just the sensitivity that women have, but I'm really worried 'cause I see a lot of it losing.  I see a lot of it going away.  I don't see women concerned and really caring for each other.  And I tell people--I gave a brunch--I only entertain out of the house now.  I don't entertain at home any more.  But it just happened, one of my [surrogate] daughters was here from Atlanta [Georgia], another one was here from, from Brooklyn [New York].  And so ten of us got together for brunch.  And I told them, I said, "I look around this table"--and all the women were early fifties, mid-fifties.  And I said, "all of you are successful, making it, done it, had their children, grown," and all that.  And I said, "but the value of this table sitting here is the friendship," and you cannot overlook friendship of women.  And they've been friends since little girls in dance classes.  So I said, "your value is--value your friendships," 'cause like they say "husbands come and go and girlfriends are forever".  That's true.  So I said, "value your friendships because even if you're married, women outlive their husbands and friends are there to hold and support you through everything.  I just talked to one of my girlfriends who lives in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and the other one lives up here [Oakland, California].  We always called ourselves "the Golden Girls" 'cause the three of us grew up together.  Our parents were pregnant together and all that.  And, the friendship that you can establish when you've all experienced so much together, it's so valuable.  I tell girls, "value your friendship, just 'cause you moved away, keep contact with them, because new friends are nice, but they don't have the history with you."  So I like people to hang onto those friendships, cause Maya's [Angelou, poet, author, director] way down in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]; I'm way out here.  So--I would like to see people begin to respect each other more, make your children behave, make your children respect elders, value the way you look.  Daddy [Felix Beckford] used to always say, "the first impression is what they see before they know you're wonderful inside.  Are you pulled together?"  So I would like to see that happen again.
Story_ID: 16464
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my father, Felix Beckford, Sr.  And you can see he's debonair, well dressed with his handkerchief.  And that's in the house I grew up on, on at that time 38th Street which then became MacArthur Boulevard [Oakland, California].  And it was a two-story, four-bedroom house.  And Daddy's standing in front of the stairway.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford's father, Felix Beckford, Sr., Oakland, California, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16465
Speaker 1: Okay, this pose is in north Oakland [California] still.  That was 34th Street and Market so that was like four blocks from where I grew up at my aunt's house.  And I imagine I was about five years old then.  And you see I have on high-top shoes.  I'm togged down with a very floppy brim hat.  I can't even remember what color that dress is, but those houses that you see are still there.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford as a small child, Oakland, California, ca. 1930.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16466
Speaker 1: This picture, I imagine I'm about nine or ten.  And I'm sitting on the piano stool--see my Mary Janes [shoes]--and oh, I was sitting there.  I can remember that session almost cause that was done by Mr. E.F. Joseph.  In fact, all the pictures you're seeing here now were done by E.F. Joseph.  And I was sitting on the piano stool that I suffered on trying to practice my piano lessons.  But that is one of the stools that you wind up, you sit in front of the stool.
Speaker 2: [Studio photo of Ruth Beckford, ca. 1934-1935.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16467
Speaker 1: This photo is, as I told you about, acrobatic toe dancing.  So this is me in a backbend en pointe in toe shoes.  And it was a backbend, you see I was very flexible.  And this was when I was about fourteen, and that was an acrobatic toe dance.  And that whole dance was done en pointe.
Speaker 2: [Studio photo of Ruth Beckford performing an acrobatic dance move, ca. 1939.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16468
Speaker 1: This was a picture of my first installation dinner of the 'Ruth Beckford Awards for Extraordinary People in the Field of Dance.'  And we inducted five people at the time.  And we always include a $100 as the gift.  So that was me at my first induction, and they had presented me with flowers.  And we did it at a Chinese Restaurant 'cause they know I love Chinese food.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford presented flowers at the Ruth Beckford Awards ceremony, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16469
Speaker 1: This was the premiere of the movie 'Funny Valentines' that I was honored to be in with two very famous, serious actresses, Alfre Woodard on the [Beckford's] far left and Loretta Devine on the [Beckford's] right.  And I am next to Loretta Devine.  I played the, I played the role of the midwife where Alfre and Loretta thought they were cousins, but they were actually sisters and I knew it 'cause I had midwifed them into the world.  So that was a wonderful experience in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  And the premier was at Magic Johnson's Theaters down in Hollywood [California].  And I thought I was at the Oscars [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science Awards] 'cause we walked on a red carpet and we came up in limos, and there were search lights.  And I was pretending to be a movie star.  I had a ball.
Speaker 2: [Photos of Ruth Beckford, Alfre Woodard and others at the premier of 'Funny Valentines', Hollywood, California, 1999; (Left photo, L. to R.): Actress Loretta Devine, Ruth Beckford and an unidentified woman; (Right photo) Actress Alfre Woodard.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16470
Speaker 1: This picture was taken at the Dock of the Bay, very upscale black club in Berkeley [California] at the time on the Berkeley Marina.  And it was for cookbooks that I had written and sold for $3 because originally, they were written for my family.  And so many people wanted copies because I created all my recipes, and I don't cook from scratch all the time.  I believe in utilizing cans and boxes and doctoring them up and come out with some really good food.  So the cookbook was called 'A Little of This and Some of That: Cooking with Style,' by Ruth Beckford.  And at that time, my, I would always dress up and wear baby's breath and carnations in my hair.  I've stopped doing that.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford celebrating the publication of her cookbook, 'A Little of This and Some of That: Cooking with Style', Berkeley, California, ca. 1983.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16471
Speaker 1: This is a photo of the closing dance in all of my performances with the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company.  And this was called 'Bamboche.'  And my partner and I did very high jumps like that, and they--it was just a good time, good party dance which closed the show all the time.  And that was taken during a performance.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford performing 'Bamboche' as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16472
Speaker 1: This photo is me as about 10 I think doing the splits.  And it was so easy for me to do.  I would just stand up and go down.  And that was the splits.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford doing the splits, ca. 1935.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16473
Speaker 1: This picture is of my mother [Cora Fowler Beckford] and father [Felix Beckford, Sr.] at the San Francisco [California] World's Fair [sic, Panama-Pacific International Exposition] in 1915.  You can see how dapper they dressed.  My mother's got ostrich plumes in her hat.  Daddy has a Persian lamb fur collar, look like.  And he's holding his cane, so they were sharp.  I have my love of clothes from them.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford's parents, Cora Fowler Beckford and Felix Beckford, Sr., at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition, San Francisco, California, 1915.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16474
Speaker 1: The top photo is my sister [Roselyn Beckford Perry], and that had to be--I don't know how old any of these are.
Speaker 2: She's still alive, you said.
Speaker 1: Yes, she'll be 84 in June [2002] and she was with me last night at my dinner.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford's sister, Roselyn Beckford Perry, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16475
Speaker 1: I was very--if I got spoiled, it was by my brothers more than my mother and father.
Speaker 2: I don't know if we already--I think it came, it came in context, your--.
Speaker 1: Felix.
Speaker 2: Yeah, your brothers' names.
Speaker 1: Fowler Beckford, F-O-W-L-E-R, is the one on the top step, then Daddy, then my other twin brother, Felix, who just recently died.
Speaker 2: And that's F-E-L-I-X?
Speaker 1: F-E-L-I-X and F-O-W-L-E-R, which was my mother's maiden name.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford's father, Felix Beckford, Sr. (center), and twin brothers, Fowler (left) and Felix Beckford (right), n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16476
Speaker 1: That was good old graduation from Oakland Technical High School [Oakland, California].  And our school colors were purple and gold and I love wearing gold.  And that was me in my pale gold outfit where I was the first black valedictorian of the school.
Speaker 2: [Reproduction of Ruth Beckford's high school graduation photo from Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California, 1943.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16477
Speaker 1: Ms. Dunham had become ill when she got off the plane with jaundice and had to go to the hospital.  And I had to come out of retirement cause I know that was 1976.  And I had retired in '75 [1975].  And this was like the last class where she was able to come back 'cause I had to teach that whole course.  And she was demonstrating a drum rhythm.
Speaker 2: [Reproduction of photo showing Ruth Beckford (standing) with Katherine Dunham at the University of California, Berkeley, 1976.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16478
Speaker 1: That was me teaching Modern dance.  You can see I have bangs and a page boy hair.  That's why I did that one so you could see me with hair.  So that was a Modern dance outfit at DeFremery [Recreation] Center [Oakland, California] where I had one of my offices and taught all the advanced classes.
Speaker 2: [Reproduction of photo showing Ruth Beckford teaching a dance class at DeFremery Recreation Center, Oakland, California, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16479
Speaker 1: This picture is taken at, on the top of the Berkeley Hills [Berkeley, California]--you have to turn it--at the top of the Berkley Hills.  And that was one of my company dancers called 'Banda.'  And Banda is a Voodoo god whose represented by half death and half life.  And he was supposed to be a bad Voodoo person that would get drunk and womanize and scare everybody.  And their face was painted half white and half black.  And that was Robert Taylor, my partner in that, and I was supposed to be a shopkeeper that was flirting with death.  And that chair on top of my head is the kind of chairs the Haitians ladies sat on to sell their market wares.  It's close to the floor and they would sit there.  So 'Banda' was supposed to be a scary dance, and I'm frightened away from him.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford (right) with Robert Taylor performing 'Banda' as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, Berkeley, California, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16480
Speaker 1: Because Haiti they still believed in zombies. And zombies, I think were actually people who had been drugged and put into such a state that they would wander around and--it's like a mental problem with people here you see walking down the street, talking to themselves.  Zombies--I believe anyway, I don't know if they believe it--but I believe were put into a mental state by drugs.  And they would work the fields for hours and hours on end, and they were believed to have been pulled up from the dead.  So this dance, I had all the men's faces covered so that they didn't'--their features weren't visible.  And this, with their bodies bowed was where I was pulling them out of the earth, and they first bowed their spines like that before they came up.  It was a very eerie dance, all done in blacks and whites and grays.  And so the zombies came to life and danced.
Speaker 2: [Dancers performing a zombie dance as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16481
Speaker 1: This dance was 'Combite' C-O-M-B-I-T-E, which meant the men--it was like a barn building here where they all came together to do work.  So the men would come together and clear the fields.  And then the women would come and bring all the food.  So this dance was done, after the men did the work dance first, and then we came out with all the food and it was a joyous dance 'cause all the work had been done.
Speaker 2: [Dancers performing 'Combite' as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16482
Speaker 1: We would always have to go to the poultry market and get a live chicken because I wanted it as authentic as possible.  So Clarence, my partner there, and you can see me holding a wooden trough which was painted so it looked like blood was coming out of it.  And my costume was a bright red and those hanging balls were all wunga charms which is like good luck charms here.  And so we would have this live chicken.  And when the show was through nobody, of course, wanted to take the chicken home and kill it.  So many a backstage had a live chicken in the box that the janitor I'm sure discovered and was wondering "Where did this live chicken come from?"  So we always used to laugh at that.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford and her dance partner performing with a live chicken as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, n.d.  Photo courtesy of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16483
Speaker 1: This was my only solo dance in my company [Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company].  I always did group dances and was a part of a group.  But this dance was called 'Loa Erzilee,' E-R-Z-I-L-E-E.  And Loa is just another word for god in Haitian Voodoo.  And--
Speaker 2: How do you spell Loa?
Speaker 1: L-O-A.  And this was a solo dance that I did.  And she is represented in Catholicism as the Virgin Mary so I was all in white and it was a very lyrical dance.  And that picture was in 'Harper's Bazaar' magazine.
Speaker 2: [Ruth Beckford performing 'Loa Erzilee' as part of the Ruth Beckford African-Haitian Dance Company, n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16484
Speaker 1: This was one of the awards that the Oakland [California] Parks and Recreation, I was a charter member of the award and my trophy is over there.  And they had a ceremony and I was presented as one of the founding members in the Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: [Program from Ruth Beckford's induction into the Oakland Parks and Recreation Hall of Fame, Oakland, California, June 10, 1980.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16485
Speaker 1: This is [William] Billy Hutton, the leading man, and my, in my play, 'Tis the Morning of My Life,' and that's myself as Roxie, the older woman-younger man romance, a family comedy.  I have a very wealthy family and he was wealthy so he wasn't after my money.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Ruth Beckford and Billy Hutton from her stage play 'Tis the Morning of My Life', n.d.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16486
Speaker 1: This was my last job, that I would call a job.  And I took that because I was really interested in working with homeless people.  And I was a counselor for homeless.  It's mostly men.  And I used--and I was like the motivational speaker for that.  And I was able to accumulate eight of Les Brown's motivational tapes.  And I always thought he was the best thing since bread with white rice and the wheel.  He just was so great as a black man talking to other black men who were homeless.  So I always started off with Les Brown's tapes, and then I would go from there as for life skills and their self-esteem and everything.  And the organization [Berkeley Oakland Support Services] gave me that award.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: That was like, early '90s [1990s], I guess.
Speaker 2: [Commendation certificate to Ruth Beckford from the Berkeley Oakland Support Services for her work with the homeless, Berkeley, California, ca. 1990s.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16487
Speaker 1: This is the jacket to my most recent book, which is called 'Still Groovin': Affirmations for Women in the Second Half of Life.'  I aimed it at women forty-five up, but in the book tour, I found that interviewers were men, oftentimes and women in their twenties and thirties who had said that they just skimmed the book at first and then started actually reading the book because they felt it spoke to them too.  Men also said they were going to give it to their mother, but now they were going to read it first, because it covers health, inner peace, self empowerment and romance.  And I think one of the weakest things women have to deal with is get self empowerment because oftentimes women will say, "yes," to do something they really don't want to do instead of being strong enough to say, "no, I'm not able to do that," and stick to it.  So oftentimes three weeks after, they're still kicking themselves cause they say, "I should have told her I'm not going to go to that.  I don't want to go."  Tell it right then, you don't want to go, and be through with it.  So I'm telling practicing saying no, to your dog first.
Speaker 2: [Cover of Ruth Beckford's book, 'Still Groovin': Affirmations for Women in the Second Half of Life', 1999.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
Story_ID: 16488
Speaker 1: My first experience in writing anything serious came from my mentor who I love very deeply, Katherine Dunham [dancer, choreographer].  And she called me to write her life story.  And I had tried to convince her that I was not a writer and that she should get my sister-friend, Maya Angelou [poet, author, director], a real writer to write her story.  She insisted that she wanted a friend and a Dunham dancer to write her life story.  I told her, if we do that, she was going to have to answer any question I wanted and help me any way I needed.  And she followed through with that, gave me access to her private photographs.  And I was able to pick out any of those for the book.  And I interviewed her both in East St. Louis [Illinois] and at her residence LeClerc in Haiti.  So we got the book done, and got my sister-friend, Maya Angelou, to endorse it.  Ms. Dunham endorsed it, and it was very good.  It was used in dance classes for research and I'm proud that I did it.
Speaker 2: [Cover of Ruth Beckford's book, 'Katherine Dunham: A Biography', 1979.  From the collection of Ruth Beckford.]
