Story_ID: 28704
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Guion Stewart Bluford, Jr.  Guion is G-U-I-O-N, Stewart is S-T-E-W-A-R-T, last name Bluford, B-L-U-F-O-R-D, and I'm a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story behind the name Guion?
Speaker 2: If there is, I don't know it, and I'll tell you why.  I believe the name is a last name that the family made as a first name.  People have poked me about, is it French or whatever?  I don't know.  I have run across people who have it as a last name.  And I have only run across one other person besides my father [Guion Bluford, Sr.], who has it as a first name.  So I believe it is a last name that has been converted into a first name.  And surprisingly enough, when I go out and talk to somebody who has that name, I ask 'em how they pronounce it.  And I pronounced "Guy-an."  Some people pronounce it "Gee-on."  But I pronounce it Guion.  So, and the people I've run across, some of 'em I run--you know, pronounce it "Guy-an" and some of 'em pronounce it "Gee-on."  So the source I think is a last [clearing throat], excuse me, a last name that was converted to a first name.  And--
Speaker 1: But you're not sure if it's French or not?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it's French or not.  But I have run across people who have it as a last name, and that's my--and I've only run across one person who has it as a first name, a fighter pilot type, surprisingly enough.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, ran across a guy who had it as a first name.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, well, move on from there, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 22nd, 1942 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, I have so many titles that (laughter), people ask me that all the time.  My attitude is my occupation is an aerospace engineer.  But I'm an aerospace engineer who's a pilot, a scientist and an astronaut, which is interesting.  I'm a--and I had, I got an award from the Tuskegee Airmen, and they described me to a tee.  They said, I'm a pilot.  I'm a pilot.  I'm an engineer.  I'm an aerospace engineer.  I'm an astronaut, and I'm a scientist.  So, and I fill all four of those roles.  So I do that very well.
Speaker 1: And you have the--
Speaker 2: Oh, and title wise, you asked me about titles?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Military, I'm a full colonel in the [U.S.] Air Force.  So people call me Colonel Guy Bluford.  I'm also a Ph.D.  So they call me Dr. Bluford.  So, sometimes they call me Guy Bluford, Colonel Bluford, Dr. Bluford, so all of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have a distinction of being the first African American to go into outer space.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I take advantage, I'm the first African American who has gone into outer space.  But I'm also the first African American who has returned to space a second time and a third time, and also a fourth time.  So I've, I've got a distinction of doing that as well.  Also, I take pride in the fact that I'm the first African American to earn U.S. Air Force Command Pilot Astronaut wings.  That, I take a great deal of pride on, so.
Speaker 1: So the first African American to earn pilot astronaut wings?
Speaker 2: Command pilot--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Command, okay.
Speaker 2: -- astronaut wings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: U.S. Air Force Command Pilot Astronaut Wings.  Matter of fact, I flew those things in space.  They're on my uniform, and I'm also the first African American to return to space a second time and the third time and the fourth time, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --take a great deal of pride in all that.  So--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is May 8th, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Westlake, Ohio at Westlake Library in Westlake, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think it's the ninth.
Speaker 1: Just outside of Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: It's the ninth. Oh, it's the ninth today.
Speaker 1: Oh, today's the ninth, okay.  Today's the ninth, sorry.
Story_ID: 28705
Speaker 1: Okay, so before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask everybody--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm a surf and turf guy.  I like surf and turf.  So steak and lobster is my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: They ask me that too.  My favorite color is probably beige.  That's a tough one for me 'cause I, that's probably my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime is probably my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm a world traveler.  The wife and I like to travel all over the world.  So I like to do cruising and I'm a world cruiser.  I cruise all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have to stop and think.  I told you guys what my favorite phrase was, and I've forgotten it (laughter).  "Do what you love and love what you do."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Do what you love, and love what you do," 'cause that's what I do.  I encourage kids to do their very best, but to do what you love and love what you do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28706
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separate from your father's side--
Speaker 2: Sure, that'll be fine.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: That'll be fine.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford.  Harriet, H-A-R-R-I-E-T-T, I think or whatever.  Lolita, L-O-L-I-T-A, Brice, B-R-I-C-E, and Bluford.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 16th, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my grandfather.  My grandfather is John Brice.  He was born in Tennessee.  He was born in 19--no, 1877, I think.  He grew up in Tennessee.  He went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  He's a graduate of Knoxville College.  He's a chaplain in the [U.S.] Army.  He was a chaplain in the Army during World War I.  He eventually became vice president and religious director of the Palmer Memorial Institute in Sedalia, North Carolina.  So he's, and he's a minister.  He's a minister.  So that was my grandfather.  And he married a woman by the name of Ella Hawkins, and they had four kids.  Ella was also a graduate of Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee.  She was a singer, performer, that sort of person.  Between the two of 'em, they had four kids.
Speaker 1: Now, is she the celebrated opera singer?
Speaker 2: No, that's my--that's my aunt.  That's my mother's sister.  I'll talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she's a singer in a show.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she sing classical music or gospel or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know what type of singer Ella Hawkins Brice was.  But I know they had four kids, my grandfather and Ella had four kids.  My mother was the oldest, I think.  They had two sons, Jonathan Brice, Eugene Brice, and then they had Carol Brice, who was the youngest.  And Carol Brice proved to be--she's an opera singer, Broadway singer, contralto, sang on Broadway.  Her brothers, Jonathan, Jonathan Brice is a singer, but primarily a pianist.  And then Eugene Brice is primarily a singer.  Eugene Brice and Carol Brice both went to New York--I'm trying to remember the name of the school for music.  And all three of 'em lived in New York.  They were singers and performers in New York City.  My mother was the only one who was a non-singer in the group, okay.  So that's how that worked.  They grew up in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].  They all went to Palmer Memorial Institute for schooling from, I guess first grade all the way up through high school.  And that was a finishing school for blacks, and because--and my grandfather was vice president and religious director and minister and all that sort of stuff.  So these, all four of 'em went, went to that.  And this was in the 1920s and 1930s.  Surprisingly enough, and I'm gonna deviate just a bit, also that went to the school was Marie Hawkins, who is the lady who married Nat King Cole [singer, musician, jazz pianist] and the mother of Natalie Cole [singer, songwriter].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother is a cousin to Marie Hawkins or Marie Hawkins Cole, as an aside.
Story_ID: 28707
Speaker 1: But my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] grew up in the 20s [1920s]--in the '30s [1930s], went to [Palmer] Memorial [Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina], went to school in Palmer Memorial Institute, graduated and went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] and got a degree in biology and a, with a minor in mathematics.  So this was 1934, '35 [1935], she got this degree in biology.  And then from there, she went on to teach.  She was a teacher in high school, taught high school biology and science.  Then she went back to school.  She went to the Teachers College in Columbia, Columbia University up in New York, got her master's degree in 1939.  And then from there, she went to Alcorn A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [now Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] down in Mississippi and was an instructor and teacher down there.  So that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --where she, that's where she comes from.  And that's where she met my father [Guion Bluford, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 28708
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories on your mother's [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] side about slavery or Emancipation or--
Speaker 2: No, no, and my mother was very good.  Both my parents were very good at raising kids and not telling them about the discrimination, the lack of opportunity, all that sort of stuff.  They were very good at that.  If you take a look at me, I'm a third-generation college graduate on both sides of the family.  I got grandparents who were college graduates, parents were college graduates.  I'm a third-generation college graduate.  So I grew up in a world in which I could do anything I wanted to.  And I saw that world that way, growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And my parents did that.  I mean I didn't go to segregated public schools.  There wasn't a black this or black that though I saw it on the news for those people who were growing up in the South.  But I never experienced any of that and never really experienced any segregation.  And so for my, for my mother's side, no.  She raised us up in a world where we could do anything we wanted to, and there were really no, no stories of how bad it was and all that sort of stuff, even though I know--
Speaker 1: So you think--it's interesting.  So you relate, knowing that history to holding people back by knowing about slavery?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Well, not, the holding people back, but also I grew up in a world where you didn't have any black role models.  I blew up in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  You didn't see blacks in magazines, newspapers, television, none of that sort of stuff.  The image that you saw of black Americans were sharecroppers, laborers, maids and butlers, okay.  So I grew up in a world which was predominantly white, you know, and the, and the white image was very strong, i.e., we all--blacks wanted to be as light as possible to be like whites, so to speak.  So I grew up in that world.  And I didn't see a change until Black Power came in, in the 1960s, okay.  So I grew up in that world, but I had excellent role models.  I mean I had a mother who, she married my father.  She went on to become a public school teacher in the City of Philadelphia, and she taught for twenty-five years.  So I grew up in a household where my mother was a school teacher in the Philadelphia public school system.  And that was both good and bad, good in the sense that there was a strong emphasis on education.  Bad in the sense that my mother knew my teachers, so I couldn't get away with anything as a kid (laughter) because she knew what was going on.  She, you know, so, so, but I was raised in that environment from my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, grew up in a--my mother's side of the family is a musical side of the family.  So every year, the, her sister and my cousins would all get together at Christmastime every--it would oscillate between Philadelphia and New York 'cause they lived in New York.  And so there was, I always saw the musical side of the family, though my mother and my brothers, none of us, have any musical talent whatsoever.  But I saw that.  And that was very strong.  But, no, she was a school teacher, did an excellent job, great mother.
Speaker 1: So you're saying, she pushed a positive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) advantage.
Speaker 2: And I would say she took parenting seriously.  She was a mother, housewife until I was nine.  Then we had an interesting situation--I'll talk about that a little later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she went to work as a school teacher.  But, you know, I was active in the Cubs Scouts and Boy Scouts.  She was a Cub Scout den mother and all that sort of stuff.  So a very interesting woman, a woman who liked animals.  So I had lots of cats and dogs and, and she liked to--she had tropical fish.  She was into fish.  She was also an artsy, craftsy person.  She made a lot of stuff.  She had a kiln, and she made lots of pottery and so forth and so on.  So she was into arts and crafts and painted eggs and made decorations and all that sort of stuff.  She was very good at that.  She was that sort of person, very (unclear).  She was also very, a social person, had lots of friends, lots of friends, you know, school friends, I mean teacher friends, all that sort of stuff, very social person, very outgoing, lots of friends.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 28709
Speaker 1: So, let's go to your father's side.  And then we'll put 'em together.  Now, your father has the same name as you, right?
Speaker 2: My father has the same name as me.
Speaker 1: Except he's a senior.
Speaker 2: He's a senior.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is April 22nd, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in, he was born in North Carolina.  I was gonna say Sedalia, North Carolina.  He was born in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, he was born in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right, well, what are the stories on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, then--
Speaker 1: How far back can you--
Speaker 2: --let me talk about my father's side.  Bluford, Bluford family.  Blufords from what I can gather, I can go a little further back.  I start off with a Tom Bluford who was an oyster fisherman in Virginia, okay.  This is 1850s, approximately.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a black person?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I assume so, but not sure, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had three kids.  Timothy Bluford, a William Thomas Bluford and then a John Wesley Bluford, okay.  The Timothy Bluford side of the family went to Canada.  So there's a Bluford branch that's in Canada.  And then there're two Bluford branches that are in Virginia.  This is Virginia, okay.  So, there's a Thomas Bluford, and there's eight kids under there.  And then there's a John Wesley Bluford, and there're eight kids under there.  And my great grandfather is John Wesley Bluford, okay.  John Wesley Bluford, and this is late 1880s.  He had a farm, lived on a farm.  He had a son by the name of--oh, no, I'm screwing up.  It's John Dewey Bluford, sorry.
Speaker 1: John Dewey, okay.
Speaker 2: John Dewey Bluford.  Okay, he had a son by the name of John Wesley Bluford.  And he's my grandfather.  John Wesley Bluford was born in 1880, grew up on a farm in Gloucester, Virginia, Gloucester County, Virginia, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, wait a minute.  I'm kind of confused.  Let's see.  So--
Speaker 2: There's a Tom Bluford.
Speaker 1: Tom Bluford, then comes John Wesley Bluford.  He's your great grandfather?
Speaker 2: It's not Wesley Bluford.  It's John--
Speaker 1: John Dewey?
Speaker 2: --Dewey Bluford.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: All right, John Dewey Bluford.
Speaker 2: I think that's how it goes.
Speaker 1: And Dewey comes before Wesley?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Dewey Bluford, then John Wesley.
Speaker 2: John Wesley, and John Wesley Bluford is my grandfather, okay.  He grew up on a farm, left home at about seventeen or eighteen [years old].  This is in Virginia, went to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and went to Howard University, worked his way--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: --worked his way through Howard University, washing dishes, all that sort of stuff, worked his way through, washing--through Howard University, graduated and left at the turn of the century.  From there, he went to Kansas City [Missouri], and was a teacher, high school teacher, at Sumner Junior High School, Sumner High School in Kansas City; did that for a year.  And then he came back to North Carolina, and was at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  And he was a professor, I think he was head of the agriculture department, chemistry department and, at North Carolina A and T, and that's even before North Carolina A and T was called North Carolina A and T.  I don't remember what the name of the school was.  So he was there.  He married a lady by the name of Viola Harris.  And they had three kids--
Speaker 1: Iola or--
Speaker 2: Viola--
Speaker 1: Viola, okay.
Speaker 2: Viola Harris.  They had three kids.  They had Lucille Bluford, which is my aunt, [clearing throat] excuse me.  They also had John Wesley Bluford, Jr., and then they had my father, Guion Bluford.  So they had three kids.  My father was the youngest of three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and just after my father was born, shortly after my father was born, his mother died on him.  And John Wesley remarried about four or five years later and took the family and went to Kansas City and raised all three of them in Kansas City.  And my father, my grandfather, John Wesley Bluford was a chemistry teacher in Lincoln High School in Kansas City, did that for twenty-four years, married a lady by the name of Etta Austin, and she served as a stepmother for my father and his siblings.  My father's oldest sister was Lucille Bluford.  Lucille Bluford went on to become a journalist--all three of them are college graduates.  This is 1920s, 1930s.  All three of 'em are college graduates.  Lucille Bluford went on to be a journalist.
Speaker 1: With what paper did she--
Speaker 2: She ran the 'Kansas City Call' [Kansas City The Call; African American newspaper founded in 1919].
Speaker 1: Oh, Kansas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She worked in the 'Kansas City Call'.  She became editor-in-chief of the 'Kansas City Call' and part owner of the 'Kansas City Call'.  And she died here, maybe ten or fifteen years ago.  They have a library named after her in Kansas City.  And if you go see the public library, it really is quite remarkable 'cause they have a statue of Aunt Cil, Lucille Bluford and a panorama of her, a wall of her, of what she did in her life, very exciting, very--she never married, you know.  But she was a remarkable person.  She died in her early nineties.  Then there was John Wesley Bluford, Jr. who also was, was, went to college and was an insurance guy and entrepreneur.  And then there was my father, Guion Bluford, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28710
Speaker 1: My father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] went to University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and got a degree in mechanical engineering.  This is in the '30s [1930s], and then from there went on to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got a master's degree in mechanical engineering.  And so in the 1930s he had two degrees from reputable schools and couldn't find a job.  I mean this was '30s [1930s], middle of the [Great] Depression.  And remember, he was black, all that sort of stuff, and so he eventually ended up going South.  And he was a teacher and instructor at Alcorn A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical College, now Alcorn State University] in Alcorn, Mississippi.  And that's where he met my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford], because both of 'em were instructors, teachers at Alcorn A&M, in Alcorn, Mississippi, black school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, Alcorn, is there a story about how they met?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Not that I know of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If there was, they never told me about it. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's sort of, that's sort of how they got together, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, they're the same age--
Speaker 1: They're about the same age.
Speaker 2: Was your mother--so your mother was teaching there, and your father was teaching there?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, okay, so they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I think, now that I think about it, I think my father graduated from University of Michigan in 1935.  So he may have shown up at Alcorn A&M before my mother 'cause she went to the Teachers College [Columbia University, New York].  She graduated from the Teachers College in 1939 and went down there.  But they were in, by the time they met and married, they were in their late twenties.  They were 27, 28 [years old]--.
Story_ID: 28711
Speaker 1: Okay, so it'd be in the, about 1939 or '40 [1940] when they [Bluford's parents, Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] first met--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --my father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] was an eng--and my father's an engineer.  He likes being an engineer.  He always wanted to be an engineer.  But the opportunities were limited.  I mean you couldn't, you know, black, nobody trusted him as an engineer, all that sort of stuff.  World War II started, 1941, World War II started.  Lots of opportunities emerged.  The country was on a war footing.  My father finally got an engineering job.  He went to Maine to work on the design and development of ships up there in the shipyard.  My mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] joined him, and this is 1942, maybe, yeah, '42 [1942].  They got married in Maine in 1942.  He was up there maybe a year, then went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1942 and worked at the Franklin--worked at the Frankfurt Arsenal which is an [U.S.] Army depot in Philadelphia.  So that's how they started.  They got married in Maine and went to Philadelphia in 1942.  And he got a job as an engineer in the Frankfurt Arsenal.  Interesting enough, this is a government position.  In order for him to get that job, the people had to ask the various engineers [voice talking over intercom]--they had to ask his peers if they could work with a black engineer.  I mean that was sort of the world he walked into.  So he was a black guy walking into a, sort of an all-white situation as an engineer.  And he was an engineer, and he did that basically for most of his career.  He designed guns.  So he took a great deal of pride in designing guns.  He's got some patents associated with designing guns, recoilless rifles.  So he did that as a, when he worked.  When they moved to Philadelphia, my mother started a family, and she was a, basically, a housewife, homemaker, you know.  I was born about nine, ten months after they got married.  And we lived in Philadelphia, you know.  My, my father got up every morning, hopped the--public transportation in Philadelphia is great for public transportation, went to work at Frankfurt Arsenal, came home at the end of the day.  We lived in row houses.  I lived, I grew up in the inner city, so I lived in row houses all my life, and, you know, trolley cars, buses, subways.  I'm very comfortable in that environment.  So that's what we did.
Story_ID: 28712
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford], their personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'll talk about that--
Speaker 1: --interact with people,--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I take after my father.  I am, interesting enough, I have two brothers.  All three of us are our father's sons, our father's sons.  My father is quiet, very logical, easy-going, doesn't make a lot of friends.  I don't think me and my brothers make a lot of close friends, very attached to our wives.  We're all very attached to our wives, very methodical, that sort of thing.  So my father is, he's the, he's an optimum engineer, you know, looks at things logically, not excitable, all that sort of stuff, but very methodical.  My mother is very sociable, all that sort of stuff.  She gets along with people.  And their relation between my mother and my father is just like my relationship between my wife and me.  My wife is the social person.  I just follow, follow her around (laughter), you know.  She, she put "social" in my world.  If, if I did not have a wife, I'd be a hermit (laughter) and my brothers would be hermits as well.  So that's basically what it is.  And so my father is mechanic--I mean he's logical, you know, all that sort of stuff.  We take after our father, so.
Story_ID: 28713
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  My parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] married, my parents got married in February, and presto, nine months later, I was born in November.
Speaker 1: So you're the eldest son?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of three sons.  And, and we lived, they lived in a row house, three-story row house.  I remember that my--and I still remember we had a little Scottish terrier and my parents--as I said, my mother liked animals, so I grew up with animals.  So they lived in this row house, and Pop, my father went to work every morning.  And my mother stayed home.  They lived there for about two or three years, and then my parents moved to a duplex in West Philadelphia where they bought a house.  And they--we lived on the upstairs floor, and they rented the main floor and the basement.  So they sort of got into real estate, and three years after I was born, my middle brother came along, Eugene Bluford, okay.  And so I got a middle brother who's Eugene Bluford, and he, he grew up, and we both grew up in Philadelphia.  And four years later, my youngest brother was born, Kenneth Bluford, and that was in 1949.  So I have three brothers.  And when Kenneth was born, my parents said, hey, this living upstairs is not gonna be any good.  And so we moved a third time, or second time, or whenever, to another house, and we lived in a regular house.  So that was sort of (unclear).  But we lived in Philadelphia.  I grew up, as I said, on the streets, in the playgrounds.  I was, grew up in a world where all the houses were row houses so you had nine million people all in the neighborhood and that sort of thing.  I went to, I started off at Brooks Elementary School at about five.  I was five years old.  Brooks was about two and a half blocks away, and I walked to school, you know, and I grew up in a time when there were no school buses.  We all walked to school.  You know, if you didn't walk to school, you climbed on public transportation, the trolley or the bus to go to school.  So there was no school--the other thing that's interesting is I grew up at a time when there were horses on the streets.  And there was no television on the street.  So if you played in the street, you had to watch where you looked because you might step into, step on something that the horse left behind.  And I also grew up at a time when there were ice trucks.  A guy would have a horse-drawn carriage with, with blocks of ice, and he would take it by and drop it in people's house's ice box.  So I grew up in that neighborhood.  And I also grew up during World War II.  So I grew up at a time when there were no jet airplanes.  They were all propeller airplanes, and all that sort of stuff.  So I grew up--so I grew up in Philadelphia.  I went to Brooks Elementary School for my first three years, first, second and third grade.
Story_ID: 28714
Speaker 1: Now, what side of town did you grow up on in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I grew up in West Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, West Philadelphia.  And what were the demographics of West Philly when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: It was primarily white that turned primarily African American during my time there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was sort of a, if I would say, when we moved there, I would say it was like 80 percent white.  And then by the time I graduated from high school, I would say it would be 40 percent white, 50 percent--60 percent African American.  So there was this--this is the 1940s, 1950s.  Eventually, there was this white flight to the suburbs, okay.  But at, when I grew up, it was primarily a white neighborhood that, you know, went black.  When I went to Brooks Elementary School, it was an integrated school, you know, white kids, black kids, all that sort of stuff.  Primarily, I would say primarily white kids.  And I went there for the first three years, kindergarten, first, second and third grade, and then at the third grade, you know, at that point my parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] moved.  We went, moved to a house.  My, I'm trying to figure out how old I was when I was in third grade.  Yeah, my, my youngest brother [Kenneth Bluford] was probably an infant at the time.  And then we moved to--
Speaker 1: So you'd have been about eight [years old] in the third grade, I'm thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then--
Speaker 1: That's where most people are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's probably right.  And then fourth, fifth and sixth grade, I went to Hanna Elementary School.  And to give you a feel, when we moved to our house, we lived at 5522 Media Street in Philadelphia, and so between 55th and 56th and Media, the elementary school was at 58th and Media, so I only had to walk three or four blocks in that direction.  And then when I went to junior high school, it was at 53rd and Media.  So I had to walk, you know, three or four blocks in the other direction.  So I went to the school, and I walked to school every day.  School was in the neighborhood, so I grew up in this neighborhood.  But I primarily grew up in West Philadelphia.  But I also grew up in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  I grew up during the Cold War.  I grew up at a time when I saw airplanes go from propeller driven to jets.  We're starting to develop jets at the end of World War II.  Airliners eventually went to jets with the Boeing 707.  The [U.S.] Air Force was building, was pumping out all sorts of jets every few years, a faster airplane, a--had a big bomber, all that sort of stuff.  The [U.S.] Navy was doing the same.  So there was a lot of, a lot of excitement in the aviation business, and I was caught up in that.  Rockets, the Air Force.  The [U.S.] Army was developing rockets and so forth and so on.  So I grew up in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and it was an exciting time.  When I was growing up, I was, I liked math.  I didn't like reading.  I still am, I'm a stronger person in math, logical, drawing, didn't like reading.  I was always a weak reader.  And I still consider myself a weak reader.  But I grew up, and I realized by the time I was in sixth grade that I was, my strength was math.  As a kid, I played in the streets.  Our house was on the corner of Media and Alison Street.  Alison Street was a little, bitty street, so I could play in the streets.  And I roller skated, rode my bicycle, played with the kids in the street.  In the summertime, we would turn on the, we'd--somebody would get a wrench.  We would turn on the fire hydrant and play under the fire hydrant.  It was one right there on the corner where our house was.  And our--and so forth and so on.  I have two younger brothers [Eugene and Kenneth Bluford].  We got along very well together, but there wasn't a lot of physical interaction.  I mean there wasn't a lot of, of competition among us.  We were far enough apart where we were all, each our individual people.  And even today, we're very quiet, easy going, but we're very separate people.
Speaker 1: Did you share the same room growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I had my own room.  My brothers had--they shared a room until I left to go to college, and then I lost my room to my brother and never got it back (laughter).  So, but I, I was very curious as a kid.  I collected stamps.  I collected rocks.  I was a member of the Alison Street gang, and this was eight-year old, nine-years old.  We had a backyard.  I got together with a bunch of kids.  We built a clubhouse in the backyard, in our backyard.  So I was into that.
Story_ID: 28715
Speaker 1: I was into making model airplanes.  If you walked into my room, I had all sorts of model airplanes, so that--and that's how I got interested in airplanes and getting to be an aerospace engineer.  I, and if you had stopped me as a kid, I could tell you, I read books on airplanes.  So I could tell you how jet engines worked and rocket engines worked as a kid.  This is as a kid.  This is high school, junior high school, high school.
Speaker 2: Could you--did you have a favorite airplane?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't have a favorite airplane, but I had, but I liked airplanes.  I mean I liked--I could tell you, I could tell you all the Navy airplanes, the Panther and the Cougar and the F-86 Super, and Saber Jet and the F-84, F-89, Scorpion and the F-100, all those.  I knew all those airplanes.  And, and I made model airplanes.  And not only did I make airplanes, but I also had gas covered, gas-operated engines.  So I, I made models with gas, operating gas engines and I would fly them.  I would fly them in Fairmont Park [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was not too far away.  So that was interesting.  But my interest was primarily airplanes, very strong interest in airplanes.  As a kid growing up, I went to, I was in the Boy Scouts and Cub Scouts.  So I was in the Cub Scouts for three years and then went into the Boy Scouts, and was in the Boy Scouts for three, three or four years.  I'm still amazed that I can remember "A Boy Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, thrifty, brave, clean and reverent," something like that.  You know, I, I gave a speech several years ago, and I still rem--I'm surprised that I remembered that.  But I was in the Boy Scouts.  And it was a very good experience.  Matter of fact, I went to the Boy Scout jamboree, which is a, an event that's held every four years where scouts come from all over the world.  They had a jamboree in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania when I was in the Boy Scouts.  And I remember being at the jamboree.  So I was very active in the Boy Scouts.  I went to Boy Scout summer camp, was a- Did you go every year?
Speaker 2: I went, I know I went once, maybe twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the jamboree--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And like I said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was another separate--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Jamboree was, and they still have it today, the scouts from around the world get together in a particular place, and they pitch tents and so forth.  They do it now in Virginia.  They finally, instead of bouncing, picking places all over the world, they, they decided to do it every year in Virginia on a military base.  But when I was going through, they had it in various parts of the world.  They would have it all over the world.  And the year that I was--the year that I went, they had it in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your, where was your troop based?
Speaker 2: The troop was based in, my troop was Philadelphia.  It was a church.  I don't remember the name of the church.
Speaker 1: Is this a black church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  We didn't go to that church as a church.
Speaker 1: But was your troop integrated or was it an all-black troop?
Speaker 2: I guess it was all black.  I can't think of any whites, white kids in my troop.  I do remember some of the kids in my troop, but they were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was that way.  So, I was very active in the Boy Scouts, and--
Speaker 1: What was the troop number?  I'm sorry, I just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't remember?
Speaker 2: No, remember that's too old (laughter), you know.  So--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I was very active in the Boy Scouts and Cub Scouts.  And, and my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] was a den mother.  So we would, when I was in the Cub Scouts, we would have den meetings once a week or whatever.  And we'd meet in the basement in our house.  And my mother who was into arts and crafts had little things for us to make, you know.  And she was very good at that.  My mother is a good arts and craftsy person.  So that's, Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts.
Story_ID: 28716
Speaker 1: I was also very involved with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  In the summertime, my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] would give me some money.  I would hop the bus and L [subway] and go to the Central Y [YMCA], downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And, and that was a major event, you know, in the summertime.  I learned how to swim at the Y.  I worked out, and they had calisthenics and gym activity, played basketball.  I learned to play checkers and chess and ping pong, and I got good enough at checkers--at ping pong and chess that when I was in high school, I was on the Chess Team and on the Ping Pong Team.  So it had that.  The YMCA was also a major factor in my life because I learned how to make model airplanes, part of being at the Y.  We'd get on, I'd get up and go to the Y every day.  It would be a full-day activity.  But part of it was, I made model airplanes and ships and so forth and so on.  So my model building developed at the Y, and that led to my strong interest in airplanes and my desire to eventually, to be an aerospace engineer.  Plus, the fact that I liked math, I really like--I'm a math guy.  So a combination of all of that just drove me towards being what I wanted to be, an aerospace engineer.  And then you copy--you put on top of that the fact that I had a father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] who was a mechanical engineer.  Not only was he a mechanical engineer, but he loved what he did.  He loved what he did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I read that he would come, he would leave the house excited every morning.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was, he, he enjoyed--he never brought the, he never brought his work home, but I knew he loved what he did.  And that was, that was a very motivating factor for me because that's why I sort of said, "Do what you love, and love what you do," you know, so.  So I grew up in that world.
Story_ID: 28717
Speaker 1: After Hanna Elementary School, I went to Shoemaker Junior High School [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Now, I just wanna stop a second here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and just think about Brooks [Elementary School] and Hanna.  Were there any special teachers or mentors there that you remember?
Speaker 1: No.  I remember my kindergarten teacher, Mrs. Thompson.  I remember my fifth grade teacher, Mr. Fearman (ph.).  I remember him because I was an ants in the pants.  That was the year that I was a real ants in the pants character, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so--
Speaker 1: But elementary school, no, not really.  I remember some of the kids, my friends in elementary school, and I still remember, I mean they still, I still cross paths with some of 'em even today.
Speaker 2: Okay, so seventh, eighth and ninth grade, is that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Seventh, eighth and ninth grade to Shoemaker Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Shoemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay, Shoemaker Junior High--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That "s", like a shoe, like a shoe you wear?
Speaker 1: Shoemaker, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Shoemaker Junior High School.  I went to Shoemaker Junior High School, and I have a brother who's three years [Eugene Bluford] behind me.  So at that point, I was never in the same school as my brothers, okay.  I was always three years ahead of 'em.  I went to Shoemaker Junior High School.  Shoemaker Junior High School was basically, at that time, an all-black priv--I wouldn't say, I would say 80 percent black.  So you could tell the community was starting to change.  So it's about 70, 80 percent black.  So I went Shoemaker Junior High School, did very well in Shoemaker Junior High School, not realizing the fact that their standards were lower than they should have been.  So I did very well in Shoemaker Junior High School.  I wasn't the valedictorian, but I was pretty close to it, and when I graduated in ninth grade.  I had a teacher that stood out.  Her name was Mrs. Pierce, Pierce, Connie Pierce.  She was a math teacher, and I remember her because I was in the Math Club at, in junior high school and also, I remember it because I got into algebra, and for the first time, I had to struggle to figure out how to do algebra.  I had to go from adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing, to abstracts and, and formulas, and "x" and "y" and math problems and all that sort of stuff, had to make that transition.  I remember, I remember it was tough for me.  It took me a while to sort of mentally do all of that.  And, and that occurred in junior high school.  But junior high school was fine.  I had to take a language.  I took Latin in my ninth grade.  I thought that--now that I look back on it, I'm still convinced that was a waste.  But I took Latin in my ninth grade.  So by--and I had, ninth grade I had, ninth grade was Algebra.  Ninth grade was algebra still, so--
Speaker 2: So Latin didn't help you at all in understanding the scientific terms and the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I, no, I could have, I would have benefited a lot more if I'd taken French or Spanish.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You can at least talk it, you know, hey.
Speaker 2: I know they stopped teaching it primarily in the public schools.  These days, they don't teach it much.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But then it was every, every public school taught Latin.  I mean they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I had a, I had a choice.  I could have taken Spanish, I'm pretty sure, maybe French and Latin.  And I took Latin.  And then also coupled with that is the fact that I'm not--my weak areas are languages, English, reading, writing, spelling, language, anything that required words, still my weak area.
Story_ID: 28718
Speaker 1: Now, I've read that you worked really hard in school.  I mean you had the, not (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Probably high school.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Probably high school.
Speaker 1: --and things didn't come easy to you.  You had to really--
Speaker 2: I had to work hard at it, and I'll tell you why.  So I went to, I went to Overbrook High [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], tenth grade through twelfth [grade].  Overbrook High is, it was maybe fifteen minutes away from my house, walking wise.  Overbrook High was fed by two junior high schools.  One was Shoemaker Junior High School, the one that I went to and the other was Beaver Junior High School.  Beaver Junior High School was in an affluent, Jewish, upper-class neighborhood, excellent education.  So in high school, when I went to high school, I had to compete against those types of students, and I was behind the eight ball.  When you went to high school, Overbrook High was an excellent school because it offered you a wide variety of things.  It was geared for sending kids to work right out of high school.  You could major in home economics.  You could learn auto mechanics, you could learn driving.  You can learn a whole bunch of skills that taught you, gave you skills so that when you graduated, you went to a job.  And there were a bunch of people who did that, primarily, black kids.  And then there was the academic, there was the academic line for those kids who were going to college.  So I took academic courses leading me to college.  And, and so most of my classes in high school, I had white kids, you know, and all of these kids, you know, including myself, were all going to college.  I grew up in a household where my parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] basically said, "All of you are going to college."  I mean we never, there was never any thought in high school or junior high school that I wanted to just go--that was gonna do anything else.  I was going to college.  Also, by the time I got to high school, I had pretty much decided that I wanted to be an aeronautical engineer.
Story_ID: 28719
Speaker 1: Now, what happened [that led to Bluford's decision to become an aeronautical engineer]?
Speaker 2: And that was primarily due to the fact that I liked math and science, I liked airplanes.  I had this father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] who was a mechanical engineer, who loved what he did.  It just made sense.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1957?
Speaker 2: This is 1957, going into high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is also the year that Russia--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the USSR, launched Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite].
Speaker 2: Sputnik.
Speaker 1: And [Nikita] Khrushchev [led the Soviet Union during part of the Cold War; served as First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1964, and as Chairman of the Council of Ministers, or Premier, from 1958 to 1964] was on television with a shoe, and he said, "We will bury you," I mean on the commercial for a Radio Free Europe.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And people saw that, and they, you know, they were saying, watch out, they're gonna bomb us, they're gonna bury us--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they already sent the satellite up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --so, did you get, you were getting--
Speaker 2: I saw all of that, but I mean, you know, I was, had a strong interest in airplanes.  I followed the rockets that we were making, the Redstone and the Thor, and the air--surface-to-air rockets.  So I followed all of that.
Speaker 1: Did you watch Werner von Braun [German rocket scientist; "Father of Rocket Science"] on TV.
Speaker 2: Watching Werner von Braun on TV and all of that sort of stuff.  But surprisingly enough, I was not enamored with flying in space.  I liked airplanes.  I wanted to be an engineer.  My role models were Jack Northrop, the guy who, one of the founders of Northrop-Grumman [global aerospace and defense technology company].  I'm trying to think of the other guy's name, Dick, the guys who--the skunk works guys, guys at Lockheed Martin [American global aerospace, defense, security, and advanced technology company], Skunk Works, I liked those guys.  My goal when I, by the time I hit high school was I wanted to be an engineer, and I wanted to design airplanes.  I wanted to go work for Boeing [American multinational aerospace and defense corporation] or a McDonald-Douglas [was a major American aerospace manufacturer and defense contractor, producing a number of famous commercial and military aircraft; merged with Boeing] or Rockwell [International; was a major American manufacturing conglomerate in the latter half of the 20th century, involved in aircraft, the space industry, both defense-oriented and commercial electronics, automotive and truck components, printing presses, valves and meters, and industrial automation], and help design, build airplanes.  That was my goal.  And so my heroes were there.  So my heroes were not test pilots, and my--if I followed a test pilot, it was like Scott Crossfield, who was a test pilot, but he was also an engineer.  So my interest was primarily focused on engineering.
Speaker 1: Now, these are unusual heroes for a young fellow of your age.  And so it indicates that you were reading materials and being exposed to things that a lot of young people were not.
Speaker 2: Well, I was exposed to, to the engineering side of the business 'cause I had a father who was an engineer, you know.  I wasn't--and then also, you gotta describe the world.  At that time, blacks didn't fly airplanes.  You didn't see, you didn't see blacks in the cockpit.  You rarely, you know, the only image of blacks as I said was maids and butlers and that sort of thing.  And thus, if you wanted to see professional blacks, you had to have 'JET' magazine or 'Ebony' magazine".  You had Bill Cosby [comedian and actor] was starting to make a breakthrough in showing that blacks could be professionals, his program.  Diahann Carroll [television and stage actress and singer] in a program.  I think she had one--
Speaker 1: Called 'Julia', yeah. 'Julia', she and her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nursing, 'Julia', yeah.  And they were starting--and remember, I was also--I'm distantly related to Nat King Cole [singer and musician; jazz pianist].  Nat King Cole was very popular because he--but he couldn't, couldn't get on television and find sponsors to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a show for about half a season.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't go very far 'cause he couldn't find sponsors.  So, and then also, when you saw advertisements, they would not put blacks in advertisements.  So if you saw an advertisement on television, they were all white advertisements because it was sort of, it wasn't--it was, you know, you saw, I mean you--I lived in a white world.
Speaker 1: If black people were on television, would someone in your family call everybody to the set?
Speaker 2: No, probably not.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know it happened in other places.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so, so, I put--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And did you know about the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: I knew of the Tuskegee Airmen.  I'm not very--other than that, I knew of the Tuskegee Airmen.  I knew that they were black fighter pilots, and they flew in World War II, the struggle they had to, you know, fly airplanes, but once the war came to an end, they couldn't find jobs flying for the airlines.  And I know at least one, Charles McGee, who stayed in the [U.S.] Air Force and retired as a full colonel in the Air Force.  So I heard about the Tuskegee Airmen--
Speaker 1: In those days, you had heard about 'em, but you didn't have a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, and I wasn't really interested in flying airplanes because I was interested in the technical side of the business.  So I liked the technical side of the business.  So I went to high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And high school was a struggle because I was competing with kids that were better prepared than I was.  But I would, I did the academic courses, the courses that lead, led to college which meant four years of English, four years, including ninth grade, four years of math, four years of science, English, science, math.  And either I could take four years of a language or two years of a language and two years of government, which is what I did.  Ninth and tenth grade was Latin, and then I jumped out.  And I struggled through Latin in high school.  So I was behind the eight ball catching up in high school, competing with kids that were white, Jewish, who were better prepared in high school than I was.  So it was (unclear). And my, my extracurricular activity and my elective act--my elective course was mechanical drawing.  I liked mechanical drawing.  I'm a good drawer.  I draw well.  I could very easily be an artist, so to speak, so I did that.  So I did mechanical drawing all the way up through high school, except one time in senior year, I took typing.  My mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] insisted that her three sons had to do three things.  They had to be able to swim.  They had to be able to type, and they had to be able to drive a car.  So--and that proved to be very valuable for me later on, learning how to type.  So I went through high school.  As I went through high school, I knew I wanted to be an aeronautical engineer.
Story_ID: 28720
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers who were like, kind of mentored you and helped you in that school?
Speaker 2: Okay, in high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as I said, in junior high school [Shoemaker Junior High School], it was Mrs. Pierce, math teacher.  In high school, probably two, biology teacher, Mrs. Sairus (ph.), Ms. Sairus, and physics teacher, Mr. Hofkin (ph.).  Hofkin ran the Science Club.  I was a member of the Science Club.  I was fascinated.  Hofkin was an engineer who decided to become a teacher.  He was very good at it, and he taught physics.  And he ran a Science Club, and one of the things that excited me was the fact that he, the Science Club made a cyclotron, an accelerator, particle accelerator.  So that was an exciting experience.  But in high school, I was on the chess team.  I represented the school in chess, and I represented the school, I was on the ping pong team.  And I was a big letter, high school letter, senior varsity, you know, wasn't the greatest in the world, but I had a high school letter in them.  And, and high school, high school was a good experience for me.  But I struggled through high school.
Speaker 1: Now, over--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I struggled through high school because I liked the maths, I liked the sciences.  I took biology in tenth, chemistry in eleventh, physics in twelfth.  But I, I was weak in the languages, English, history, I had--my interest wasn't there either.  So I didn't put a lot of effort in it.  And that's sort of how I had--when I got into twelfth grade, it was time for me to apply for college.  As I was going through those three years, I pretty much looked at universities.  I looked at University of Maryland, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania].  I wanted to be an aerospace, aeronautical engineer and Penn State was my Number One choice.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what kind of counseling did you get in high school?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I'll do the--so in my senior year, we had a college counselor in our high school whose job it was to keep up with the schools and make sure that we take our courses and so forth and so on.  So in my senior year, my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] and I went up to see the college counselor as I was getting ready to apply to colleges.  And to the dismay of my mother, the college counselor said, after she looked at my high school records and so forth, she didn't think I was college material, which upset my mother.  I just sort of ignored the lady.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But it did upset my mother, and I'll tell you the impact it had was I really wanted to go to Penn State [University] , and I suddenly realized that I could apply to Penn State and not get in there and what do I do, okay?  So as a result of that, I applied to a whole bunch of colleges that I really wasn't interested in.  And fortunately, all--most of those colleges turned me down.  But it had, it seemingly had a big effect on my mother.  I barely remember the encounter other than I realized that I didn't really, didn't really believe the lady 'cause I grew up in a world in which I was always going to college.  So that's what happened there.
Story_ID: 28721
Speaker 1: Let me back up a bit.  When I was nine years old, about eight--eight or nine years old, my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] had three kids.  My father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] got up every morning and went to work, working at the Franklin Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  One day he came down, and had an epileptic seizure, epileptic seizure.  This is 1950-ish, '51 [1951], some place in that time (unclear).  He had an epileptic seizure.  I don't know where he had it, either at home, work or whatever, epileptic seizure.  The solution to a person with an epileptic seizure is they take 'em to a mental institution.  The police came by, put him in a straight jacket, sent him off to a mental institution.  It was a major, it must have been a major crisis in our lives, in my mother's life.  All of a sudden, she was--the breadwinner of the family was in a mental institution, rather sudden.  Then we were moving, all that sort of stuff.  And at that point, my mother went to school, went--became a teacher.  She had all the education to become a teacher.  So she became a teacher.  And then she taught for the--and she proved to be the primarily--primary breadwinner of our household from that time on.  She was the one that sent all three of her sons to college, you know.  So my father went to a mental institution.   And he was there for six months.  They put him on medication.  He would come home for the mental--from the mental institution.  He'd be home for a couple of years, on his medication.  He ran around and found other jobs.  He taught.  He was an engineer.  But he had problems staying on his medication because he didn't like the affects of it.  He would wander off his medication, and epileptic seizure, and he would be back in the mental institution.  So for the rest of my life, he bounced in and out of mental institutions with epilepsy.  When he first went in, my mother contacted her father, John Bluford, the pastor, and he came in and lived with us.  So when I was growing up, I had really three adults in my household, my mother, my father and my grandfather, John Bluford.  And my grandfather was a great person in the house.  I mean he helped run the house while my mother went to work every morning.  He got us up every morning to go to school.  He was a good role model, all that sort of stuff.  So, that worked out very well.  So I grew up in a world where by the time I was nine or ten, my father had this problem, and he never really recovered from it.  My mother was the primary breadwinner.  It, it--the major effect it had on me was I recognized that women needed to be educated and take care of themselves.  I married a woman who had two years of college.  I made sure she got her bachelor's degree, master's degree, and, and if she needed to work, she could work.  And my wife was a woman who went out and worked for fifteen years and retired.  I was big on that, big time.
Story_ID: 28722
Speaker 1: The other thing that was interesting with me growing is I'm a puzzler.  I'm a puzzler.  I like puzzles.  I would get up every morning.  We would get the 'Philadelphia Inquirer' which was our morning newspaper.  My father [Guion Bluford, Sr.] would read the newspaper as he, before he ran off to work.  I would grab the newspaper and I worked puzzles.  And I worked cryptograms.  So I learned to work cryptograms and crossword puzzles and math teasers and all that sort of stuff, going through, primarily, junior high school [Shoemaker Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia], and all that sort of stuff.  And I still do that today.  I'm big time into Sudoku, cryptograms, crossword puzzles.  I'm a puzzler, I like puzzles.  So you don't wanna give me a puzzle.  Otherwise, I'm gone, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear) Yeah, kiss me off, you know, I'm gone.  So I like puzzles.  So that was another thing.  But by the time I got into high school, I knew I wanted to be an aeronautical engineer.  I saw the space thing come along, Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite; launched by USSR] was launched in '57 [1957].  I think we had our first seven astronauts in '59 [1959].  I never did really relate to that because they were test pilots.  They were flying.  I was more interested in the engineering side of the business and that sort of things.  But I, in high school, you know, I wanted, I, I pretty much narrowed it down that I wanted to go to Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania].  So I applied to all these schools.  I applied to seven schools.  I only got accepted to two, Penn [Pennsylvania] State and Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].  My mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] insisted that I apply to a bunch of little-bitty, small schools 'cause she went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  Fortunately, all those schools turned me down.  I've always been tempted to, if they ever invite me to be a commencement speaker, at any of those schools, I would thank them for turning me down, because in my senior year, when the results of the applications came in--I still remember, in March of 1960, the first, the first result came in, and it came from Penn State.  Penn State said, "Congratulations, you've been accepted to Penn State University into the aeronautical engineering program.  And I knew I had it made.  And then I had a bunch of rejections, and then probably two months later, I got an acceptance to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] if I wanted to go there.  So for me, I was thrilled to death to be a Penn Stater.
Story_ID: 28723
Speaker 1: When you were-, so when you were on the verge of graduation [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania], did you get any special honors or anything like that,
Speaker 2: No--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --from the school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, oh, I took the SAT.  I took the SAT exams twice.  My math score was twice my English score, twice, just to give you a feel.  I was so one-sided on math and so, no, I, I was just thankful to graduate, yeah, no special--there were about 400, four to 500 people in my class, graduating class from high school.  One of 'em was Walt Hazzard who was a basketball player, went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], you know, Gold Medalist, coach--
Speaker 1: I remember, yeah, he won the (unclear) championship--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --coach, coached for UCLA.  He died here not too long ago.  I had--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, Walt Hazzard and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a stroke and eventually died.  Then we also had a guy in my class who's a Rhodes Scholar, Richard Cooper.  We had a bunch of people who went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and, you know, Haverford [College, Haverford, Pennsylvania] lawyers and so forth.  Our class, my class, 1960 class gets together every ten years.  A matter of fact, we got together not too long ago.  So it was very interesting.  But there was about 400 people, you know, doctors, doctors, professors.  There's, you know, lawyers in my class.  So it's some pretty, some pretty heavy people in my class [clearing throat].
Story_ID: 28724
Speaker 1: But I graduated in 1960 from Overbrook High [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I was excited about going to Penn State.  I really had not been on the campus at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], but Penn State accepted me into the aeronautical engineering program.  I knew that I wanted to be an aeronautical engineer.  I didn't know specifically what type of work I wanted to do as an engineer, but I knew I wanted to work with airplanes.  I knew a lot about airplanes.  I was familiar with how rocket engines and jet engines worked, and so I was excited to go to Penn State.  Great, big great--big break in my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Penn State in State College, Pennsylvania--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in the hills of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Middle of Pennsylvania, right there in the center of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of people don't know where Penn State is for some reason.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: They never heard of State College, but that's a little town around there in the mountains,--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --so, and Happy Valley (laughter).
Speaker 1: Happy Valley, right, went to Penn State in September of 1960.  They had about 25,000 students on the campus in a small town, State College, Pennsylvania, which is about the same size as the campus and showed up as a freshman at Penn State.  If you took a look at the demographics on the campus, probably three or 400 blacks out of 25,000 students.  I lived in the dorms for all four years.  I was not a, never joined any fraternities, though there's a, the Omegas have been trying to claim me as a member, but I was never--I was one of--
Speaker 2: That's right.  I read that--
Speaker 1: No, I'm not--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) to--
Speaker 1: That's not true, never was a fraternity--
Speaker 2: Never was a--okay.
Speaker 1: Never, never was a member of a fraternity.  I showed up at Penn State.  Penn State was tough.  When I look back on Penn State, I look back on it because it was tough, 'cause I had to make the transition from being a high school student to a college student.  And the curriculum was tough.  So it was a tough four years.  I was very fortunate in going to Penn State because I knew exactly what I wanted to do.  I wanted to get a degree in aerospace engineering.  And I remember, you know, engineering program at Penn State.  When I showed up at Penn State, there were some surprises for me.  Penn State had mandatory ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], had never even considered ROTC.  But for all male students, all male students going to Penn State had to take two years or ROTC.  So when I showed up on the campus at Penn State, I had to choose an ROTC program.  I chose [U.S.] Air Force.  And basically, you went through two years of ROTC.  Most people dropped it.  And for those who wanted to stay on, you could go all four years and go into the Air Force and get--as a, as--with a commission.  But I, when I joined them, when I showed up at Penn State and had to choose an ROTC program, I chose Air Force.  It made, you know, airplanes, all that sort of stuff.  So I went to Air Force ROTC, not very interested in it.  But I had to do two years of air power and how airplanes flew and all that sort of stuff at ROTC.  The other thing Penn State insisted that you had two years of phys ed [physical education].  So I took courses in phys ed that I had never done before.  I took fencing.  I took gymnastics.  I took handball, racquetball, squash.  I took the Red Cross lifesaving course at Penn State and became a lifeguard during one of the summers.  So I did that.  Penn State was, I showed up at Penn State.  I, they gave you a questionnaire before you showed up at Penn State to match you up with roommates.  And the first three years I was matched up with black roommates.  A matter of fact, I was matched up with a guy by the name of Larson (ph.) Dorsey out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in my freshman year.  And the system matched me up with Larson Dorsey out of Pittsburgh at my junior year, you know.  And then I had another black guy that I was matched up with in my sophomore year, had three--I had four years of great roommates, easy going, hardworking, you know, got along very well with 'em, all that sort of thing.  I lived in the north, north halls, for three years.  The Penn State gave priority to freshmen. When you go to Penn State, freshmen had priority on campus.  And your priority went down as you went, as you moved, motored on to being a senior.  But I stayed all four years on the campus.  I liked living in the dorms.  I, I would say I would--I struggled through the program.  And the frustration I had at Penn State was I had to go through two years of everything else before I got into aero-courses.  You know, I wasn't interested in statics and dynamics and thermo and vibration and physics and chemistry and calculus and, but I had to take all those.  So, and a lot of those courses--and you really didn't get a lot of help.  You showed up on the campus.  You registered for your courses, you got your books and you were off and running, you know.  There was really no support.  Well, on the campus, I was a member of the Christian Science Student Organization, all four years.
Story_ID: 28725
Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriett Lolita Brice Bluford] Christian Scientists, growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, my--and my--and I'll back up.  That's a good point.  My parents went to Episcopal church, Thomas--St. Thomas Episcopal Church until I was about 13, 12 or 13 [years old].  My father was having the problems with epilepsy, all that sort of stuff.  My mother jumped up and decided to change churches.  And she went to Christian Science.
Speaker 1: Now, how did--do you know how she reached that--
Speaker 2: No, but she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --my thinking was, she did not get the support she wanted from the church.  Christian Science offered an opportunity of healing.   And so we flipped over to Christian Science church.  If you ask me today what religion I would be affiliated with, I'd say Christian Science.  So we flipped over to Christian Science church, primarily, all white congregation.  I was very comfortable with it.  So from the time I was twelve or thirteen, I went to Christian Science church.  We all went to the Christian Science church every Sunday, did that every Sunday.  And when I was in college, I did that, up in State College [Pennsylvania, at Pennsylvania State University], went to the Christian Science church in State College, Pennsylvania, was a member of the Christian Science Student Organization.  We had a Wednesday night, sort of prayer meeting there, that was very good for me.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the--what is the philosophy of Christian Science?  I always wondered--I mean you're a scientist, and so, you know, and science is in the name.  I don't, you know, I know about the Christian part, but what is--how does the science part enter into Christian Science?
Speaker 2: Boy, it's been so long since I've been to church, it's embarrassing.  We believe in faith healing.  Yeah, we believe in faith healing primarily, mind over matter.
Speaker 1: Now, does that mean you wouldn't go to a doctor or--
Speaker 2: It could very easily be that.  We have pract--Christian Science practitioners that you would go to for healing.  You would, you would prefer to go there versus going to a doctor.  Interesting enough, that's one of the problems that I have today, is the fact that doctors have problems with me because I don't trust them.
Story_ID: 28726
Speaker 1: I grew up in a, I grew up in a--an interesting characteristic.  I grew up in a, you know, you develop all sorts of characteristics.  I have an interesting series of characteristics.  One, I have a fear or heights under certain circumstances, which is interesting.  The other one is, I don't like hospitals and blood and guts.
Speaker 2: Now, the fear of heights is interesting since you've been higher up than any--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It doesn't bother me flying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --anybody else.
Speaker 1: --flying airplanes.  It's only if I'm, if I'm in a situation where I can, I can personally jump off the side, over four stories.  In buildings, I can stand against the, against the window and look down from the Empire State Building [New York, New York], no problem.  But if I could, if I could jump over the side, physically jump over the side, I'm in trouble.  And it's interesting because I had an interesting--I was in, the wife and I went to Four Corners in the United States.  She wanted to see the Anasazi, or the the Indian ruins out there.  You have to go down a steep cliff to get in, into the ruin.  I couldn't do that.  And I remember talking to the, to the forest guy.
Speaker 2: Forest ranger?
Speaker 1: Forest ranger.  And he said, the problem is you're afraid that you will jump off the side.  And I realized that was the case, that the problem wasn't that, that I couldn't do it.  It was that there was a fear in my world, he thought, that I would jump off the side.  He was afraid.  It's self--it was a fear of myself.  And I thought, there may, there may very well be.  When I was in Boy Scouts, I couldn't get on, I couldn't climb a forest towers.  You know, I'd get up about two or three stories, and [gagging], you know.  So, but flying airplanes, any of that sort of--but if I'm in buildings, I remember going up on the Eiffel Tower [Paris, France].  At one time you could go up on the Eiffel Tower, and stand out on the edge and look over the side.  That bothers me.  You can go up there now, I think it's meshed over.  If I can't go over it, it doesn't bother me, you know.  So any time I'm in a situation where I'm above four stories, and I could hurt myself, that, that's more of a bother, but if I'm enclosed, can't do it, you know.  And, you know, I've been on the World Trade Center, and, and this--a couple of years ago, we were in Dubai.  I was in that, the tallest building in the world [Burj Khalifa].  So, no problem, so, so there.  But then the other portion is, I don't like doctors, blood and guts, you know, you know.  There was a time on television where you had the doctor's program, 'Dr. Kildare', you know, that's fine.  I'm, just don't let me see the operation and all that sort of stuff.  So I don't like it.
Speaker 2: This is a--I wondered about this too.  Did you ever consider being a medical doctor--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --that seems to be the--
Speaker 1: Big time, no.  And it was interesting because when I went to Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], they gave me a series of tests to figure out what the avocation--what I should major in.  And they said "medical doctor," and I said, [pip sound], no, no, no, no.  No, I knew that from the start.  Engineering was fairly down on the list, but it was not, so--and I don't like being in doctor, in hospitals and all that sort of stuff.  And I think part of it is, I grew up and I had very little experience with doctors.  You know, I mean I may have had the chicken pox and the measles, you know.  My exposure to doctors growing up was nil.
Speaker 2: So you never got injured--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Never got injured, and any of that sort of stuff.  No, and I really had to start dealing with doctors when I got into the [U.S.] Air Force, and I had to take a physical every year.  And I was always in good shape.  I never had any problems, you know, physically, I'm a good specimen. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm a good specimen.
Story_ID: 28727
Speaker 1: So I got to Penn [Pennsylvania] State [University, State College, Pennsylvania].  Four years at Penn State, tough four years.  And it was tough from a growing up point of view because I had to make this transition from being dependent on my parents [Guion Bluford, Sr. and Harriett Lolita Brice Bluford] to depending on my own, which meant you had to monitor, you know--I, I would go to class.  I would only study when exams showed up.  And that four years, that just made my life miserable 'cause I--it took me four years to figure out that you can't do that.  I had to study all the time, but I made it through, I made it through.  In my freshman year, I met this--I'd never dated.  I showed up at college and never dated, never went to the high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] prom, all that sort of stuff.  I remember my freshman year, I ran around with a bunch of black guys.  One of 'em is Dave Robinson, football player, went to Green Bay [Packers, NFL team, Green Bay, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Did he?  Okay.
Speaker 1: He's being, he's being incorporated in the National Football Hall of Fame this year.  I might go down and see that.  He lives up here some place, Akron [Ohio].  So I played, I, you know, socialized with them.  And I went, I was in the north halls, and north halls at the time in my freshman year were four dorms that were all-male dorms, three or 400 guys, football players, all that sort of stuff, (unclear).  So Penn State was tough in the sense that there was a lot of maturing I had to do.  And there was a lot of stand up, fall down, all that sort of stuff, competed in intramurals, represented intramurals, hall intramurals.  I went to the concerts they had on, on the campus.  But the campus was 25,000 students, and I keep telling people there were 12,500 women out there, could never understand why they all didn't, weren't crazy about me (laughter), me, you know.  That was a big distraction.  But I also, I showed up at Penn State at a time, Civil Rights demonstrations in the South.  You know, I grew up high school, you know, the Civil Rights Movement was starting to really bubble up.  I showed up in college with women's lib [women's liberation], you know.  Imagine being a college student and women going across campus without wearing bras.  Boy, that gets you excited in a hurry.
Speaker 2: So that was going on then?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you know, hey--LSD [Lysergic acid diethylamide], the drug, the drug thing was starting to bubble up and the Vietnam War was starting to bubble up.  So there was a lot of ups and downs.  I mean there was a lot of change going on, on the campus, and, but you didn't see it at Penn State.  Penn State was pretty stable.  But I mean, that was the world.  I mean, you know, that was the world.  So four years of Penn State, real challenging.  Junior year, I finally got in the Aero Program.  My best year in college was in my senior year.
Story_ID: 28728
Speaker 1: Between, between my, at the end of two years of [Air Force] ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps; Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], I decided to go Advanced ROTC, which was an interesting decision.  The draft was still on, had to worry about the draft.  The Vietnam War was starting.  I said to myself, well, I hated to be an engineer and be drafted by the [U.S.] Army.  And I know guys who were in that (unclear).  They graduated from college and got drafted.  So I decided I would start off my career in the, in the military.  So I went Advanced ROTC, and when I went Advanced ROTC, I could not pass the physical to be a pilot, which was interesting.
Speaker 2: Now, what was the problem?
Speaker 1: My blood pressure was too high.  I probably had stayed up half the night.  And I had a, I had a bad tendency--I'm a big time procrastinator.  So, I mean every term I got so far behind that I had to stay up half the night and all night or whatever, did a lot of all-nighters.  So I couldn't pass the physical to be a pilot.  The [U.S.] Air Force offered me an opportunity to be a navigator.  I told them, no, I wasn't interested in being a navigator.  I'd go into the Air Force as an engineer.  So I went Advanced ROTC.  I was gonna go into the Air Force as an engineer, get some experience, aerospace engineering, Air Force and then go out and go to industry.  That was the plan.
Story_ID: 28729
Speaker 1: So I went Advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], Air Force ROTC.  I couldn't pass the physical.  They offered me an opportunity to be a navigator.  I didn't wanna be a navigator.  I'd just go in as an engineer.  So that's what I did.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: In my freshman year at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], I was in the Student Union building, called The Hub, one day at, standing in the cafeteria line, getting something to eat and behind me were two black women, freshmen, didn't know 'em, struck up a conversation with 'em, didn't take much note of 'em, did note the name of one of 'em, didn't pay too much attention to 'em.  Later on in my freshman year as I was running with the guys, I had to go to some function, and I had to get a date, had never dated in my life.  So I remembered the name of one of these women.  I looked her up and said, well, you know, I'll take you out.  I discovered women.  I had a woman, woman that I was interested in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--I'll tell you that, when I was going through high school.  I went to church, Christian Science Church.  There was another black woman who was about the same age I (unclear) did, was in my class in, in church.  I saw her every Sunday.  I said, I'll chase after her, you know; could never get there, you know, started dating her.  When--I started seeing her probably when I graduated from high school, couldn't get it started.  She went off to Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Thornbury, Pennsylvania], wanted to be a teacher, and just couldn't get it--showed up at Penn State.  So I met this woman at Penn State, you know, and got fascinated with the lady.  So freshman year I, you know, so I dated this lady in my freshman year.  She was from North Philadelphia.  During my--and I saw her that summer in Philadelphia.  In my sophomore year, she did not come back to Penn State.  She went to Penn State at Ogontz which is the Penn State campus in Philadelphia.  And I wrote back and forth so on in the summertime.  She did that for two years.  She went, and at the end of her second year, she ran out of money, and she went to work.  And I just stayed up with her, you know, saw her in the summertime, all that sort of stuff, wrote back and forth.  And in my senior married the lady.  (Laughter) That was a big step, married the lady.
Speaker 2: Now, her name is?
Speaker 1: Linda, Linda, her last name is Tull.  She is the, she is the youngest of ten kids growing up in Philadelphia.  She has one sister, eight brothers.  At this stage in our lives, all her brothers are gone.  It's just she and her sister.
Speaker 2: So she's from Philadelphia too?
Speaker 1: She's from Philadelphia too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Did she grow up in the same neighborhood or--
Speaker 1: No,--
Speaker 2: --or the same (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --didn't know her in Philadelphia at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I grew up in West Philadelphia.  She grew up in North Philadelphia, just met her at Penn State.  So, and next year, we will have been married fifty years.  It's amazing.
Speaker 2: Well, if you're gonna date, make it count.  That's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Fifty years.
Speaker 2: That's is something.  That's remarkable these days.
Speaker 1: So, I met this woman and dated her for four years, you know, very comfortable with her, all that sort of stuff.  Interesting enough, I really wasn't sure that I wanted to marry her because she and I were very different.  She drank and smoked and, you know, partied, and I was sort of straight-laced but in the, in my senior year, she convinced I--my goal was to graduate, go to pilot training, get a Corvette Stingray and be second lieutenant with the (unclear).  She convinced me it was nicer to get married.  She was right. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28730
Speaker 1: My best year, oh, so junior year at Penn State, I was up, Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  I started to get aero courses.  And my senior year was probably my best year, academically 'cause I got aero courses.  Between my junior and senior year at Penn State, I went to ROTC summer camp.  And I went to Otis Air Force Base in Cape Cod [Massachusetts].  This is '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2: Okay, 1963.
Speaker 1: President [John F.] Kennedy was the president at the time, okay.  So, oh, let me back up a little.  At Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], the first year at Penn State was semesters.  The second year, they switched to quarters.  So instead of two semesters, I went the three quarters, which for me was great because I had fewer courses because I was a procrastinator.  At the end of the semester, I had four or five term papers and finals all exams, and they all hit me at once.  And I was always behind.  When in the quarter, I had fewer courses at the end of the quarter.  It moved a little faster, but I had, I didn't have a lot of that jamming up because I--and I never got out of that procrastination.  It took me till my senior year before I started breaking out of being a procrastinator.  But I went to summer camp, went to Otis Air Force Base up in Massachusetts, four weeks of drilling, marching and calisthenics, living in the dorm, shining shoes, saluting, all that sort of stuff, which was very interesting, but the interesting thing was to see President Kennedy come in.  He and Jackie [First Lady, Jacqueline Kennedy] would kind of fly into Otis and go to Hyannis Port, I remember seeing that.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: That was fascinating.  I got my first ride in an airplane, Air Force airplane, T-Bird.  They gave you a little dollar ride in an airplane.  So that was fine, and at the end of four weeks of drilling and calisthenics, all that sort of stuff, they gave me a physical.  And at the--I still remember I was in the physical, and the doctor at the end of the physical said, why don't you wanna be a pilot?  I said, can't pass the physical to be a pilot.  He said, yes, you can.  You look fine.  And so at that moment, I switched and decided to become a pilot in the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: Now, this is, now, why, because you had dreamt of becoming an engineer--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Engineer, okay.
Speaker 2: --when you think about it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I'll tell you why--
Speaker 2: All right, all right.
Speaker 1: So I said to myself, I'd be a better engineer if I knew how to fly, be a better engineer if I knew how to fly.  So I said, plus you make a little bit more, you know.  And I said to myself, I'll go into the Air Force.  I'll fly airplanes and then I'll jump out and then I go to Boeing or McDonald Douglas, I will be an engineer who knows how to fly airplanes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I, I took that route because I thought I would be a better engineer if I knew how to fly them.  So in my senior year at Penn State, ROTC was for me getting my private pilot's license.  If you were a pilot candidate, the Air Force had a program where they would fund you to get your private pilot's license in ROTC.  So in my senior year, ROTC was fun because I would go out to State College, Pennsylvania and team up with an instructor, his name was Ken Falwell, and he taught me how to fly, you know, one Cessna 172.  And I still remember that that was lots of fun, once a week, you know, go out to jump in the little, you know, 172, take off.  I soloed, went across country, took my private pilot's exam.  You gotta take both a flight exam as well as a written exam, got my private pilot's license.  Great, enjoyed it, realized--I still remember soloing, flying across the air--flying across the campus solo in 172, saying, boy, this is cool.
Speaker 2: So this is interesting.  You had no problem flying--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --even though you had like a fear of heights?
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no, no.  No, I don't have any problem--I don't have--it's only if I can jump off the edge of something, and if I can't do it, I'm fine.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, I discovered I liked flying, you know.  So I went through my senior year.  My senior year was my best year.
Story_ID: 28731
Speaker 1: So you got married that year [1964; senior year at Penn State University, College Station, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Got married that year.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And just before graduation.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got married in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, yeah, I got married in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But my senior year was my best year.
Speaker 1: You learn how to fly.
Speaker 2: Learned how to fly.  My--but my senior year was also dramatic because on my twenty-first birthday, President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I still remember that.
Speaker 1: I was in the aero [aeronautical engineering] department--in my senior year, I had a design project, and I had a research project.  When I went advanced, when I went during my junior and senior year, I had to select a aeronautical engineering option, and I selected engines.  I could choose engines or airplanes.  And I decided to do engines, and so my specialty was engines, jet engines and rocket engines.  So my, my study--and so in my senior year, my design project was an engine, aircraft engine.  I was in, drawing this engine one afternoon, when I heard President Kennedy got shot.  I still remember that, twenty-first birthday.  That's when I turned twenty-one.  So I remember that.  But, and then I had a design, I had a research project in my senior year.  And I studied the aerodynamics of a boomerang, which was interesting.  I went, I was in a course with a professor who ran the research projects.  He asked all the students to come in with a list of five projects, and he'd pick one.  I remember sitting in class one day when he pulled out my sheet, and Number 5, was aerodynamics of a boomerang.  And surprisingly enough, he chose that, and I studied boomerang, threw it, filmed it, put it in a wind tunnel, very interesting study, had to, had to call home and ask my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford] to send me a couple of boomerangs.  You know, finding them, had no idea, threw 'em on the campus for a while just to see how they worked, got interested in boomerangs.  But very exciting, full, great year, senior year was--got married.  I stabilized out.  I suddenly, I suddenly became an adult, learned how to fly airplanes, all that.  So, oh, the other thing that occurred at Penn State was because of the Space Program, the program changed from aeronautics to aerospace.  So during the four years the program I was in was being converted to aerospace, I took a course in orbital mechanics.  That was the only space course that I took.  I graduated late.  Instead of graduating in June, I graduated in September.  Part of that I think was because of the change in the program.  Part of it is because I failed another course at Penn State, Aircraft Structures.  I had to take it over again.  But in September, I graduated from Penn State, '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 28732
Speaker 1: And I still remember that, graduated beautiful day, thousand people graduating, lawn in front of the (unclear) library [Penn State University, State College, Pennsylvania].  My parents [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford and Guion Bluford, Sr.] were there, the wife [Linda Tull] was there.  My, my father must have been in seventh heaven.  I've never seen a guy that excited in my life.  He was, you know, and my attitude was thank goodness I got out of Penn State.  I'll never go back to school again (laughter).  I was just thankful to get out.  I got my Commission, you know, [U.S.] Air Force uniform, pinned on my second lieutenant's bar, you know, took--got my commission.  The wife was there.  My parents were there.  It was a great day.  And I'll tell you, I graduated from Penn State with a 2.44 average out of a 4.0.  That's the highest it ever got.  So it's, you know, I was constantly behind the eight ball for all four years at Penn State.  It got higher and higher, but I mean it was, you know, and my senior year.  And I knew that I wanted to be an aerospace engineer when I graduate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Strong drive, to be an aerospace engineer, no doubt about it.  But I, I was sick and tired of school (laughter).
Story_ID: 28733
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any, any particular mentors at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were they?
Speaker 2: Mentor, the mentor, the guy who, who was the advisor for the Christian Science Student Association was, I would say a mentor and a friend, Leslie Greenhill, professor type.  I don't know what he taught.  We had a professor at, in the Aero [aeronautical engineering] Department, Barnes McCormick.  Barnes McCormick still teaches at Penn State.  So I would rate those two as--when I go back to Penn State, I see Barnes McCormick.  He still teaches at--he's, let's see, if I'm seventy [years old], he's eighty.  Leslie Greenhill died several years ago.  Those are the two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28734
Speaker 1: So I graduated from Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], and when I graduated, orders were to go to pilot training, and there was about three or four months.  I graduated in September [1964].  I didn't--show up--I wasn't, I didn't, I got orders and I showed up in pilot training in January of '65 [1965]  So there was four months there where I lived in a small apartment with this wife [Linda Tull].  I found that I really liked being married.  Boy, that was exciting.  I mean, ghee. Couldn't find a job.  My wife was working.  I finally found a job.  I was a, I worked for Gimble Brothers [department store] as a stock boy 'cause I couldn't find a job which--and I'll have to admit, I started off enjoying that job because I didn't have to think.  But I got tired of it after a while.  And then after Christmas, they laid me off which pissed me off, but I was about ready to quit anyway 'cause I had to go to pilot training.  But, so I worked, you know, the wife and I were married.  We had a little, we had a small apartment.  My family gave us a few bits of furniture.  The wife, who was living with her sister at the time when we got married, moved into the small apartment.  Surprisingly enough today, we live in a four-bedroom, three and a half bath house, 2,500 square foot house.  I think we still have two pieces of that original furniture.  A refrigerator, my mother [Harriet Lolita Brice Bluford], when they got--when she got, she and her--when my father [Guion Bluford, Sr. got married, bought a refrigerator.  They gave it to us.  It still works.
Speaker 2: Well, what kind is it?
Speaker 1: Frigidaire.
Speaker 2: Frigidaire, okay.
Story_ID: 28735
Speaker 1: So, in January of '96 [1996], I got ordered--well, I got orders--I sat around for three or four months waiting for orders, going to pilot training, didn't know where the [U.S.] Air Force was going to send me.  This was '64 [1964], '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: Now, let's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Civil Rights, all that sort of stuff in the South.
Speaker 2: There's one thing that was going on that was precipitated by the Civil Rights Movement--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in fact, it was suggested by Whitney Young [civil rights leader] in a meeting with Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy, U.S. Attorney], he suggested we have a black astronaut.  And they actually chose Ed Dwight [trained astronaut and sculptor, also a HistoryMaker], based on the suggestion of Whitney Young--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I've talked--
Speaker 2: --because Whitney Young didn't know Ed Dwight, but they had to search the [U.S.] Air Force for a pilot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very few pilots in the Air Force.  I--
Speaker 2: Did you hear about that?  Did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: --know about that?
Speaker 1: No, no, wasn't even familiar with that.
Speaker 2: Because I know it was in JET [magazine] and other things that a black astronaut--(simultaneous)- No, no, didn't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm sitting here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], waiting to go to pilot training.  I could go to Moody Air Force Base in Valdosta, Georgia.  I considered that enemy country.  I could go to Craig Air Force Base in Selma, Alabama, you know.  Here I am, I grew up in the Northeast, never saw any Civil Rights, no discrimination, none of that sort of stuff, and so I looked at the Southeast as the enemy country.  So when I got orders, surprisingly enough, they were to Williams Air Force Base in Chandler, Arizona.  And I realized, I think the Air Force was very wise to do that.  They shipped me all the way out to Chandler, Arizona.  So I still remember.  January, I got on my little Air Force uniform, my, and it's like 10 degrees, you know.  The wife [Linda Tull] got all dressed up.  We jumped on the airplane.  We flew out to Phoenix, Arizona.  We jumped off the airplane.  It was 70 degrees, goodness gracious.  No row houses.  You know, people had land.  We had, the wife and I had a, I did not have a car.  We didn't have a car 'cause we could get around Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] without a car.  I needed a car quick, you know, no car, nothing, zippo.  My plan was to get off the airplane and, you know, I could get public transportation and ride out Williams.  Well, forget that nonsense, you know, you know, and so we eventually called the base.  They sent a car out for us.  They brought us in.  We stayed on the base and visiting officers' quarters.  The next day pilot training started, and they told us we had to be out of the visiting officers' quarters in a week.  We knew no one in, you know, zippo.  I remembered in ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps], when I was in ROTC, the guy said if you were got into trouble in the Air Force, go to the Chaplin.  I did that.  Oh, in ROTC, I was a full colonel in the ROTC program.  ROTC, let me back up, the ROTC program at Penn State, 5,000 cadets in the Air Force ROTC program, division, ten wings, run by a cadet colonel.  He must have had ten wing commander cadet colonels.  I was a colonel 'cause I was the opps officer for the division, division opps officer, the guy who wrote the orders for all the wings.  So, we showed up at Williams, knew no one in Arizona, zippo, nothing, no car, nothing, get out of the (unclear).  So I told the wife, go over to see the Chaplin.  She ran, walked across the base, spoke with the Chaplin.  The Chaplin teamed her up with a person in the congregation, a lady in the congregation drove the wife around a few days.  She found a small apartment.  We moved into the small apartment.  I had to carpool every day to and from work for about three or four months until I could save up enough money to buy a car.
Story_ID: 28736
Speaker 1: Pilot training was great.  Fifty-two people in our, I think it was fifty-two people in our pilot training class, basically all second lieutenants, a few captains and first lieutenants, a third of our class was Germans, was German students.  We were all going through pilot training together.  In the class of fifty-two, there were three blacks.  Only two of us made it.  We, you fly a T-37, side-by-side trainer for six months.  And, you know, and that side-by-side trainer is a trainer that you use to learn to fly a jet airplane.  So my instructor was Kent Speers, Major Kent Speers, who was a, who was a former F-100 fighter pilot.  I was one of his first students.  He had three students, only--I was the only one that made it through the T-37 phase of pilot training, learned how to fly.  I still remember soloing out, you know.  Fifty-two of us in our class.  Only thirty-nine of us made it.
Speaker 2: Now, what was the difference?  I assume you learned how to fly on a regular prop plane, right?
Speaker 1: No, this was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Initially.
Speaker 1: This is--yeah, flew on a Cessna--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Cessna, right.
Speaker 1: --a little Cessna prop plane, um-hum.
Speaker 2: So, now, you're in a jet, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So what was the difference that you noticed, I mean from a pilot's standpoint?  I know we--
Speaker 1: Well, the airplane moved a little faster.  It is, as a jet controls versus prop controls.  It was pressurized.  I had to have a parachute and a mask.  You didn't have to, you know, just didn't, didn't get very high.  So it was just, the thing moved faster, you know.  And I had to, and when I got my private pilot's license, I didn't have to fly in instruments, no formation flying.  I mean it was just, I got thirty hours, about thirty-six hours of flying.  You know, I was able to fly around stalls and slow fly, be able to take off and land, go across country, pass the, passed the exam for the private pilot's license.  It was pretty simple.  You got into flying jets, you gotta fly faster, higher.  We had to do all sorts of acrobatics, go across country in the airplane, fly formation in the airplane, you know.  So that was T-bird, that was the T-37, had an instructor who was a fighter pilot.  He had three students.  One student washed out 'cause he couldn't, he constantly got sick.  Another student washed out 'cause he couldn't figure out how to land the airplane.  He washed out most of the students in the early phases 'cause they couldn't figure out--they had problems figuring out how to land the airplane or they had motion sickness problems (unclear).  We lost a bunch of students.  Switched over to T-38s, supersonic jet trainer.  Instead of side-by-side, the instructor sits behind me, fabulous machine.  I flew six--flew that for six months, cross country, you went cross county in the airplane, flew the airplane solo cross country.  So, I (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You mean cross country, what does that mean?
Speaker 1: I went from Williams Air Force Base [Mesa, Arizona] to Nellis Air Force Base [Nevada] or to San Francisco [California] or whatever, (unclear).  They give you the airplane for the week, weekend, and say go fly some place.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you could fly to any Air Force Base you wanted to in the country?
Speaker 1: With an instructor as a student.  And part of the instruct--part of the training was to do that.  You learned to, learned to take off and land the airplane.  You learned to fly the airplane in instrument weather, instrument situations.  You reached a point where they say, well, it's time for you to go cross country.  So you jump in and you fly from Williams to Luke Air Force Base [near Glendale, Arizona] or some other [U.S.] Air Force base and fly back.  They even had a section where you did it solo, you know, all of that, all of these are skills that you need to learn.
Story_ID: 28737
Speaker 1: Towards the end of pilot training, college training is about a year.  At the end of pilot training, they, they--you start thinking about assignments after pilot training.  And they would have various representatives from the various [U.S.] Air Force commands come in.  They'd have the tanker guys come in, and then they'd talk to my class about flying tankers.  And the bomber guys, they'd send a couple bomber pilots in, and they'd talk about how great it is to fly B-52s and B-47s, you know.  I still remember the fighter guy, the fighter guy.  So our class, we got, the fighter guy flew his F-4C Phantom in, brand new machine.  He parked it at base operations.  And I still remember going down to base operations and slobbering over this plane, wow.  So our class goes in.  We sit down in the auditorium and listen to this fighter pilot.  This fighter pilot was a black guy.  Not only was he a black guy, his name is [Daniel] Chappie James [Jr.; fighter pilot in the U.S. Air Force, who in 1975 became the first black American to reach the rank of four-star general].  The guy was a full colonel in the Air Force.  He was flying fighters out of Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base, near Tucson, Arizona] and he flew up there, talked about flying fighters.  I said, I wanna fly fighters, you know, wanna be a--I wanna be a, a, yeah, I wanna fly fighters.  I wanna be a gunslinger. Now, Chappie James at that point-- Chappie James, Chappie James--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he was becoming--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Chappie James ended up being a four-star general.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was becoming like well known around the country even then.  I know--
Speaker 1: Speaker.
Speaker 2: --he was on Phil Donahue's [talk] show, in the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in the mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Very nat- (unclear), you know, I'm an American, all that sort of stuff.  Tuskegee Airman, part of the Tuskegee Airmen, big-time fighter pilot, big guy.  I mean Chappie was 6'2", 6'3", football player size, impressive, came and talked to us about fighters.  I decided I wanted to fly fighters.  So towards the end of pilot training, the Air Force sends you down a slip--a list of airplanes, thirty-nine airplanes, 'cause there were thirty-nine guys.  And, and each guy, we all take a list, took a list, and this is the airplane, the desired assignment and the order that we want it.  And the first guy in the class got his slot and so forth.  By the time they got to me, they selected--I got my tenth selection.  It was fighters.  It was F-4C Phantoms.  It was unpopular only because it was Vietnam.  F-4C is Southeast Asia.  But I got a fighter assignment out of pilot training.  I was excited, pilot (unclear) you know.  And then from there, this was--I graduated from pilot training in January of '66 [1966], yeah, January of '66 [1966], January, February, '66 [1966]--
Story_ID: 28738
Speaker 1: What percentage of pilots are black in the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: In the Air Force, I think less than three percent of the pilots in the Air Force are black.
Speaker 1: This is today, right?
Speaker 2: That's probably even today.  I wouldn't be surprised.
Speaker 1: But then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's been, it's been that way through my career, very rare do you see a black pilot in the Air Force, and they're a rare breed.
Speaker 1: Do all the pilots kind of know each other?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that 'cause there are a lot of pilots.  It depends on what you, what you do, but there are very few black pilots in the Air Force.  The problem is, one, pilot training is tough.  They do wash people out, wash a good percentage of people out.  Pilot, black pilots tend--blacks tend to be eliminated because of sickle cell anemia.  That's interesting, when they, when I decided to go become a pilot in the Air Force at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania], they gave me the physical.  And then they had to come back and say, oh, that's right.  He's a black guy.  We'd better check him for sickle cell anemia.  That eliminates black pilots.  If you have sickle anemia traits, you're, you can't get in.
Speaker 1: So to start off, there aren't that many in the first place.  Then they weed you out for sickle cell anemia.
Speaker 2: They weed you out in pilot training.
Speaker 1: I'm pretty sure something that plagues the black community.  I don't know about young black men, but high blood pressure is something that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Probably--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Hypertension, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you generally have very few, you have very few people coming in, in the system to be a pilot.  And then, and then when you, when the Air Force does get black pilots, then a lot of 'em jump out after four years and go fly for the airlines.  So, very few of 'em stay.  So it's three percent, and I'll talk a little bit about that a little later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28739
Speaker 1: So, I got--
Speaker 2: So after--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I graduated from pilot training [at Williams Air Force Base, Mesa, Arizona], F-4Cs, frontline, Moc II, fighter bomber, Vietnam, Southeast Asia.  That was my assignment.
Speaker 2: You were a bomber pilot?
Speaker 1: Fighter pilot.  This is fighter pilot--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Fighter pilot, okay.
Speaker 1: This is fighter pilot.
Speaker 2: All right, and you were flying the, what was the plane that you--
Speaker 1: F-4C Phantom.
Speaker 2: F-4C, okay.
Speaker 1: F-4C Phantom, brand new fighter airplane.  It used to be a [U.S.] Navy airplane.  Then the [U.S.] Air Force liked it and made it an Air Force airplane, "C" version.  So after pilot training, I went to, left the wife [Linda Tull] and kids in Phoenix, went to Reno, Nevada to stay there for a space for three weeks of survival school.  And then from there, I went down to Davis-Monthan [Air Force Base] in Tucson [Arizona], wife and kids, we all went down to Tucson for two or three months for radar school.  And then we went to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida, and I flew the machine, learned to fly it, take off, land, refuel, drop bombs, all that sort of stuff, about six months flying, six months.  In October of '65 [1965] I sent the wife, and took the wife and kids to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], got them situated and in October of sixty--not '65 [1965], October of '66' [1966], excuse me, October of '66 [1966], I went to Vietnam.  My orders were to go to Ubon Air Base, 433rd Tactical Fighter Squadron.  And if I had gotten there, I would have flown for [Daniel] Chappie James [Jr; fighter pilot in the U.S. Air Force, who in 1975 became the first black American to reach the rank of four-star general] and Robin Olds [fighter pilot and general officer in the U.S. Air Force], two fighter pilots who ran the wing up there.  And this would have been primarily, I would have flown Air cap over North Vietnam, primarily, you know, shooting down MiGs, defending thuds [fighter bomber], F-105s, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: You said, "if" you had gotten there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't get there.  I'll tell you why.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that's where I was assigned.  So, once I got the wife and kids up in Philadelphia, matter of fact, I left and they were still living with my parents [Harriett Lolita Brice Blueford and Guion Bluford, Sr.] 'cause they had--we didn't have enough time to get an apartment for 'em, and then I left.  I was gone for nine months.  I went from there to, I flew from there to Travis Air Force Base in California.  I hopped a transport with, full of military guys going to Vietnam.  The airplane flew from California to Hawaii.  We got off the airplane in Hawaii just long enough to stretch our legs, and then we flew from there to Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, great big Air Force base in the Philippines.  I got to Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, got off the airplane and they said, have you gone through jungle survival training?  And I said, no.  So they slowed me up about a week or so, and I took a jungle survival course at Clark, which was exciting, you know, learn how to eat, how to live in the jungle, took classes, did escape and evasion, how to escape and evade in the jungle, POW [prisoner of war] training, all that sort of stuff.  While I was there, they changed my orders.  They flipped me from there to 12th Tact Fighter Wing, Cam Ranh Bay [Vietnam].  12th Tact Fighter Wing had deployed all, the whole wing deployed to Cam Ranh Bay.  And the, the members of the wing were all finishing up their assignment, and they were coming back.  They needed people to replace 'em.  And so instead of going to Ubon, Thailand, I went to Cam Ranh Bay and South Vietnam, Twelfth Tact Fighter Wing, a wing of maybe four squadrons and F-4C Phantoms.  So we must have had eighty fighters, great, great big fighter base.  It was also a transport base, lots of military transports go in there.  We had a hospital there, a major hospital facility there, and the [U.S.] Navy had a port there.  So it was a great, big--it was a major base.  So I flew nine months in Vietnam, and I flew out of Cam Ranh Bay, 144 missions total, dropped bombs all over Southeast Asia, South Vietnam, North Vietnam, Laos.  I had sixty-five missions over North Vietnam.  Primarily, they were air cover.  When I did fly that way, we would take off out of Cam Ranh Bay and fly North.  We would refuel just, just below the DMZ [The Korean Demilitarized Zone] between North and South Vietnam, and go up and fly six hour mission, air cap, come back, refuel coming back and then come home, good six-hour mission, did long missions.  So lots of triple A.  I still remember being shot at by a 85 millimeter.  I still remember my last mission where I got deployed, scrambled off the alert path.  We had two or three fighters that sat on the alert pad.  And as, and they would assign you to the alert pad, which would mean you live in trailers out near the runway, and they would scramble fighters in, if they had an emergency some place.  I still remember being scrambled and dropping bombs on active, triple A site in the DMZ between the North and South Vietnam.  I still remember seeing all those tracers and all that sort of stuff, still remember flying, coming home one day and having a wing, a bullet hole in the wing.  The best missions flying out of Cam Ranh Bay were ground support and supporting the ground guys.  You'd fly in--see the [U.S.] Army guys all ready to take a piece of real estate, and you drop bombs on 'em, you drop 500-pound slicks as well high drag bombs, fired rockets.  We had, the airplane didn't have a internal gun.  So if we had to stray, we had to carry a gun pod which worked some of the time and which didn't work some of the time.  It was nine months of doing that.
Story_ID: 28740
Speaker 1: While I was over there, you'd get a week of R and R [rest and relaxation].  A lot of guys go to Hawaii and join up with the family, with the wives.  I didn't do that.  I took R and R and spent a weekend in Bangkok, Thailand.
Speaker 2: Now, why did you do that instead of going to Hawaii?
Speaker 1: Didn't wanna go home, you know, didn't wanna bring the wife all the way from Philadelphia out to Hawaii, you know, just didn't.
Speaker 2: When I showed up in Cam Ranh Bay [Vietnam], Cam Ranh Bay was--fighter pilots lived in Quonset huts in the (unclear)--people lived in tents.  We had four fighter squadrons, 557th, 558th, 559th and one other fighter squadron there.  There was lots of camaraderie among the fighter pilots.  Our squadron, 557th, our call signs were "Shark Bait."  We were "Shark Bait."  You lived, I roomed with another black guy.  His name was Pinkney Mosley who also was a fighter pilot.  We lived in Quonset huts, four to a room.  You'd get up in the morning.  You'd walk down to squadron ops [operations].  You'd look up on the board to find out if you're flying that day.  If you were flying that day, you show up a couple of hours before your flight.  You'd get a brief as to what the target is, intelligence as to what the threat is and all that sort of (unclear), call sign, and you pull off and drop bombs or whatever.  We probably, I probably flew, probably two out of every three days, maybe--every--two out of every three days.  When you didn't, when you weren't flying, you had the day off.  You didn't have anything to do.  About once every couple of months, they gave us orders, sort of training orders, and every couple of months they would give me--they would give me time off, at which time I would hop a transport and go to Tokyo [Japan].  And when I went to Tokyo, I went to Tokyo, and bought stereo equipment and so forth and shipped it home, you know.  By the time I got home, I had all these boxes, speakers and all that sort of stuff, and while I was at Cam Ranh Bay, I made tapes.  There was a tape center, and so I would make records and tapes and all that sort of stuff, having good sized tapes, amplifiers, all that sort of stuff.  So I did a lot of that.  And, you know, when you didn't have time, I was the security officer in the squadron and partly responsible for all the classified material.  And you gotta remember, I was a second lieutenant, first lieutenant, I was a first lieutenant during all of this.  And it was an exciting, full, four years.  Bob Hope came in.  I was very popular on the alert pad because I didn't drink, and so Christmas and New Year's and all that sort of stuff, I was always assigned to the alert pad 'cause I was the only guy who wasn't drunk.  We had--
Speaker 1: Now, what's the significance--again, it's called the alert pad?
Speaker 2: Alert pad.  If you, you had--we had three or four fighters that sat on the end of the runway.  They were armed with bombs and rockets, and napalm.  And if some Army group was under fire, and they needed support quick, they would scramble us, and you'd take off.  They would tell you where the target is.  You'd drive over--fly over to the target and drop bombs.  And basically, what you would do is fly over to the target area, you'd team up with a FAC, which was a Forward Air Control, a little bitty airplane.  You'd shoot a little rocket at a point in the jungle there and said, put your bombs there, you know.  That's what we did.  I still remember that, some of that, you know.  You would get scrambled--those were the best missions solo.  You know, some, some platoon was in trouble.  They were under fire.  They needed air support.  They had, they would scramble you off the alert pad.  You run out, jump into your fighter.  You'd roar off, you know, two ship, four ship, three ship--three ship primarily.  And you would, you know, fly to the--as you were taking off, they'd tell you where you were headed.  You show up at some place and you, you knew that somebody needed your bombs on target, you know, big time.  You were saving somebody's butt on the ground.  So, and those were the most exciting.  A lot of times you, you drop bombs in support of ground operation.  We dropped bombs in Vietnam on truck parts.  We dropped bombs in Laos on truck parts, you know, so all that sort of stuff.  So, (unclear) a lot.  So it's a very, it was a very good, it was a very interesting nine months.  I was over there during the seven-day Israeli War.  I still remember that.  I still remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) It's called the Six-Day War.
Speaker 2: Six-Day War.  I remember being pissed because the Israelis did what, what--they got it done in six days, and we were, we were still playing around in Vietnam.  I was over there during--
Speaker 1: That's 1967, Six-Day War.
Speaker 2: --during Christmas of '67 [1967] when the guys in Ubon [Vietnam] got together and did a MiGs sweep and shot down seven MiGs over North Vietnam.  They set 'em up and, you know, [Daniel] Chappie James [Jr; fighter pilot in the U.S. Air Force, who in 1975 became the first black American to reach the rank of four-star general] and Robin Olds [fighter pilot and general officer in the U.S. Air Force], you know.  So I remember all of that, you know.  But very interesting experience, you know, that sort of thing.  At the end of my assignment, I was pissed with the Air Force to some extent because this wasn't the way you exercised fire power, all that sort of stuff.  I'm convinced that we could have killed, we could have ended the war while I was over there, you know, but otherwise, neither here nor there; lost friends over there.  We lost, as a wing, we lost probably one or two birds a month, you know.  I still remember losing--my black roommate, Pinckney Mosley, waking me up one day and saying, we lost Larry, Larry Silvers.  He was dropping Napalm just North of Saigon.  I remember we had a three ship out of, out of our wing that went dropping bombs, Napalm just in the DMZ [The Korean Demilitarized Zone] between North and South Vietnam, two of the three, airplanes got shot down and those guys were prisoners of war for six or seven years.  Harold Munlux (ph.) is one of 'em.  So I remember all of that, you know.  I remember what it was like being, dropping bombs, but also being shot at and so forth and so on.  But nine months, so forth and so on, at the end of nine months, I left.  I--
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and basically, it was a year, it was a tour of duty for a year and they shortened it up, one month for each twenty missions over North Vietnam.  And I had sixty-five missions over North Vietnam, which meant my tour was nine months.  So it was, it was a growing experience, but I liked flying the machine, airplane, and great experience.
Story_ID: 28741
Speaker 1: Were you ever in a position where you were really--you really thought you were gonna get shot down or--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so though I do remember being shot at by a 85 millimeter.  I still remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's a round shot from the ground?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember flying North.  We were flying North one time.  We were in a four-ship.  We went trail, one right behind the other.  I was Number Four.  I remember seeing, being, puffs, puffs, puffs of smoke, you know, being shot at.  And I realized the North, the North Vietnamese were trying to get us, the Number Four guy and trying to get the last guy so the other people won't notice it.  I remember that.  I remember being shot at, Triple A, you know.  So you never really knew.  You were nervous going in.  You fly in, you go into Vietnam.  You're a new guy on, on the block.  It takes you a while to get used to combat situations.  You were sort of nervous.  Then you get comfortable with it, you know.  You eventually get comfortable with people shooting at you all the time or whatever.  And then you get nervous just before you come home.
Speaker 1: Now, I would guess, now, I don't know.  I'm, I don't know that, exactly what was going then, but it would seem to me that you would have more resistance from the ground, I guess, then from other planes?
Speaker 2: Yes, and never saw an airplane--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I wouldn't have guess that Vietnamese had much of an Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't have much of an Air Force.  Most, the, the biggest threat was being shot down by ground fire, you know.  Everybody with a little pop gun.  You, if you're dropping Napalm, in particular, and you're pretty low, it wasn't too--and I remember coming home and, and being in, refueling the airplane, there was a great big hole in the wing.  You never saw it.  Sometimes you saw the fire, sometimes you didn't.  So, that was, yeah, you know, we lost, the wing lost, I think one or two airplanes a month, yeah.
Story_ID: 28742
Speaker 1: I know there's a difference between being in something and then reading about it and watching it on TV and that sort of thing.  But did you have any, ever have any second thoughts or trepidations about being in Vietnam, being--it being such a controversial--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --war.
Speaker 2: No, I sort of, I recognized there was a lot of protests against it.  But when I was over there, my job was to get it done, you know.  My frustration was that we didn't do it well, you know, and we could have put the hammer to the, to those people and brought it to an end in a hurry.  We didn't do it.  We mealy moused them.  We didn't exercise the air power adequately, all that sort of stuff, you know.  If we had dropped heavy bombs on Hanoi Haiphong, we would have brought the war to an end in a much quicker time period.  No, we kept, you know, let's be nice to 'em, and you know, maybe they'll negotiate and all this crap.  No, if we put the, if we really put, you know--what we did in Kuwait, Colin Powell [General Colin Powell] and company.  They were all over in Vietnam.  They learned that lesson.  If you're gonna, if you're going to risk American lives, you really wanna bring in the big guns, you know, and you overwhelm 'em with that.  So I, and we didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Well, I think in Kuwait, they basically destroyed the Air Force, the Iraqi Air Force.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And they were like paralyzed after that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were, well, you know, but they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In Vietnam, you would have had to destroy cities, you know, basically to win--(unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, we could have done it.  We could have laid (unclear) waste to Hanoi Haiphong which was up north--
Speaker 1: Those are cities.  That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not just the Air Force or--
Speaker 2: Well, you don't have to destroy the city, but you could destroy a lot of the infrastructure, infrastructure in the city.  You would have closed off the port so that supplies couldn't get into Haiphong.  You can knock down all the bridges.  You can destroy the supply routes going from North to South Vietnam, (unclear) all that sort of stuff.  We just didn't do, I mean there were places where we flew over targets that we could have destroyed that would have eventually brought the, you know, dams and so forth, we could have brought the country to its knees.  We just didn't do it.  So, but it was, it was an enlightening experience, lost some friends over there.  I still know people whose names are on the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. I left Vietnam and I was disappointed in the fact that we didn't really apply the hammer to these people.
Story_ID: 28743
Speaker 1: So, but when I got out, I really--when I joined the [U.S.] Air Force, I really hadn't made any plans to stay.  I mean it was just only a temporary, I was just passing through, and so when I left Vietnam, I was thinking about getting out.  And basically, I had a commitment in the Air Force of four years because I had gone through pilot training.  I was a fighter pilot, and also this was '67 [1967], and so the war was heating up.  The Air Force really needed pilots because they were starting to cycle pilots through for their tours in Vietnam and all that sort of stuff.  So the Air Force needed--so when I came up on assignment, they asked me what I wanted to do.  For me the choice was either be a T-38 instructor pilot in the United States, go into Europe, go to Europe at F-4s, upgrade and then possibly go back or flying F-106s, which is air defense.  I decided to, I got tired of being away from home.  I wanted a day job, you know, so I decided to be an instructor pilot.  And so I got ordered to be a T-38 instructor pilot.  T-38 is a white supersonic twin engine, jet airplane, the same jet airplane that I learned to fly in.  And I got a slot as an instructor, and I, and my plan was to--I asked the Air Force to send me to either Reese Air Force Base in Lubbock [Texas], Randolph [Air Force Base] in San Antonio [Texas] or Williams [Air Force Base] in, in Phoenix [Arizona].  And the reason why I wanted to do that was I wanted to go back to school and get a master's degree in preparation to getting out.  And they sent me to Sheppard [Air Force Base] in Wichita Falls, Texas.  And that proved to be an excellent assignment.  I showed up at Sheppard, 36/30th flying training wing.  This was a wing that trained both U.S. pilots as well as German pilots.  The German training was taken out of Arizona and put at Sheppard at Wichita Falls, Texas.  The training program there was geared for fighter pilots because the Germans were going to F-104 star fighters, Navy and Air Force star fighters.  So it was a specialized pilot training to, for pilots going to fighters.  And I went there, and I spent five years as an instructor pilot, great assignment.
Speaker 2: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was very, it was very unexpected.  I showed up, I went through the pilot instructor training course at, in San Antonio, Randolph [Air Force Base] and then spent five years as a T-38 instructor pilot.  The thing that I enjoyed the most about it was I got good at it.  I was good at it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No doubt about it.  It took a while, but I was good at it.  And not only was I good at it, but people knew I was good at it, you know.  It was a great airplane.  I enjoyed the camaraderie with the students.  All my students graduated.  If you were my student, I'd make sure you got through the program.  And I had students who went to fighters or went to F-104s, went to--you know, all my students made it.  And I've, I've subsequently run into a few of those students.  Matter of fact, I ran into one of my students a couple of years ago.  I was in Germany on the twenty-fifth anniversary of my second space flight.  And I was at a heavy function in Berlin [Germany] with a lot of dignitaries, you know, as part of the space program and all that sort of stuff and was at a cocktail party and had a guy come up to me and say, "You know who I am?"  "No."  "I was one of your students."  That was impressive.  Retired Admiral in the German Navy, F-104 driver.  But four or five years as an instructor pilot.
Story_ID: 28744
Speaker 1: Once I got, once I got to Sheppard [Air Force Base, Wichita Falls, Texas, as an instructor pilot], I really wanted, I knew I wanted to be an aerospace engineer.  I enjoyed what I did.  I poked the Air Force about could I go to the academy and teach at the academy.  No, I didn't have--my academic qualifications weren't good enough for that.  They said I could come to the academy and be a, a guy who marched the troops around, the cadets around in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Drill instructor?
Speaker 1: Drill instructor, didn't wanna do that.  I applied, the Air Force has a program, a graduate program where they will send you back to grad school.  And I poked the Air Force about being an engineer in the Air Force, and the Air Force said in order for you to be an engineer in the Air Force, you have to have a master's degree.  So I poked the Air Force about going back to school and getting a master's degree.  They looked at my 2.44 average, and after laughing a few times, they basically said, well, you need to take a few courses, and, you know, strengthen your academic credentials before we even look at you.  So at the, during my five years at Sheppard, I was preparing to get out 'cause I knew that if I wanted to be an aerospace engineer, I would probably have to go back to school.  I was gonna go back to school on the GI bill.  I enjoyed flying jets, no doubt about it.  I liked what I was doing.  I got good at it, at Sheppard.  But I wasn't sure that I was gonna be in the Air Force or not.  So I, I took graduate, I took courses from the University of California, Berkeley, through correspondence.  I looked around the country to take, you know, I need to get prepared to go to grad [graduate] school.  I looked around the country.  There's no--nothing in Wichita Falls, Texas.  So I took courses through the University of California, Berkeley, math courses, took maybe three or four of 'em over three or four years while I was an instructor pilot 'cause I wasn't sure if I was gonna stay in or get out.  And then in '71 [1971], '72 [1972], '71 [1971], I was coming up on a point where I had to decide if I was gonna get in, stay in or get out.  And I applied for this graduate program at Penn--in the Air Force and got accepted, big break, got accepted.
Story_ID: 28745
Speaker 1: Tell us about Robert Lawrence [United States Air Force officer and the first African American astronaut].
Speaker 2: I don't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I never met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't know him.  I had--well, I'd probably heard about him, you know.  I knew he was a black pilot.  I wasn't sure if he was a test pilot or not, but he probably was.  He has a Ph.D. in chemistry, physical chemistry.  He's from Chicago [Illinois], okay.  The [U.S.] Air Force selected maybe, the DOD [Department of Defense] selected maybe twenty guys, primarily test pilots, to be in this man-orbiting laboratory, a laboratory in orbit.  They were training to do that.  Most of 'em were test pilots.  He was in that group.  He was, so they flew--he worked at Edwards Air Force Base [Lancaster, California].  The Air Force cancelled the program.  They cancelled the program for interesting reasons, but I won't go into that.  They cancelled the program.  These guys who were in the program, half of them went on, went to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to be NASA astronauts, and this is mid-'60s [1960s], '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. The other half stayed in their respective services.  And the dividing point was age.  Bob Lawrence was one of those that was selected to go to NASA to be a NASA astronaut.  He never got there because he was killed in a F-104 accident at Edwards [Air Force Base].  He was in a two-seat F-104, back seat, he was sitting in the back seat, F-104.  A guy in the front seat, I think it was (unclear) some sort of types of approaches and-or landings, and crash landed the vehicle.  He [Robert Lawrence] got killed in the back seat.  The guy in the--he was flying it in the front seat, I think, survived, seriously injured, but survived.  He was killed.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, so he was selected as an astronaut?
Speaker 2: No, he was not.
Speaker 1: He was not.
Speaker 2: No, he never made it to NASA.  He never made it to NASA.  He was in the man-orbiting laboratory program.  So he would have been an astronaut.  That's interesting.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I may be wrong on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I think subsequently, posthumously, they did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they always say--he's listed always as a--(simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Posthumously, posthumously, they did because they--because I think there's a monument down in Florida at the Cape [Canaveral] of guys who got killed as astronauts.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's on that list.  He's on that, he's in there.  So, and it was interesting because, you know, I never knew him.  I did meet his widow after I flew on my first flight in space, and there was a lot of traveling and hoopla.  I went to Chicago, spent a few days with, with his widow--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's Barbara Lawrence.
Speaker 2: --who never really got, who never really married, and his mother, spent a couple of days in Chicago as part of that, but, no, but never met the guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause he's always called the first black astronaut, even though Ed Dwight had been in a program--
Speaker 2: Well, him--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --too and never, neither one ever went into space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, neither one of 'em never--really, in the end, the first black astronaut is the guy you're looking at.  I'm--because I flew.  The other two guys, both of 'em, probably were selected, but they never made it.  Bob Lawrence got killed.  Ed Dwight was sort of pushed out.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 28746
Speaker 1: So I'm at Sheppard [Air Force Base, Wichita Falls, Texas], being a--I got selected for this Air Force program--
Speaker 2: This is 1971.
Speaker 1: This is 1971.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Got selected to go back to school, get a master's degree in aerospace engineering with a job as an aeronautical, aerospace engineer.  I was totally excited.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that was the clincher for me.  I'll stay in the [U.S.] Air Force.  My goal in life at that point was to be a Four-Star General, to be the guy who's responsible for R and D [research and development] and procurement of future Air Force airplanes.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I went to, in '72' [1972], I went to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio] for the master's degree program in the Air Force Institute of Technology [AFIT].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had, I showed up and I was well prepared for the program, having taken all those courses in preparation to go back to grad school.  So I showed up.  It must have been a class of about twenty or thirty of us.  When I showed up, I was, I was in the--the Air Force had me set up to go into the master's degree program with air weapons, master's degree in air weapons.  I didn't want that.  So I switched and decided I wanted to major in aerospace engineering.  So I flipped.  I did that.  I did so well in the program because I figured out how to study.  I'd get up every morning, I teamed up with another guy.  We'd go to, go to work.  I'd study, take classes, study, take classes at the end of the day, came home, studied till about ten o'clock at night, went to bed.  I probably should have done that at Penn State.  It never dawned on me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, you're more mature.  You're married, you've got a family--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, more mature and got, got a family, two kids, you know, wife [Linda Tull], all that sort of stuff.
Speaker 2: It sounds like you were really hungry to do this.
Speaker 1: Oh, I was hungry to be an aerospace engineer.  I would have jumped out if I--if I couldn't have been an aerospace engineer in the Air Force, I would have left.  Flying was nice, I enjoyed it, great fun, all that sort of stuff.  But I didn't wanna be a pilot.  I, you know, there are guys who like pilots, they're airline pilots.  They're, like Fred Greckcor (ph.)--I don't know if you've spoke with Fred Greckcor, guys who wanna be, yeah, no.  I'm an engineer.  And, and I mean that's why I tell people, I'm an aerospace engineer.  That's why I went to school at Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania].  That's, that's me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let me back up a bit, just one--so, at Sheppard [Air Force Base], the wife who had only two years at Penn State went back to school, got her master--got her bachelor's degree.  I encouraged that.  We got a car, kids went to nursery school.  She went to school.  She got her bachelor's degree.  She was majoring in business.
Speaker 2: She got that at Sheppard in Wichita--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: She got that at, she got--in Wichita Falls, Texas while we were stationed at Sheppard.  She got it at Midwestern [State] University.  I was big on that, hey, talk about, I could get run over by a bus, you know, whatever.  You know, you gotta be able to take care of the kids.  So I went to Wright-Patt [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base].  And I went through the master's degree program and was making all As.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Enjoyed it, figured out how to do it, had my act together.
Speaker 2: So did you stay on the base or--
Speaker 1: No, oh, we, we bought our first house--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We lived, in Sheppard, we lived on base.  We lived in our first house.  We, when we went to Wright-Patt, we bought our first house--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: $25,000 house.  I can't believe it.
Speaker 2: Near the base or--
Speaker 1: It was in Huber Heights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Huber Heights, suburb of Dayton, Ohio.  So I bought this house.  Kids were in third grade maybe, second and third grade.  I went to school every day.
Story_ID: 28747
Speaker 1: About nine months into the [master's] program [at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio], I was walking down the hall one day in school and a professor, Colonel Tully, came up to me and said, "Hey, you're doing well in the program.  You should think about staying on for the Ph.D. program," for which I said, well, you know, and my gripe about the master's degree program was, there was always other courses I wanted to take 'cause I liked the program.  And I was gonna graduate, and I wasn't gonna be able to take 'em.  And so I said, "Oh, oh, well, I don't know--", you know.  So I, I thought about it for a while, and then I spoke with three [U.S.] Air Force officers at Wright-Patterson, black Air Force officers who had Ph.D.s in aerospace engineering.  Wow.
Speaker 2: Do you remember who they were?
Speaker 1: I have 'em written down.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's--
Speaker 1: One was Horace Russell, who went on to be a One-Star General.  Another one was Ray--and Horace Russell was a branch chief in the Air Force Flight Dynamics lab.  Ray Jensen who was an instructor, professor of aerospace engineering at AFIT.  He was a major.  And then there was a third guy, and I don't remember his name right off bat, who was also a branch chief in the Flight Dynamics Lab, who has subsequently retired, and he's a professor at the University of Cincinnati [Ohio].  But I went out and spoke with all three of these guys. Didn't know, should I be a Ph.D. guy?  I talked to all three of 'em.  I looked at all three of these guys and to me they all walked on water.  Boy, wouldn't I like--isn't that cool?  Can't believe, three Air Force officers, majors, Ph.D.s, aerospace engineers, wow.
Speaker 2: Now, is this the same Ray Jensen that worked for Ford [Motor Company]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right, we interviewed him.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, you've run into him?  Good, I'm glad you did.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, yes.  So, in my opinion, all three of those guys walked on water, leaped tall buildings with a single bound.  I was in awe.  All of 'em basically said the same thing.  Yeah, go get it, you know, go get it.  So they all gave me similar advice.  So I decided I'd go for the Ph.D. program.  The only problem was, I had get approved by the [U.S.] Air Force.  The Air Force had to approve it.  They had to, they knew I was coming up for promotion to major.  They wanted to make sure that I could make it as a major, even while still being a student, you know, my training reports, my evaluation reports were such that when I hit the promotion board, it would be training reports on top 'cause I was still a student.  They said, yeah, you're strong enough to do that.  So they approved me staying on at AFIT for the Ph.D. program.  So while I was completing the master's degree program, I started to take Ph.D. courses.
Story_ID: 28748
Speaker 1: And I graduated from the master's degree program [at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio] in '74 [1974]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I was the top guy in my class.  I got the Mervin E. Gross Award for being the, being the valedictorian of the class.  I still remember that.  My mother [Harriett Lolita Brice Bluford] contacted me--interestingly enough, my mother contacted me when I was graduating from pilot training.  I still remember that, wanna come out to Arizona and see you get your wings.  Okay, mom, ghee, surprised to see that, coming from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She said, and seeing you getting your master's degree, I'll come out and see that.  Okay (unclear).  And so I was the valedictorian of my class and stayed on for the Ph.D. program, did coursework.  The Ph.D. program required six--let's see, the master's degree program, I think was 40, 45 hours.  The Ph.D. program required sixty hours of academics, had to choose a minor.  I chose laser physics out of the blue.  I had to minor in laser physics.  I minored in mathematics, majored in aerospace, Ph.D. program, sixty hours.  At the end, I had to take a, an exam in laser physics, three-hour exam in laser physics, had to take a three-hour math exam, a six-hour exam in aerospace.  I had to do orals.  I had to take a language, I took French, and then after completing all that, I wasn't through.  I had to still do a dissertation.
Speaker 2: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, in '75-ish [1975], I completed all of that, and was assigned to the Air Force Flight Dynamics Lab at Wright-Patterson to do a dissertation.  And I was a major at the time.  I had a choice.  I could, I could have gone to Wright-Patterson, I could have gone to Albuquerque [New Mexico] and worked with the Airborne Laser Lab.  I had a choice between those two, and I chose to stay at Wright-Patt.  And so I went to the Air Force Flight Dynamics Lab and was a major there and did my dissertation there in computational fluid dynamics.  I worked for a guy.  His name is John Catowsky (ph.).  And he brought me into the branch, his branch.  He was running a branch.  And, basically, he had been a professor at AFIT, and he basically said, you have two years.  Get it done, you know, I'll stay out of your way, take care of you, get it done.  I worked, I ran around for quite a while, to try and find a topic.  I finally found a topic in computational fluid dynamics, which meant I wrote a computer code that solved the governing equations for flows and hypersonic flows.
Story_ID: 28749
Speaker 1: Now, is this the paper entitled 'A Numerical Solution for the Supersonic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and Hypersonic--
Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Vicious Flow in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Around Thin Planar Delta Wings' [A Numerical Solution for the Supersonic and Hypersonic Viscous Flow Around Thin Planar Delta Wings].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: All right, can you kind of explain that to us, what that's about, in language that we might be able to follow?
Speaker 2: Hypersonic flow is flows greater than five times the speed of sound, okay.  Delta wings are triangular delta wings.  I wrote a computer code that described the flow around a delta wing at hypersonic speeds.  And the computer code told--gave you temperature, pressure, velocity, measurement around hypersonic--at hypersonic speeds, around delta wings, triangular wings.  The--very complicated computer code.  I will tell you, it took--, the computer code ran for fifteen hours in order to come up with a solution, had to run the code fifteen hours to come--and I would go over to the computer center at night.  I would run the code an hour and stop it and freeze the solution.  The next night, I would take that frozen solution, run it another hour.  So it would take me a little over two weeks to get a solution.  So, it took me nine months, a year to get the code running, running right.  At the end of the two years, I had completed, solved the problem.  All I had to do is write the dissertation.  No, no, it's--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was, this is considered a contribution to advance the field of aerodynamics (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, big time, yeah, yeah.  The dissertation is an original piece of work where no one--you're solving a problem or getting a piece of data, and it's never been done before.  So that's what this was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So this, are these computations still useful for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the [U.S.] Air Force (unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I got a flight dynamics lab report on what I did.  Besides my dissertation, I have technical papers on the work that I did, and you can pull 'em up some place, you know, so, yeah--
Speaker 1: I know it was, it's been published a couple of times, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you often cited?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'm often cited.  At this stage, remember this was '78 [1978], you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The world has gone by and whatever.  So I worked on it for two years, and got to the point where I was pretty much completed it.
Story_ID: 28750
Speaker 1: And then I, they assigned me--they made me branch chief of the aerodynamics and air frame branch [at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio].  And I led that for about a year as I--
Speaker 2: Is this still in Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, still in Dayton, Air Force Flight Dynamics Lab.  It was a great job.  I was running the branch of forty-five or fifty engineers who were doing cutting-edge research in aerospace engineering.  We had two wind tunnels.  We did all sorts of great work, flows over wings, computational fluid dynamics, all sorts of aero--we were the researchers, [U.S.] Air Force, in the Air Force for aerospace, for airplanes, in particular.  So I ran that branch for a year, little over a year, great job--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I could have done that forever.
Speaker 2: So, is--was Titus Hall the commander over there at that time, Titus Hall?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  But there was a black commander over there, I think in the mid-'70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Could very easily have been.
Speaker 2: --Titus Hall.
Speaker 1: Could have, yeah.  The name sounds familiar, but I don't know him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was a great job.  It was a great job.  In '77 [1977], I was coming up for reassignment in the Air Force.  The Air Force said, hey, you're a pilot.  You've been out of the cockpit for almost six years.  You need to get back into the cockpit.  We need to throw you back into the cockpit in order for us to continue to pay you flight pay, which is fine.  So, in '77 [1977], I was still finishing up my Ph[D]-dissertation [Ph.D. degree in aerospace engineering], running this engineering branch, and I was iterating with the Air Force about a flight assignment, you know, assignment after the laboratories, and I wanted to get into fighters, hadn't been in fighters, tried to get into fighters, kept dealing with the Air Force, couldn't get in the fighters.  Air Force wanted me to go back and be an instructor pilot, T-37 instructor pilot.  I didn't really wanna be a T-37 instructor pilot.  I also did not want to--I wanted to stay in the engineering business.  Here I was a Ph.D., I was a black--imagine this.  I'm a black Air Force officer, pilot, only three percent, with a Ph.D. in aerospace engineering.  From the Air Force's point of view, I was just an average guy.  I still think about that.  I mean it doesn't make any--
Speaker 2: They want you to instruct T-37s.
Speaker 1: They want me at T-37s.  I did not--it didn't make any sense.  My goal in life was to help Air Force develop the latest and greatest in reference to technologies associated with airplanes.  They would have pulled me out, and I would a been a T-37 instructor pilot for three years.  I would have come out of that too far behind to get back into the career field that I wanted to, and too rusty to do it.  That didn't make any sense.  So I was constantly banging on the Air Force, and I wasn't getting anywhere with 'em.  In '77 [1977], I saw these advertisements for the space shuttle, wasn't sure, you know, sounded interesting.  But I'm an airplane guy.  I wasn't a space guy.  They wouldn't select me anyway.  NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] went out for a call for astronauts for this thing called the space shuttle.  And I was uncertain at the time.  But eventually, I decided, hey, let me apply.  You know, I'll apply for the program.  I'll let the Air Force--I'll let NASA tell me "no."  And so in '77 [1977], I applied for the astronaut program.
Story_ID: 28751
Speaker 1: In order to apply for the astronaut program in the [U.S.] Air Force, you apply through the Air Force.  The Air Force, you have a competition in the Air Force.  About a thousand officers in the Air Force applied to go into the astronaut program.  The Air Force had a board.  They evaluated these officers.  And they selected about a hundred of us and forwarded our names to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] for submission into the astronaut program.  So, and the [U.S.] Navy did that, the [U.S.] Army did that, the [U.S.] Marines did that.  So the services all forwarded these names of these officers, and, and I was put in a pool of about 8,000 people applying for the shuttle program.  I don't know, did you do this thing with Fred Gregory [former NASA astronaut and former NASA Deputy Administrator]?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Fred Gregory did the same thing.  He did not get selected by the Air Force and in random, and got into the astronaut program besides that and pissed off a bunch of Air Force people and NASA people, but got away with it.  So I got selected as a, as a military candidate for the astronaut program and my name was put in.  In the summer of '77 [1977], NASA took these 8,000 people and whinnied them down to 200 finalists.  They would send you a letter if you did not get selected for the program.  And so during the summer of '77 [1977], I was waiting for what happened to me, if I was gonna get a letter or not get a letter.  NASA sent people out to ask about me, all that sort of stuff.  And I was selected as a finalist.  They, in the summer of '77 [1977], they would select twenty people at a time as finalists.  They'd notify, you'd go to Houston [Texas] for a week for an evaluation, physical and so forth, and so forth.  And you'd see the names in the newspaper.  So, in the newspaper, it was big news, hey.  You know, such and such (unclear) was selected as a finalist.  In October of '77 [1977], October of '77 [1977], I was on travel.  I was in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and on a Thursday night, I came back to my hotel room.  There was a little note on the door which said contact (unclear) up at NASA, and I did that and found out that I was a finalist.  I was a finalist in the eighth group of ten, of ten classes of finalists.  I called back to my base.  I told, I called back to talk to my boss.  I said, hey, boss, these guys want me to go down to Houston.  They want me there this Sunday.  I can't make it on Sunday 'cause I won't be back, back home until Friday night.  I have to get orders, and all that sort of stuff.  You know, I can't do that.  I was gonna tell NASA to put me off a week.  He said, no way, Jose.  He cut orders for me, got me tickets.  I showed up on Friday.  He gave me tickets on Sunday.  I went to Houston and spent a week with nineteen other people as finalists for the astronaut program; fabulous experience.  I had nine--I was competing with nineteen other people who all leaped tall buildings with a single bound, walked on water, fabulous people.  I was impressed.  They gave you a physical that could last a week.  I got to meet astronauts.  I was excited.  You know, I met some nice, you know, walk by the office.  They gave you pit briefings on the space program.  It was interesting.  I wanted, I went over and talked to the aero guys about the aerodynamics of the shuttle 'cause I was curious about how they were doing that, got to see--got a couple of sessions with psychiatrists, all that sort of stuff.  And they take you all the way through this week.  At the end of the week, they say, thank you, and send you back home.  They don't tell you how well you did, how badly you did, anything.  They don't tell you anything.  They do say, we will not pass any information on to your military service.  So that was fine because they didn't want Air Force, they didn't want pilots to come in and they discover something, and they tell the Navy or Air Force, and they ground them.  And the physicals were good.  I mean they were--they made the military physicals look like chinsey stuff.  This was a physical.  So, 200 people, ten sets--ten ten groups of twenty.  I was in Group No. 8.  I left in October.  When I left, I told them, told them, I get my Air Force, Air Force physical in November.  If I pass my Air Force physical, let the Air Force know so I don't have to take the physical in November.  They did that.  When they notified the Air Force that I passed my Air Force physical, they said, he passed his astronaut physical as well, wasn't sure.  So, November, December of '77 [1977] went by.  Nothing.  In January of '78 [1978], I was driving to work one Monday morning and heard that NASA had selected thirty-five astronauts.  I said to myself, ghee, I hadn't gotten the letter in the mail, no, you know.  I was expecting this, thank you for applying.  NASA was very good at sending out letters when they eliminated people, and got to work one Monday morning in January.  NASA was going to notify--let people, you know, they would, to announce to the world the thirty-five astronauts.  I was curious of who got it.  I was at work for maybe half hour, forty-five minutes when I got this call from a guy by the name of George Abby, who started off by saying, "I'm George Abby.  I'm at Houston, and all that sort of stuff.  He asked me what the weather was like up in Dayton [Ohio].  This was the summer [winter] of '78 [1978], the weather up here was miserable, worst winter in a long time, terrible winter.  I mean people still talk about the winter of '78 [1978] up here, just miserable winter.  I moaned and groaned about the winter for five minutes, you know.  And he listened.  And then he said, very calmly, "You know it doesn't snow in Houston.  Would you like to come to Houston?"  I said, "Yeah." And he told me I'd gotten selected for the astronaut program.  They called all 200 people that very day, and thirty-five of us got selected, fabulous.
