Story_ID: 187311
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Beverly Martin.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: And spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Irma Barber, I-R-M-A, B-A-R-B-E-R.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I should have put Mason in there.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's the name you're, you're--
Speaker 2: My maiden name.
Speaker 1: Your maiden name, right.  Mason, M-A-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: M-A-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, Sunday, March the 13th, 1904.
Speaker 1: Alright and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Or you mean be--
Speaker 1: Or what was it, yeah.
Speaker 2: What was it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was, yeah I--really, recording secretary.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the.
Speaker 1: Eighteenth.
Speaker 2: The eighteenth.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yesterday was St. Patrick.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Seventeenth.
Speaker 1: And this is--what, what year is this?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: What, what year is it?
Speaker 2: What is this year now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: And, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my apartment, 4850 South Lake Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 187312
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five kind of People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer.  The first question is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I don't know if this is considered--garlic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More, you want five?
Speaker 1: No, just one, just one favorite.  But there are five questions, though.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: That was the first question.  The second question is what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Aquamarine.
Speaker 1: Okay and ma'am, what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I did have when I worked, and it was California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the fall.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well I have one.  It'll go in one ear and out the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what was the other one, I just used it this morning?  I can't remember.
Story_ID: 187313
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your, your family origins.  How far can you trace your family back?  I mean how far do they go back?  Are there stories from the 19th century about where your family--
Speaker 2: Eighteen--like my--what you mean my older sisters or something?
Speaker 1: No, not just your sisters.  As far back as your family goes, your great, great, great, great--how far can you go back?
Speaker 2: My mother [Albertine Mason].
Speaker 1: Can you go--
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: Can you go past your mother, your great-grandparents or anything like that, or great, great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me how far you can go back.
Speaker 2: Well my mother was 1870.
Speaker 1: She was born in 1870, all right, okay.  Now did, did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandparents slightly.  My--Paul, that picture you had there, and Filamena.
Speaker 1: Masons or, or--
Speaker 2: Boucrees.
Speaker 1: Okay, Boucrees, okay.  How do you spell Boucree?
Speaker 2: B-O-U-C-R-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did they--did your grandparents tell you any stories or anything about, about life before the Civil War or any of that, any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: About any, any of the struggles during Reconstruction or, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  Did they talk about the cultural origin of your family?  You're from Louisiana, were your family Creoles on the Boucree side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were Creoles.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did they have any, any stories around that, you know, around being a Creole?  Any songs or, or anything that they passed down that you'd know about?  Customs or--
Speaker 2: Not that I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I left there when I was twelve.  And before that, really there wasn't much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they didn't have any French songs or any words or any, any peculiarities to being Creole that they exhibited that you know of.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 187314
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your mother.  What's her name?  Can you give us her name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Albertine, A-L-B-E-R-T-I-N-E Mason.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was she born?  You said 1870, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she born in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes she was.
Speaker 1: All right, and what, what was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well my--as I remember my mother was more or less very hard working.  My father died when we were young.  I was, I think I was six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother used to wash and at that time they were, they were--the men wore the pongee suits.
Speaker 1: What kind of suits?
Speaker 2: Pongee, you know they were white.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And my mother used to wash and iron those suits.  And my sister would deliver them.  Sometimes she would go even before school.  And this was after my father [Jefferson Mason] had passed.
Speaker 1: Was it really hard on your mother after your father passed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was limited jobs or anything to do.  But we had a--we never complained.  She always seemed to make out very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you, you, do you know very much about your mother's childhood?  How she grew up or--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Did she go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  First of all, they were real good Catholics.  Very Christian and always went to church and everything.  Yeah, she went to school but I don't remember the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Did she attend the Catholic school?
Speaker 2: She did for a while.  I don't know how far in the grades that she go.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of skills did your mother possess?
Speaker 2: She could--first she played the piano very well.  But after they married and began having children, she just got away from it because she used to teach lesson, piano.  And she sewed very well.  Would make our clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she play piano at church at all?  Did she ever do that?
Speaker 2: No, not at church, but she had students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she taught piano in, in New Orleans when you were, when you, when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: A little girl, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What else?  What, what kind of personality did your mother have?
Speaker 2: She was a very (unclear) a very easy going person (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any, any outstanding memories of your mother that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things I remember, my mother was never in a hospital.  She were--we were of course all born at home.   And she was a person that if we--when our children were coming up, if they were sick, before we'd call a doctor, we'd call Mama.  She would look at a child and the first thing she would tell them she'd see that their bowels are clean.  And then we--if she would tell us I think you better see a doctor.  Otherwise, she would always pray.  She was a very devoted person and believed in prayers.
Story_ID: 187315
Speaker 1: Now what about your father?  Can you give us his name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Well his name was Jefferson [Mason].  You want me to spell it?
Speaker 1: His, his first name was Jefferson?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not too sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds like it.
Speaker 2: Mason.  His mother name was Julia.  And he had two sisters, Phoebe and Portia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is Phoebe spelled P-H-O-E-B-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and Portia, P-O-R-T-I-A?
Speaker 2: I imagine.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, so what did your father do?  What did he--where did he go to--did he go to school or did he have a chance to, to do any of that?
Speaker 2: Well he--I'm sure he went to--when I, I was never told just what school he went to.
Speaker 1: Was he a Catholic too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Was he from New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: He was--I think he was from Mississippi, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well at first they, they took him to be white.  And he was employed as a--I don't know if I'm going to pronounce this right, and if you were know what it is, a cistern, sitren, sister--these big things that held water.
Speaker 1: Cistern, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what he was connected with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he knew how to, how to operate a cistern.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To purify water?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, they thought he was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had they thought he was black, would, would they have let him--
Speaker 2: No, he wouldn't have been employed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So there were strict segregation laws in Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell, tell me more about your father.  What, what kind of a personality did he have?
Speaker 2: He was a very easygoing person also.  And I can--one of the things I can remember so well that my mother [Albertine Mason] used to--on Sunday mornings she would dress us and he would always take us over to visit his mother.  That was his Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so--and are there any outstanding stories about him that you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm getting--I'm getting him mixed up with my husband [Vaughn Barber] now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187316
Speaker 1: I want you to try to reflect back on your childhood and--tell me how many brothers and sisters you had.  Tell me--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one brother and three sisters and myself.  We were four girls and one boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you want the name of my sisters?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: My oldest sister was Maudine.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-A-U-D-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born in 1896.  And my brother was James, J-A-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in 1898.  And my sister was Edna, Filamena, and she was born in 1900.  Then of course I was 1904, and my youngest sister was Deborah, D-E-B-O-R-A-H.  She was born in 1906.
Speaker 1: Now is, is her name--yeah her name was spelled like most people--well--
Speaker 2: Not Debra.  It's Deborah.
Speaker 1: Deborah.
Speaker 2: Like the Bible.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.  Okay now are any of your brothers and sisters alive now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right, so you're the last one.
Speaker 2: I'm the last.
Speaker 1: Now what were they like?  What, what were their personalities like?  Starting from the be--the first one going all the way through.
Speaker 2: My, my oldest sister.  You mean in the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's just go, go through each one and, and talk about their personalities, what they were like.
Speaker 2: Well we, we got along so well.  I'm just kind of wondering what my--
Speaker 1: I suppose they all had different things they did or different talents, or different abilities, they looked different, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: Well my sister Maude, she used to love to read.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother loved horses.  We lived across the street from a stable and he would go over there and help, even though he was quite young.  He would be around that, that's one thing he liked very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he liked horses.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And well he left for--he left New Orleans [Louisiana] before we did.  And at that time, 1918, well 1917 maybe, they began taking the boys of 18 and over and take them here north to work.  And that's how he left New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Did he come directly to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He came to Chicago to work.  And then he was supposed to--he sent for my mother.  I mean he encouraged my mother to bring us.  But when we got there, it was quite a story.  But when we got here, he had left Chicago and he had gone to Iowa to work in the oatmeal factory.  And we didn't get in touch with him again until about the next year or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about your other sisters?  Your other two sisters.
Speaker 2: Well Edna, Edna was the 1900.  She was--when my father [Jefferson Mason] passed, my grandmother and aunt, they really took her to raise.  They--not to live, but to dress her and feed her.  But then she would come home and sleep with the family.  And she went to school.  And went as far as the eighth grade, and had a nice graduation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Deborah was--went to school and she became a beautician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's years later.  We, we attended Catholic school up to about the third grade, and then we went to public school.
Story_ID: 187317
Speaker 1: Now I want you to reflect back on your childhood and you know, and tell us some details because we weren't there.  I, I, I'd like to know about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana] in, in your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: The sound.  I don't know, but the smells I know we had a lot of trees, magnolia trees.  And I don't know about the--strange sounds.  I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  Well what did your, your street look like?
Speaker 2: My street?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you grew up on.
Speaker 2: Well they, they were very small, narrow.  And they were all bricked.  And we--even though they was very prejudice there, we lived on a street where there was a Dutch family I can remember, that was our very best friends.  And they were about two doors from where we lived.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it a Dutch family on your, your block?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was the rest of the block integrated?  Was it black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no it was mostly black.
Speaker 1: Most--mostly black but there were some other--
Speaker 2: Well the only family that I, I remember well was that family.
Speaker 1: The Dutch family.
Speaker 2: The Dutch family.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And we lived--the block we lived on, we had pictures of those.  And my grandmother lived next door.  And there was quite a, a, a space between my grandmother's home and the yard we called it, and our home.
Speaker 1: So it was a big yard?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandmother.  And I can remember well that she had trees like fig trees and fruit trees, like that.
Speaker 1: So was the fruit good?
Speaker 2: Boy, but we were only allowed to take from the, the branches that was over in our yard because my grandmother preserved the others.  And she always made the bread.  I can remember that very well.  She would make bread for us and for herself, we seldom bought bread.
Speaker 1: So she was a good baker.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is your mother's [Albertine Mason] mother or your father's [Jefferson Mason] mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Your mother's mother, all right.
Story_ID: 187318
Speaker 1: So what were some of the--your, your favorite foods when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was coming up?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We had a, we had a lot of beans and we had a lot of--we didn't have at that time greens that much, but we did have naturally gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had like grits and salt pork was something that--it was quite a bit, sort of like bacon here, but, but salt pork in the morning, grits.  And everybody drank a lot of coffee.
Speaker 1: Even the children?
Speaker 2: No, no, not the children.  And they always--another thing at, at meal time, they always had wine.
Speaker 1: Do you think that was a carryover from the French customs?
Speaker 2: I think so.  And the, the vegetable was cabbage.
Speaker 1: Lots of cabbage.  Now what about fish?
Speaker 2: My goodness, I'm forgetting fish.  Yes.  A lot of fish.  And I can't remember exactly what fish it was because now I'm, I'm--it's quite different with me.  I don't know what--but we used to have--they used to have fish fries on Saturdays, Fridays or Saturdays.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And like oysters, all that stuff.
Story_ID: 187319
Speaker 1: Yeah, was church a big part of your life when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes we would go to church.  Now wait, I'm gonna go back.  We always went to church on Sundays.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: St. Dominic [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was the Catholic church and McDonald's was the, the public school.  But St. Dominic's was our Catholic school that we went to.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And then St. Stephen's Catholic Church [New Orleans, Louisiana] is where I was baptized.  And we always was baptized the first Sunday after we were born regardless of how small.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was the church integrated?
Speaker 2: Well the--no, this way we had to sit in the back.
Speaker 1: Okay, so black parishioners had to sit in the back of the church.
Speaker 2: Black, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you ever remember any, any discussion about that amongst the black people or the white people about somebody that either wouldn't do it, or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So pretty much people--
Speaker 2: Nothing like Rosa Parks.
Speaker 1: Okay, not yet.
Speaker 2: Not yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the name of your neighborhood?  Did, did your neighborhood have a certain name to it, or part of town, side of town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were in the French part of town, the street I was on was Prairie [possibly Praro or Prieur].  But it wasn't spelled like--I really don't remember it, but it was not spelled like we spell Prairie here.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was in the French Quarter?
Speaker 2: I don't think we were in the French Quarter.
Speaker 1: But it was a French part of town?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time we only had one streetcar.
Speaker 1: You remember the name of the streetcar?
Speaker 2: The--I don't know because that, that's the only streetcar that's running now still.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's the only streetcar in New Orleans that's running now?  I mean at this time?  Is the one that you took?
Speaker 2: Well the one that I know that runs through the neighborhoods where I lived.
Story_ID: 187320
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well when we were quite young, we played a lot with dolls.  And that's how we learned how to sew quite a bit.  We had three little girls neighbors that lived on the--another street from us and our backyards met.  And we would--there was a panel that was taken out of the fence.  That's how we would commute.  And three that were each were one of the same age as I was.  And one Odessa and Audrey, Francis.  And they were the same age with either one of us.  And we played quite a bit with dolls.  We made--we sewed quite a bit.  My aunt was a seamstress and she helped us.
Speaker 1: So she kind of taught you how--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How to do it properly.
Speaker 2: And our dolls were china.  Their heads were china, no hair or anything.
Speaker 1: Made out of porcelain?
Speaker 2: Porcelain, porcelain I mean.  And, and the sawdust bodies.
Speaker 1: Okay, so sawdust is stuffed as a cotton, kind of fabric or something?
Speaker 2: Not fabric, it's mostly like a grain or something, sawdust.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know, that's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187321
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what about music in the neighborhood?  I know New Orleans [Louisiana] is famous for music.  Was there a lot of music around you in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, but I tell you one thing I can remember very well.  We had a--because it isn't there anymore.  It was a, a market that was extended a whole block.  And then we had like when you spoke of Mardi Gras at--what I remember very well at Mardi Gras, that market stayed open all night.  And of course they, they sold all kind of foods and everything.  And then we had the grocery store was like opposite, and it was called Sampe [ph.] and I wouldn't know how to spell it.
Speaker 1: Now did you participate in Mardi Gras when you were a, a young person in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you know I left there when I was fourteen.  But I can say this much.  My, my father [Jefferson Mason] used to take us to the parade.  They just as they have now I think is three special parades.  And then they had on the Mardi Gras day, they had different groups of like it was Indians.  I know it was like a club I guess or what, what they would come through the streets and singing and whatnot.  That was on Mardi Gras day.
Speaker 1: What, what did it look like?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Mardi Gras.
Speaker 2: What did it look like?
Speaker 1: In those days.  Is it any different from what it looks like now?
Speaker 2: No, I think it was very much--probably it was updated by the floats--and they would, would be dressed like kings and that sort of thing.  And they would throw candy out to the people.  And people would line up the streets.
Speaker 1: And did the children get the candy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, children was supposed to catch, try to catch the candy.
Speaker 1: So, so you don't remember any music out in your neighborhood much in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is there very much music in the church?  It was a church--pretty somber.
Speaker 2: No, the church was--I can remember the--more or less a lot of the same songs that we have now.  Seem to be.
Speaker 1: Traditional or gospel songs?  Like Catholic, Catholic songs?
Speaker 2: Catholic songs.  All of my people were Catholics.
Speaker 1: Did they have any other kinds of churches in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well there was--
Speaker 1: Any other denominations?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were Baptist.  But I never attended.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in those days were there any black priests?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.  However in later years, my cousin became a priest, but not then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I hear that you were fond of gingerbread.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And who made the gingerbread?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay the one that lived next door?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was that real gingerbread with (unclear).  And real gingerbread.
Speaker 1: Okay, not like we have now, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was real.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I tell you what.  Things didn't taste, doesn't taste now like it taste then.  I can know now that lima beans or red beans.  I've been trying to get the taste just like when I was little, but I, I don't seem to.  And of course we ate a lot of rice and always rice at every meal.
Story_ID: 187322
Speaker 1: Well what, what other things did you like to do?  Did you like to read when you were little, or did you like to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did like to read because I used to say if I ever had any children, I wanted them to always be well educated and have a--more than my education was limited.  So I wanted them to be well educated.  And one thing that was said one time I told my mother [Albertine Mason] that the, the teacher told him, says I think if the school would burn down, Irma wouldn't leave her desk.  Because I was so much for education.  But my father [Jefferson Mason] passed before I could really realize a good education.  But I did see to give it to my children.
Speaker 1: So when your father passed, it put a strain on the family to earn money?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, the only one was my, as I told you, my mother.  And she, she earned the money by doing this laundry work.
Speaker 1: So did, did, did you have to work too at that point?
Speaker 2: I began working after I came up here when I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why I didn't go, go back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in school in New Orleans [Louisiana] until you were fourteen and then you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then the family moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what, what kind of a person were you when you were coming up?  Did you have a lot of friends, or quiet or--
Speaker 2: I was very quiet.  And it seems liked to stay to myself quite a bit.  I would--if my mother wanted us--me to go to the store, now my--I would--and my, and my sister had to do some work.  I would ask her let me do your work and you go to the store in my place.  I didn't care about going that much.  But I had friends and we played quite a bit.
Story_ID: 187323
Speaker 1: Who were your favorite teachers at school?  Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well we--in the beginning we were taught by nuns.  And I really don't remember a favorite name.  But the one thing I can remember that when I, when I was confirmed and the bishop asked how many would want to become priests.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: When I was confirmed and the bishop asks how many wanted to become priests, and they raised their hand.  And he asked about how many wanted to become nuns.  And naturally my hands went up.  That was what I wanted to be.  I wanted to be a nun and to teach school.  But my mother [Albertine Mason] told me that I should not, I should forget about that because I would have to go to school and she could not afford to send me, and I would have to graduate and all; she explained it to me.  But I still held that I wish I had become a nun.
Speaker 1: You think now that you would have been happier if you had become a nun?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I have a lovely family and I think I did very well in raising my family after my husband passed at a young age.  So I don't think I would have been.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in those days you wanted to be a nun.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you really admire the nuns who were the teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Can, can you remember any of their names?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now do you--did you--what about the priests in the church, were they, were they, were they pretty kind people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very much so.  I can't even remember their names.  I mean as a child I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now what about your relatives, your adult relatives?  Did you have favorite relatives?  Did, did you like some more than others?
Speaker 2: No.  I know my mother's brothers and we had one uncle that used to come by.  He had his children that came quite a bit, we were in different neighborhoods.  And he would bring those children over.  I didn't have contact much with the, with the relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay just with your grandmother (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You said your father [Jefferson Mason] would take you over to see his mother.
Speaker 2: His mother, yes.
Speaker 1: On Sundays.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 187324
Speaker 1: How old were you when your father [Jefferson Mason] died?
Speaker 2: What's that?  What did you ask?
Speaker 1: How old were you when your father died?
Speaker 2: I think I was about six.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened to him?
Speaker 2: Well yes because we at that time called it indigestion.  Undoubtedly it might have been a heart.  He was sick about four days.  And I can remember Deborah, my youngest sister, I can remember while he was sick, that she would get in the bed and want to comb his hair.  And she was about two I guess.
Speaker 1: Now was, was he much older than your mother [Albertine Mason]?
Speaker 2: Than my mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Forgot to get his age.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm getting confused when, when he passed.  You mean I forgot to get his age.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I forgot to ask you his age.  I mean, I mean when he was born, to tell the truth.  But was he much older than your mother, you know, or when, when was he born?  You said she was born in 1870, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's what I, I think that's why I'm telling my children things they should have asked and I wish I had asked my, like my father.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So you, you don't know what age you was when he died?
Speaker 2: No, but I know he was young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Forty, forty-eight when he died.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  They weren't that far apart I guess in age.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  See I'm kind of getting him confused with my husband, with like the age 'cause my husband was older than I.
Story_ID: 187325
Speaker 1: Did you attend high school before you moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I was--when I--I only went to the seventh grade.  And when I came to Chicago, as I told you it was during the war [World War I, WWI].  And I, instead of going to, back to school, I went to work.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I worked in a raincoat factory.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago or in--
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: All right.  Before we get into that, tell me about the move to Chicago.  How did you move?  I mean what happened?
Speaker 2: That was quite a move. Okay.
Speaker 1: As I said, my brother [James Mason] was supposed to have made arrangements to meet my mother [Albertine Mason].  And for some reason or other, they had moved him to Iowa without telling--he wasn't able to tell my mother.  So we arrived in the old Dearborn Station in Chicago.
Speaker 2: So you came by train.
Speaker 1: By train.  And there were--I think in the beginning I told you my sisters and my aunt, there were about seven of us or so.  And at that time in the station they had Red Caps.  And we arrived in the morning.  And all day we were waiting for Jimmy.  So when it was beg- getting ready to--it was a little late.  And one of the porters came and he told my mother, he says, "Looks like you probably have missed your son."  He says, "You're gonna have to try to find some place to go."  So he says, "I have an aunt that will have--rent out rooms."  You know at that time people had, had these rooms and they would rent them quite a bit.  And he said he'd call, he will contact his aunt and ask her did she have any room.  And he, he did, but she said, "No, but send them here and maybe we can help them to find something."  So my sister Edna and my Aunt Sedonia [ph.], they went there to, I don't know really how they got there, to her, her aunt--to his aunt's house.  And when she--when the person opened the door to Edna's surprise it was a person, her name was Pearl [ph.] that she had graduated with in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so then the aunt and she, she didn't have any room.  But she got the Defender.  She says, "There's always rooms in the Chicago Defender."  And she looked in there and she says, "Well, here's two rooms.  And this would be maybe," I don't know whether they called or what, "but try these two rooms."  So Edna and my Aunt Sedonia, they came back and the, the rooms were at 22nd and Dearborn.  And it was in a, a red light district.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the vice district.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was terrible, it was terrible.  And so they, they did have the two rooms.  And I remember this vividly 'cause we had to sleep on the, the seats and things, nothing was clean.  We slept on all--had to--just as people would leave.  And in order to cook, they had to go down to the basement, and it was terrible.  Now how long we stayed there, I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 2: The stove was in the basement?
Speaker 1: Everything.  There, there was--we had--it was--we had to cook and bring the food up.  And that's when I learned how good butternut bread and butter was (laughter)--we ate quite a bit of that and I thought that was the best bread and butter.  It was, it was real hard for my mother and that's why she had came up and that's--she had to do that same type of work as--then she went out and did day's work.
Story_ID: 187326
Speaker 1: So when, when you all came up [to Chicago, Illinois] on the train, you had--I suppose you had notified your brother [James Mason] that you were coming and, and--
Speaker 2: Well eventually they did--that, I don't know how, how, how we met up.  But eventually we did meet up in the, in a few weeks I think it was.
Speaker 1: He was in Iowa and you all were expecting him at the train station.
Speaker 2: Waiting for him.
Speaker 1: Apparently he was transferred, his job transferred him to Iowa?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now people watching this tape in the future here will probably ask you know, why didn't they call him on his cell phone or email him or you know but we're dealing with a different set of rules in, in 1918 aren't we?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you're writing letters and the telephone system was--you know he may not have had a phone.
Speaker 2: No, we never had a telephone then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So things are a lot, lot different.
Speaker 2: Yes, no telephone, no electricity.  Our lights were with the lamps.
Speaker 1: Gas lamps?
Speaker 2: Lamps, not gas yet.
Speaker 1: Just lamps, just oil lamp?
Speaker 2: Oil lamps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I saw from that we, we went up to gas.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so, 22nd and Dearborn.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that was the red light district.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a lot of gambling around there, prostitution.
Speaker 2: Well I don't remember it because I was, you know, indoors I guess quite a bit.  But that's all I--later on I knew what, what the red light district meant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you didn't know at the time what it meant.
Speaker 2: No.  And I don't think my mother knew.  But prostitutes and everything around there.
Story_ID: 187327
Speaker 1: You had to--then you had to, you know, kind of pitch in and help your mother [Albertine Mason] work.  Is that what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we worked--this was a raincoat factory for the government, making raincoats.  And my sister Edna and my Aunt Sedonia [ph.], we, and me--we went to the factory and was hired.  And they worked putting--made work with the machines, assembling the raincoats.  And I--there was a patch they put on it--it was piecework.  And my part, what I did was on the sleeve of the, the garment, there was a patch that I would paste on there.  And then they punched holes--Army coats, raincoats.  And then I was fourteen.  And I wasn't supposed to be working.  So when they would come around and investigate, I had to--I remember that they would tell me I'd get under the table and wait till they, they would pass.  And then I would go back to work.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, did you have identification to prove your age or anything on you?  Did you have something, kind of card to identify yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering did they give you a Social Security number?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So that's before Social Security numbers.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Social Security didn't start up until World War, just before World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: I think so.  Let me see, what was that--we went through a depression [the Great Depression].  Social Security, wasn't that in 1937?
Speaker 1: I think you're right.
Speaker 2: When the--
Speaker 1: I think so.  Some--it was an initiative of the [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt administration.
Speaker 2: Right, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: So in those days, I mean you could--I mean was there a lot of confusion about who people were, you know who was who, I mean in terms of somebody could say they were one person, but they didn't--there's no proof that--
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I imagine so.
Speaker 1: So, so how long did you work in the raincoat factory?
Speaker 2: I, I really don't know.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You weren't there that long, were you?
Speaker 2: No, because finally we went on to--we moved naturally out of that place.  And I don't remember.  I know I--before I got married, I remembered.  I, I did do some sewing, made lampshades, but I can't tell you just the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you move to?  Where did your family move to after you, you know, earned enough money to move away from the red light district?
Speaker 2: You mean address?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.  Not exactly.  It doesn't have, have to be the exact address, just approximately where.
Speaker 2: Well we moved, you know, a different neighborhood, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: You're still on the South Side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And at that time, 35th Street was very popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you live near 35th Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived near 35th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause our church was St. Monica [Chicago, Illinois], and it was 38th and Dearborn.  It was right across from the old Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember 35th Street was very popular.  And you know that's how the neighborhood changed, from 35th and it went to 43rd and 39th and so on.
Speaker 1: So the black population kept spreading.
Speaker 2: Kept spreading, yes.
Speaker 1: Southward, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was there a name--now people are calling that part of Chicago [Illinois] Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] now.  Did you all call it Bronzeville in those days and was there a name for the black section of Chicago on the South Side?
Speaker 2: I think there was a name, but it wasn't Bronzeville.
Speaker 1: They call it the black bottom or--
Speaker 2: The Black Belt [Chicago, Illinois] I know.
Speaker 1: Black Belt, okay.  Now that, that's the name I've heard, Black Belt.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Black Belt.
Story_ID: 187328
Speaker 1: What was 35th Street [Chicago, Illinois] like?  You said it was very, very busy.  What was going on on 35th Street?
Speaker 2: Well you know just the regular stores and different things.
Speaker 1: Well people don't know now what the regular stores are, were then, you know.  So they have a different idea of what regular stores are.  So what--anything you could tell us about what you remember is valuable, you know, for us having an, an understanding of what was going on then.
Speaker 2: Well to me there were--stores were kind of much as I can remember, I don't know, very much like the store now.  Not big stores.
Speaker 1: Lot of small grocery stores.
Speaker 2: Small grocery stores and things.
Speaker 1: Like--
Speaker 2: And the fruits, vegetables were--the stands were outside.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's different.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they have to--what, they pack the vegetables on ice or something outside?
Speaker 2: I guess, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What other kinds of businesses were around on 35th Street?  The stores and--
Speaker 2: Well they always had barbershops.  I can remember the big barber sign out when--it was--I just can't remember exactly when the, when the women began to--Madam [C.J.] Walker.  They began to straightening the hair.  I can remember when it was done, but I don't remember the year--it was a change then for women.
Speaker 1: So they were--Madam Walker--had she--had, had her stores, stores started by the time you got to Chicago?  I mean were they open when you got here or did they open later on after you got here?
Speaker 2: I always just heard about when I--after I got--nothing in New Orleans [Louisiana], no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you heard about it after you got here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she didn't have it in New Orleans.  And I think really she started in Chicago [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Madam Walker.
Story_ID: 187329
Speaker 1: Now did--was Chicago [Illinois] much bigger than New Orleans [Louisiana]?  Did it seem big--bigger to you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Chicago was much bigger.  Speak of when you're coming up to--going north to paradise and all that kind of stuff, from the South.
Speaker 1: Was, was Chicago like you expected it to be when, when you got here?  Did you think it was--did you have an expectation that it would be better or worse than what you saw?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you I--to me New Orleans seemed okay.  But when I came here, I noticed the difference.  I noticed that--well I noticed one thing, it was still seg-segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that didn't change.
Speaker 2: No, that didn't change.  But it was better.
Speaker 1: In, in, in what way was it better than New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Well in New Orleans they had--you had certain places like restrooms that were not but--when I came to Chicago, it wasn't that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had segregated restroom facilities in, in New Orleans with the black and white signs.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Colored and white.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't do that here, but--
Speaker 2: No, but it was still--I think people knew that certain places where they could go because like in church we even knew here that the people still--the black people would stay to the back.
Speaker 1: In, in St. Monica's when you attended?
Speaker 2: No, that was the first black church.
Speaker 1: It was all black?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: Were the priests black too, or--
Speaker 2: No.  No, the priest was white.  And then when I moved from there, we went to the parish moved to St. Elizabeth.  Still a white priest, his name was Father Eckert.
Speaker 1: But all black congregation for the most part.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time there.  They probably still had a few whites that hadn't left the neighborhood.  'Cause that was around 40 [Street], 40th and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 188104
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you like what, what did the neighborhood look like that you lived in [in Chicago, Illinois]?  I mean did it, did it--I mean it's different from the way things look today.  Were there many cars on the street in those days, or--
Speaker 2: No.  No, you were really somebody if you had a car.  They thought, you know, but no, very few cars.
Speaker 1: Mostly horses?
Speaker 2: Horses, wagon.  When my--now I'll go back to when I came up here in 1918, my sister, my older sister had married the year before.  Rather, two years before because she--when she--we left, she had a child a year old.  But when she got married, we went to church and everything in a carriage.  See, and that was 19--see because Rita was a year old when we left.  She was born 1917.  So this was about 1916, I mean '18 [1918], no, '19 [1919], yeah 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay, and even in those days, airplanes were new then, right?
Speaker 2: No airplane.
Speaker 1: You didn't see any at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I, I know they had--they used them in World War I [WWI], but, but you--
Speaker 2: I didn't know.
Speaker 1: Typically you couldn't look up in the sky and see an airplane.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were the lights on the streets electric in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Most of them were gas?
Speaker 2: Well when they had the gas, yeah.  'Cause they used to have come around and light them.
Speaker 1: A guy, a guy would have to get up on a ladder.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was that--with all the horses around, was it--did the horses leave a big mess, you know, behind, or what?
Speaker 2: Well usually have something to clean them up, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I re--I remember--now this is--I'm going into when I was a young, young person.  I don't remember whether I was married now.  And my sister, you know I was married.  As I'm ahead now.  I'd better not (unclear).
Speaker 1: Don't jump too far ahead.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But if it's a good story.  Is it, is it about horses and stuff?
Speaker 2: Because I remember that even though I'm--after we were here, this is (unclear) was horses and wagons.  I can remember streetcars.
Speaker 1: Okay, streetcars when you have like mostly horses and--you had to be a big deal if you had a car.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188105
Speaker 1: Now, well tell me how you met your husband [Vaughn Barber], now.  That's, that's a story--that's our--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well this--we were then in St. Elizabeth's Church [Chicago, Illinois].  And we had service on Wednesdays also, Sundays and Wednesdays.  And my mother every Wednesday and Sunday we went to church.  It was three of us, Deborah, Edna and Irma and Jimmy.  And we had the same pew we would sit in and whatnot.  And he noticed, would notice us, he told me later.  And he'd notice us and we were there every Wednesday and so was he.  So the way I met him, we had at that time we used to have picnics out in the, the forest preserve.  And Edna and my--we were working then.
Speaker 1: Is this the Dan Ryan Woods [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We call it now.  I, I don't--yeah--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they had--always had the--every year the church would have a picnic.  And after work Edna and I went there, was on--waiting on, on the street for the streetcar.  And he was waiting.  So he came up to us and, and talked with us.  And I think you ladies are going to--are you going to the same--he had been seeing us in church, the same place I'm going?  And he--we talked.  We got on the streetcar together and everything.  Then when we got to the forest preserve, we got off and we said goodbye.  And I remember the remark Edna made, she says now he talked with us all the while, well you watch.  He's not gonna come and ask for a dance.  He didn't.  So I thought, you know that I didn't--wouldn't see him anymore.  And I don't know just exactly how we picked up again.  But that's how we first really met him.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you see him in church again at some point?
Speaker 2: Not to talk to.  I guess at different functions or something.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he asked you out?
Speaker 2: When he asked me out?
Speaker 1: Or did he ask to come by and see you or something?  I don't know what they did.
Speaker 2: No, at that time you were, you know you--your parents were very strict with you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But they--would a person have to ask your parents if he could come and see you?
Speaker 2: Right, and I rem--I thought sure that he would--that he would want to see Edna rather than me.  But it wasn't that way.
Speaker 1: So why did you think he'd rather see Edna than you?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I always thought Edna was the more attractive.  And so any way that's the way that was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would--so did he ask your parents if he could come by and see you, or what happened?
Speaker 2: I think so.  And we did.  He came by.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Albertine Mason] anyway.
Speaker 2: My mother, yes.  And we--he visited with us.  I mean he'd come over for about a, a year before we--he asked my mother could he marry.  At that time they had to ask the parent.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You'd been in Chicago [Illinois] a, a little while.
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, came when you were fourteen, about eight years.  Okay, so, so what were you doing at the time that you--that he asked you--I mean were you--
Speaker 2: What kind of work?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of work were you doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were making lampshades.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were different from what they are now.  'Cause we--they used to have--make sunbursts and, and a lot of sewing.
Speaker 1: They do embroidery on the lampshade?
Speaker 2: No, like a sunburst was the main thing.  And there were pleats.  You had to put pleats and, and stretch the lining.
Story_ID: 188106
Speaker 1: Now where did you get married [to Vaughn Barber]?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: No, where?
Speaker 2: At St. Elizabeth's Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your wedding day like?
Speaker 2: Well in those days, Wednesday was the important day.  And I, I was married on a Wednesday, the September the 22nd, 1925.  And we had--at 9:00 Mass.  And we had--after, after marriage, we came over to our home, to my mother's home, and we had breakfast.  And then after the breakfast in the afternoon, we had a little reception.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: And that was it?
Speaker 2: No honeymoon.  I had a belated honeymoon.  My husband was on the road, railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay now--he worked for--
Speaker 2: Worked for the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a waiter for the Santa Fe.  Fred Har--He was a Fred Harvey [Company] operator, waiter.  You know that was a top, one of the top trains that--
Speaker 1: Now I did not, I didn't know that.  Anybody would probably know that now--
Speaker 2: The Santa Fe, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was a Fred what now?  What did you say?
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: What did you say, a Fred Harvey?
Speaker 2: A Fred Harvey.
Speaker 1: Fred Harvey waiter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, waiter.
Speaker 1: Was Fred Harvey the company that, that did the--
Speaker 2: Served the food, meals.  And in those days they served with silver and tablecloths.  And it was, it was quite different.
Speaker 1: It was top--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the top trains.
Speaker 1: And where did his train go?  The one that he was on?
Speaker 2: The one he was on, he ran to Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was a pretty long trip.
Speaker 2: Nine, it was a nine days, nine day trip.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's round trip there and back.
Speaker 2: Right.  Then when they'd come back sometimes they would call, they want him to deadhead they call it out, they needed a waiter.  And sometime he just got home and then he would tell me, tell them he's not home and whatnot.  And he was home just about three days and had to go back.  Worked so hard.  I think that's why--all of them didn't die young, but my husband died when he was fifty-one.
Story_ID: 188107
Speaker 1: Now I've heard that working on the railroad is very difficult because of the hours that you work.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the black porters and the waiters would work virtually nonstop the whole trip because they--management wouldn't let them sleep.
Speaker 2: That's right, and there was no union until later.  And I know you, you've heard about when they--the union and whatnot, it made the hours better.
Speaker 1: A. Philip Randolph.
Speaker 2: Randolph, right.
Speaker 1: That was a--did he [Barber's husband, Vaughn Barber] complain about those, those hours?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's why like I said a lot time he would tell me to tell them to take--he didn't--he's out, he wasn't around when they wanted him to go and deadhead right out again.  That was terrible.  And of course that was one of the best--in those days if you were working on the train, you were a Pullman porter, or a waiter, those were tops for the--and they worked in the post office.  Those were top jobs for the black man.  When my husband was--if you were--wouldn't know him to see him, you'd think he was a, a graduate or something.  He was well read and on his own he would do a lot of reading.  And he was up on the different things.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Vaughn Clifton Barber.
Speaker 1: And do you know if he was related to any of the other Barbers in Chicago [Illinois]?  I mean there was a [Jesse] Max Barber I think that, that owned the Chicago Bee at one time [sic].
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You don't think so.  Okay.  Well tell me about your honeymoon and this climbing--
Speaker 2: Well that was nine months later that I went on a honeymoon.  Naturally back to, to California.
Speaker 1: So you, you got a chance to ride with him out to California?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: You had, you, you got a chance to ride out to California with him for your honeymoon?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that was one of the trips.  We went to the--where was that--when we went on the--I was telling Beverly and that's why she was surprised to hear that.  Well I have pictures of that.  And of course I didn't know anything about climbing no mountains or nothing.
Speaker 1: Now were you out near San Francisco [California] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this the Redwood Forest?
Speaker 2: Redwood Forest--the big trees, yeah.  We have pictures of those.
Speaker 1: So what happened on this trip?
Speaker 2: Well we went up and were--and I wasn't dressed for no climbing.  I had a--dresses I got was visiting, like a visitor.  And we, we--he said well get up a little high and I'll snap your picture.  And when I--I went up--climbed a little higher.  And when I come down instead of just walking, I kind of ran down and right at the end of the cliff, he caught me, otherwise I would have fallen down into the--
Speaker 1: So you were coming down too fast.
Speaker 2: Too fast, yeah.  I didn't know, you know I should have come down slow.  So that's when I was telling him about that (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, that was a scary experience I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At least you knew you had somebody that would save you.
Speaker 2: Right, we'd have both gone down I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But that was a nice honeymoon.  He wanted me to, to--he was a person that always was for the black race.  And he always wanted me to go to Africa.  He hoped someday that we would go, be able to go, but he never was able to.
Story_ID: 188108
Speaker 1: Now was he [Barber's husband, Vaughn Barber] a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Was he a member of any of the black organizations in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if--there was another--there's a famous black historian that was a Pullman porter used to make that run to California out of Chicago in those days by the name of J. A. Rogers.  Did, did he know him?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That was the porters.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know, because he was with the waiters, you know, more (unclear).
Speaker 1: Rogers lived here a couple of years.  He's the one that wrote "World's Great Men of Color" and some other books.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I can remember those.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he was a porter of Chicago back in the--around the same time.  But he eventually moved to New York [New York].  But he was [unclear].
Speaker 2: My brother [James Mason] was a Pullman porter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, now hearing that your husband had a deep interest in Haiti.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what--why did--why was he so interested in Haiti?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Because I said he read quite a bit about Haiti and he wanted to help in some way, but I don't know, remember, more details.  But that's really where he wanted me to--wanted to visit.
Speaker 1: What were his--what, what were some of his concerns about Haiti?
Speaker 2: The way the people were treated.
Speaker 1: I think if I recall correctly, the United States invaded Haiti in 1915 and basically took it over and installed a--I think John--I mean [Francois] Papa Doc Duvalier I think around that--not too long after that, but you know the United States had presence in Haiti from 1915 on until I guess the '60s [1960s] I guess.  So he was--was he concerned about that, U.S. occupation of Haiti?
Speaker 2: I think so now.  'Cause I think that's what he was--she's right about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he know any Haitians here in Chicago that he--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188109
Speaker 1: Now speaking of Haiti, I just, I just thought about, you know coming from New Orleans [Louisiana] and being involved in the Catholic church, did you know anybody involved in hoodoo or any of that?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  And I know people--the minute you say you're from New Orleans, they think that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I, I don't know.  I didn't, I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Now, now let me backtrack a minute and ask you a question I forgot to ask you earlier.  And it's about your mother [Albertine Mason] and about the church.  And I wanted to ask you about Matilda, yeah, 'cause I didn't ask you about Matilda [ph.] and I, I think I should ask you about that before we go any further.
Speaker 2: Okay, the way she became in, became connected with the family.  It was a smallpox was waging there in New Orleans, evidently, it was smallpox, is when my oldest sister was six years old.  And she came down with the smallpox and my brother had the fever.  And at that time with--when the smallpox, they would seal the house off and nobody could go in or out and whatnot.  And people were dying all the way--all around.  And my mother made a--asked God that if he would swea--spare her children, that she would adopt a child.  She would go to the convent and adopt a child and raise it.  So after it was all over, she did go into the--and asked the nuns and told, explained to them what happened.  And the nuns selected a, a child.  And then when she went back to, to get the girl, Matil--I mean the girl, the child that she--that the nuns had picked for my mother, according to my mother's children and all, and that she didn't wanna leave, she didn't want to leave the nuns and she cried and what not.  And Matil went over and, and she was about ten or eleven and I think she might have been a little older than that.  And she just hung onto my mother, please take me, please take me.  And the nuns didn't want her to go because she didn't want to go to school and she couldn't write, read or write.  And the nuns said she would be too much of a problem.  But Mama said no, I'll take her since she wants to come with me.  And that's how she came into our family.  And Mama 'nem, they helped her.  She never did go to school because she didn't want to go to school.  But they home taught her and I don't think she ever learned how to, to write her name or spell it.  But she was just wonderful.  A good person, you know, took care of us and all.  She was older.  And that's that story about Matil.
Speaker 1: Now she, she stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana] when you all moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, she was one I told you--
Speaker 1: She came with you.
Speaker 2: She came with us.  No, my mother just--until she died, she stayed with us.  And she stayed from one, from one family to another.  She would go and live a while.
Speaker 1: Did she live a long time?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was sixty-something when she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's a member of the family.
Speaker 2: A member of the family.
Speaker 1: Came into the family a different way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't want to forget that.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause that was a--very much, yes smallpox.  Now of course when they're talking about smallpox, I just can't imagine.  'Cause my sister had, you know, smallpox, pox all on her face.  Still it didn't clear them up too much.
Story_ID: 188110
Speaker 1: --Tell me about your married life.  Now you got married in 1925 and where did you live when you got married?  Did you still live, live with your mother [Albertine Mason] for a while or did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.  We had--we had a, a big apartment and my mother--I had--we had a room and my sister Edna, she had married a few years before.  And she had--and there were three of us in one, one flat with just--got along well.  And then eventually as the children came, we would leave, you know and get our own apartment.  So we, we lived around St. Elizabeth [Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] a little while, and let me see.  Then we moved out to--no, 'cause the children, my older children, Shirley [Dillard] and Barbara [Bonner] were in school, all of them were in school when we moved to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I really raised the girls and took my children until they're--in the meantime my, my husband passed when I lived out there.
Speaker 1: Now, now what year did you move to Englewood?
Speaker 2: In 1939.
Speaker 1: Englewood, for--had been an all-white neighborhood for--
Speaker 2: Right, it was Jewish.  And they went to the--the nuns didn't want me to transfer the girls, but we had to move.  At that time it was hard to find a larger--they didn't want to rent to people with children.  And we finally found a place over on May Street in the 60th, 61st I think, block.  And we moved there.  And the children were supposed to go to Copernicus [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois].  That was the, the--Copernicus and Beale.  Copernicus was--the dividing line was Racine.  And--
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Right near the police station right?
Speaker 2: Right.  [Unclear] because we were on the other side of--Copernicus is where they wanted us [unclear] I guess must have been Aberdeen might have been the dividing line because the nuns wouldn't give us a transfer.  And I, I tried to get them in the Catholic school, but the Catholic school would not accept black children.
Speaker 1: Now is this--
Speaker 2: And that's in 1939.
Speaker 1: Now is this the Catholic school that's now [the Academy of] St. Benedict [the African, Chicago, Illinois], or was it another school?
Speaker 2: At that time it was Our Lady of Solace [School, Chicago, Illinois].  And they have--that parish, they still since moved and they're probably was some other school, church or something that took it over.  Then eventually we went back there.  They went all--when the whites began to leave and the, the--they never went to school there, but that's the church we attended.  That's where they were--made their first communion and everything.  But when we first moved out there, they didn't wanna accept black children.  And I remember when we--the priest, he says it's a wonder that I--we would still be--remain Catholics when they were so prejudiced.
Story_ID: 188111
Speaker 1: Did you go to St. Anselm's [Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois]?  Is that where--
Speaker 2: That was St. Anselm's, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's A-N--
Speaker 2: That's, that's where--
Speaker 1: --E-L-M-S.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's where the children--you got me right back on track now.  That's where we moved first before Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we lived around there, went to 59th--60th and Michigan, around St. Anselm.  We were on 61st and Prairie.  And the children went to St. Anselm's School, Catholic School.  That's where Shirley and, and Barbara--they made their first communion, yeah.  You had me back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, St. Anselm is right across from St. Evan's, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Fifty First and, yeah, yeah Michigan and Prairie, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Then St. Anselm's, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how did you like Englewood, as a neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well at that time, it was a better place.  Well it was a place because we had you know a nice house.  We first moved on May Street and we had enough room.  But at that time, that was--we had to heat the--it was a stove heat.  And as I said, it was hard finding a place for children.  In order for me to get that place, I had to say I had, let me see I had four--I said I had three children.  But I didn't, I had all four.  And my son was--hadn't start school yet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, here he was five years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how, how many children did you have?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four.  Tell me about them--names and--
Speaker 2: Well yeah now when--let's say should I say 'em--the youngest was Beverly, and when my husband passed, maybe this is--when my husband passed, Beverly was twelve.  And Vaughn was fourteen, and Barbara was eighteen and Shirley was twenty.
Story_ID: 187350
Speaker 1: Okay Mrs. Barber [HM Irma Josephine Barber], I wanna backtrack a minute and ask, ask you about your father, I mean your husband [Vaughn Barber], ex-husband, well your past husband, late husband, yeah.  I don't know why I'm getting tongue tied.  But can, can you tell us about his family and you know, his origin, you know where he came from?
Speaker 2: Well he was from St. Louis [Missouri] and his, let me see he didn't--I have to think for a minute.  Because they moved from St. Louis here.  I, I really don't know what year.  And his mother--because I, I didn't know his father, I only knew his stepfather.
Speaker 1: And did he go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to one year of college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that, I think that was in St. Louis.  That was before they moved here.  I didn't know very much about his family.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about college much?
Speaker 2: Yes he did, because well he talked about it because he always said he wanted his children, as I said education was a hefty thing in our family.
Speaker 1: All right.  Yeah, when was he born?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was born September the 15th, 1897.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, and, and you said he passed when he was fifty-one?
Speaker 2: Fifty one, in 19--I think that was '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay now, okay.  Any, any other things you wanna tell us about him or about his personality or, or his, his habits?  You said he was a studious man.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so, hard worker.
Speaker 1: Did he like sports?
Speaker 2: No.  I know he--I, I don't think he liked sports.
Speaker 1: So he wasn't into baseball or anything.
Speaker 2: No, he was nothing like that, yeah.  He was more with books and--'cause he taught me.  After we got married, we went to the library, he brought me to the library.  Which is the Blackstone Library, right around the corner here.  And that's the first time I had gone to the library.  And at that time I was living on 46th and, and, 46th and--what is that, Prairie--not Prairie, near Cottage Grove.  And we'd walk, we'd walk from there to this Blackstone.  You know where the Blackstone Library is?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, right out here (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right.  And he'd always said books, yeah--
Speaker 1: What were his favorite sub--subjects to pursue in the library?  Did he like history, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much with the history.  I guess my oldest daughter could have told me more.  I wish I'd known these subjects were coming up, I would have--
Speaker 1: Did he like poetry and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and poetry.  Because he had four brothers.  And one of them wrote a book, but it was never published, of poetry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what was his brother's name that wrote the book?
Speaker 2: Well I can't remember all of them--one of them was Pascal, and I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Do you have--did your husband ever do any writing?
Speaker 2: You mean--no.  You mean like--no he didn't any public, for the public.
Speaker 1: Okay, nothing like--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was there anything else?  Okay they had--
Speaker 2: I don't know why I can't--I'm really--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else outstanding about him you wanna--
Speaker 2: About my husband?
Speaker 1: Yes, that you'd like to mention.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was he very religious too?  Was he--go to the Catholic church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to a certain extent.  I mean when he was here, we went to church and everything, but he didn't do anything, you know, special or anything.  But we always see to it we went to Mass.
Story_ID: 187351
Speaker 1: What kind of father was your late husband [Vaughn Barber]?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: What kind of a father was he?  We're rolling tape now.  We were paused before.
Speaker 2: What kind of a father?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I--a very good father.  And he helped whenever--I don't know how to, to explain that.  He would take us--the children--Beverly can remember--on a--out to the park, to the--remember Sherman Park.  And when he had time, but he worked so hard with those long trips.  He had, had very little time.  He was very good as--of doing anything around the house, he took care of.  We had a, a three flat building and which needed a lot of work done and whatnot, he did all the work.
Speaker 1: Did it all himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Most, most of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did--how did he feel about his daughters dating and so forth?  I mean was he a strict father in terms of that?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Yeah, 'cause Barbara was eighteen.  Well he did--he didn't allow--they didn't do too much dating, seem to me.  I'm trying to think.
Speaker 1: Did he allow it at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he allowed it, but they had, they had quite a number of friends, but I don't think they did very much--they, they had no special dates.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember when he was--I don't--his last days on earth, Barbara would always go to, to him with her homework or if she had any homework or whatnot.  They were in Chicago College.  And--
Speaker 1: Chicago Teacher's College [later Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Chicago Teacher's College.  And he would--he told her the--that's when they first realized how sick he was.  He said, "Barbara you'll have to figure these things out for yourself because I'm not gonna be around that long."  So that was very hurting 'cause they didn't realize how sick he was.  I really didn't realize it.
Speaker 1: What, what did he have?
Speaker 2: And as I said at, at that time it was called--it was hypertension and kidney.
Story_ID: 187352
Speaker 1: Was, was he [Barber's husband, Vaughn Barber] sick a long time?
Speaker 2: No, just about four days.  But he had to stop working, I think it was like in March.  They were--the railroad required them to be--have a physical every six months.  It was in March that he had his last physical, and he wasn't able to make his--no he made the run to California in September I think.  And he wasn't able to--he had to deadhead back.  He was that sick.  So they--that was his last run.  And they put him in the hospital in Topeka, Kansas.  And from there is when we went to visit him in September or October.  I took Deborah and Vaughn with me.  And when we got--he told them that he had to go home and, and he would be back.  They didn't wanna release him.  But he said he had to go and, and tend to some business and he would return.  But he--when we were going out, he met us and we saw where they said look, there's Daddy coming, and he rode back with us.  And he told me he wasn't going back.  And that was the end.  He passed in November.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well what did he--did--you never--what he--did he say anything to you before he died that you remember?
Speaker 2: No.  I know he talked with his--with Vaughn.  And he mentioned to him that I'm gone be--we were waiting to take him to the hospital.  And he told Vaughn that--he said I'm going to the hospital.  I don't know how long I'm gonna be there.  But you, you are now the young man of the family.  You must take care of your mother and sisters.  But I remember when he was sick, though.  And I would go there every day.  And he spoke then to the man that was in the room with him.  And he says "I've got a good wife, good mother.  You see how she comes every day?"  And he spoke that way.  But he would--never told me much.
Speaker 1: Now I think that's, that's some points about his, his character and his demeanor that we need to mention, probably.  What was his temper like?  What was his demeanor?
Speaker 2: Very calm.  And I used to say to him when you--working among men, and you're this way.  He says I'm a different person.  When I get on the road, I'm a different person.  He said you can't--they won't let you be like you would like to be sometimes.  He said but I wouldn't have--I never would do or say anything in front of my children, or do anything.
Speaker 1: So he had a different persona around--
Speaker 2: He really had wanted to be a doctor.  And he had medical books that he would read and, and when he passed they were here.  But he was never able to do that.
Speaker 1: He sounds like a remarkable person.
Speaker 2: Oh he was.
Story_ID: 187353
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your children.  We were, we were--you had just named them, but tell, tell me a little bit about each one and--
Speaker 2: Well let's see.  They, they all of them--none of them gave me any trouble, and they were very good students in school.  And as I said, my--I really don't know.  Beverly was the one--Shirley, the oldest, Barbara used to read a lot.  And I don't know what else.  Should I go on to say when--you know--when they graduated and all that.
Speaker 1: No, could you go back to Shirley.
Speaker 2: To Shirley.  She was very particular about doing things and keep order.  I don't know if I'm confusing her--
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about Vaughn?
Speaker 2: He was wonderful.  Because at an early age he worked in the store, children's store.  And he learned how to drive--the people had him to wash the car and when I found out he was--he would drive the car around, around the block and I was amazed to know that.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he was doing that?
Speaker 2: When his father passed, fourteen.  And what they--one thing stands out at that time when he--I didn't know it until it was one Monday.  And something came up about--at the bank.  And they would wait until that--from the weeks of the, not the week, maybe the Saturdays closing of the store, and they would send him to the bank with money in a brown paper bag.  And when I found that out, I stopped it because I thought it was too dangerous.  I can remember that much about--but he never told me about it until then.
Speaker 1: He was--seemed as though he was trustworthy.
Speaker 2: Yes he was.
Speaker 1: They trusted him.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And of course he is a lawyer now.  And they--as I said they all had a---it was very hard, but sometime I'm amazed that I was able to bring them to what--wonderful man and women they have become.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about Beverly?
Speaker 2: Well and I used to sew quite a bit for the children.  And this much what I can remember about Beverly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a little chubby, and she--I had to buy her clothes because she told me that some of the things I'd want to make for her--after I finished and she'd put them on, she said it made her look too fat.
Speaker 1: Made her look too fat.
Speaker 2: So I would have to take her to the store and try on things.  But Shirley, Shirley and Barbara went all through high school, through school and I still made most of their clothes.  And I was very good at sewing.  And they was--they never complained.  Where I know they had friends that had better things, but Shirley was even complimented.  She was one of the best dressed and whatnot in the class.  But it was mostly my sewing.
Story_ID: 187354
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well was it very difficult after your husband [Vaughn Barber] passed to make ends meet around the house, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't work until--my mother [Albertine Mason] kept saying I shouldn't work, I should try to do something at home and four months before I went to work.  And then I went to the--that's how I began to work for the city, City of Chicago [Illinois].  And my precinct captain, he got me the job, to work as a--first I really started off as a--working in the public bath houses as an attendant.  And I went on to be--to work as secretary.  And I worked for forty years with the City of Chicago.  Twelve years of it I worked with the county treasurer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is what helped.  I mean that's how I supported my family.
Speaker 1: And, and you owned your own building, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You had a three flat.
Speaker 2: Which where people would figure three flat, but the, the, the rent was so small.  I think at that time it was, I want to say ninety-two dollars.  I just can't, I can't remember.  But it was very little.  It--you would live in the three flat, my husband always said, on the first floor, we lived on the first floor.  And that would take care of our--but then the other two floors would take care of the maintenance of the, of the building.
Speaker 1: Yes, now what about your gardening?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well I had a lovely garden.  My, my backyard.  The neighborhood wasn't kept up as well as it, as it should have.  A lot of people, but my garden stood out and I had roses, beautiful roses, rose garden and, and then on the side we had vegetable and whatnot.  But as I said, Englewood now is terrible.  But in that time it was one of the nicer neighborhoods.  And they went to--the schools were Jewish.  I have pictures of the children.  They would take pictures every year, every so often of the class and the--sometimes it was only about five black and the rest was white, and they had very good teachers.
Story_ID: 187355
Speaker 1: Now did, did your children go to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all graduated from Englewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Vaughn [Barber's son, Vaughn Barber] taught there one year when he first graduated, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then my girls began, became teachers, they all became teachers, really.  And from then on went to--Vaughn was in the classroom just for a while.  And then he--of course he went to night school and became a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what law school did he go to?
Speaker 2: DePaul [University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The girls, where did they go to school?
Speaker 2: Well they went to Chicago Teacher's College, that's where they graduated from.  And then they went to--they, they got their master's, I mean their bachelor's there.
Speaker 1: Now Chicago Teacher's College, that's now Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Chicago State University.
Speaker 2: Yes, and then they went on to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and received their master's.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And they--Beverly--Barbara caught up with Shirley.  But Shirley had gone to Teacher's College and at that time, they didn't recognize the credits, I mean to carry them.  She had to completely do the four years over.  But in that meantime she had went to thirty-six hours to her credit.  But that didn't help her.  She had to do the four complete years.  And that meant Barbara caught up with her and they both graduated at the same time.
Speaker 1: That was very (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, then they went on to get a master's at Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I realize now with limited income and all, they really--they helped.  In their spare time they had--they would do--even in the library, they would work any spare hours they had.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about Beverly?  Where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to, she went to Beale [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and I was very concerned about her because when my husband passed, they had--Beale School had no lunch hours or no place--they had to go home and leave the, the grounds.  And she used to come home and walk and we were in walking distance, and take her lunch, eat her lunch and go back to school.  And then when she graduated, she went to Englewood.  And then she went on and she got married when she was about I think nineteen if I'm not mistaken, something like that.  Was it around then?
Speaker 1: I think it was eighteen.
Speaker 2: Whatever it was.  And they moved to--she married a, a police officer and then they went to California.  After seven years.
Speaker 1: I think he was a Marine, that's what I'm being told.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right he, he joined the Marines.  You see I'm (unclear) now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she married a Marine and moved to California and, and--
Speaker 2: No, he was a policeman here first, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he came back and joined, and joined the police force here.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now, now did Beverly go to school out in California when she moved out there?
Speaker 2: Well that's, that's quite something.  After her--after they separated, let's see.  I think she [unclear] while she was, she went to evening school.
Speaker 1: Okay, California State University, is that it?  California State, Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she went on to get her bachelor's degree.  Even though--after she was married and had the three children.  And then went to [unclear].
Speaker 1: University of Massachusetts I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.  How far are we (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay, we're trying--talking about, yeah.  I think we got all the children now.  We got 'em all.
Speaker 2: And then Beverly went on to get her master's and doctorate.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, just a master's.
Speaker 2: You don't want me to say that.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was just master's.
Speaker 2: A master's.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 187356
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me about your career in public life here.  You know, working for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  You said you started off working in the public bathhouse.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time--
Speaker 1: Do we have any such thing now?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  But this was--you'd go in and turn--my job was an attendant.  And I, I would go in and turn the--at certain hours they had certain days for men and certain days for women.  And I'd go in and for five cents, they would get a towel and a little small bar of soap, and I would turn the water on for ten minutes I think, or five minutes, I guess it was five minutes.  And that was my job then.  But I was--
Speaker 1: So these are--I mean this is something that, that we don't have anymore and I just wanna get some--it was like a--actually a place for the public to take a bath.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so if you needed to take a bath, and you felt like you needed to freshen up, you needed--you'd go there and--
Speaker 2: Go there and take--
Speaker 1: Get you a bar of soap and you've got ten minutes worth of time in the shower.
Speaker 2: A towel--I think it might have been five minutes, wasn't ten minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, five minutes in the shower, okay.  That's interesting.  That's, that's something that we don't have today at all.  So there were--so I take it people were living in situations where they didn't have--
Speaker 2: Well they had no bathtubs.  And they--I worked out of Bridgeport, two bath houses there.  And the people would--there was no--eventually everybody get a bath, you know [unclear].  But they--still there was a class that didn't have a bathtub.
Speaker 1: So in those days not many people had a bath in their room or where they lived.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I tell you what.  See I have to go way back.  Because when we--before we moved from New Orleans [Louisiana], we did have running water out--and had a, a tub inside.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And had built a separate--onto the house.
Speaker 1: Now so you went from the pub--public bath house to work for--where did you go next in, in the city?
Speaker 2: The City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah in the city government, where did you work next?
Speaker 2: For the Bureau of Forestry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I was for forty years.  Well it was all along with the Bureau of Forestry.  But I was a temporary employee, and so they had me working with the bath house.  I was taking somebody's place.  And show you what the--Bridgeport--I was in place of a person.  One of the attendants had went on maternity leave for six years.
Speaker 1: Six years.
Speaker 2: And after six--when the child was ready for sixth grade, then I was, I was--had to change jobs.  And then that's when he--my precinct captain got me the job for the--in the Bureau of Forestry.  And then I worked for twelve years under the Democrat--no, I'm a Democrat.  Then the twelve years they changed from Democrat to Republican.  But they kept me on.  You know, the committeemen just--
Speaker 1: From Republican to Democrat.
Speaker 2: Yes, but they trade--let me stay on with the--as a Democrat with the Republican.
Story_ID: 188112
Speaker 1: Tell us about the, the [Richard J.] Daley administration.  Well, well let's put it this way.  You started work under [Martin H.] Kennelly, Mayor Kennelly--
Speaker 2: [Edward Joseph] Kelly.
Speaker 1: Okay, Republican administration.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then Richard Daley won and you--did you have to change parties?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have to change political parties?
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait, wait.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--because I, I was--I don't think--I think I became a, a Democrat before I--
Speaker 1: Before you started working for the city.
Speaker 2: Before, before, yeah.  I became a, a Democrat before.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you become a, a Democrat under the FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], I mean when FDR was elected?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know a lot of black people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was Democrat before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now how was it working in the Daley administration in those days?  What was Daley like?
Speaker 2: Very, very good.  As I said, he was, as I can remember with the seniors, he was very much for seniors.  But--
Speaker 1: How long did you work for the city?  How long did you work for the city?
Speaker 2: As I said, forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How old were you when you retired?
Speaker 2: When I retired?  Eighty-four.
Speaker 1: Now that's well past retirement age.
Speaker 2: And I was so ashamed.  But everybody was retiring and they would come up and they would say how many more years you have?  So-and-so, I got three more years before I'm sixty-five.  Irma--I'd gotten to the place when they would begin talking about it because everybody that retired when I worked for the city of, of Chi--the Forestry, they would give them a retirement ax.  It was a, you know--
Speaker 1: The kind of ax you use to chop down trees.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And when I retired, then on--when they would retire, we would have on our--at mid-day we'd have a, a little party for them.  So--but when I, I didn't want to tell anybody when I was gonna retire.  I didn't want a party or anything.  So I just took some sick days and retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: But I was treated well.
Story_ID: 188113
Speaker 1: Tell, tell me today, like what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well I think, I think they're losing and I don't really know just how.  I think right now the Hispanics are gonna take over.  I don't think that it's very hard for, for us to elect a black mayor.  I think these Hispanics will be the next mayor.
Speaker 1: Why do you think it's gonna be tough for black people to elect another mayor?
Speaker 2: Well the--you know eventually Chicago will have more Hispanics than they have--the last census proved that the count was very low of the blacks.  And I--if I'm not mistaken, the census or the Hispanics was larger.  I don't remember just--
Speaker 1: Well they're not more of them yet, but they're growing.
Speaker 2: They're growing yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Will you--what, what did you think about the election of Harold Washington?  What did you think about that?
Speaker 2: That was great, yeah that was just a wonderful election.  He had a hard time.
Speaker 1: Did you believe that, that a black man could be elected at that point in time?
Speaker 2: No, no that's why every--most people was surprised when he was elected.  But he had a hard time.  Then after that when, when--who were--Vrdolyak was--what was that--
Speaker 1: Ed, Ed Vrdolyak--
Speaker 2: Forest, Forest--who was that--I can't remember now.  To go over the--the election for just a little while, was the mayor for a little while.
Speaker 1: [HM the Honorable] Wilson Frost.
Speaker 2: Frost, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was really never mayor.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he should have been for a minute.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: But he never was allowed.  That was right, right after Mayor Daley died.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So after that happened, you, you felt that we probably wouldn't have a black mayor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 188114
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about the Civil Rights Movement?  When you saw things changing in the South (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--you said what?
Speaker 1: How did you feel about the--some of the changes in the South brought on by the Civil Rights Movement?  Did you ever think you'd see those changes?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm still thinking there's a lot of changes yet can be made.  But they're--it's better.  I think some black people have a better--living down there now, than--Chicago [Illinois] is very prejudice.  And a lot of them are moving south and whatnot.
Speaker 1: Now were, were you--backtrack way back for a minute.  Now I forgot to ask you this and I, I neglected to do it, but you were in Chicago--you came here in 1918, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you were here for the riot in 1919.
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: That was terrible, yeah.  We were living--I, I remember on 37th and Vincennes.  And we lived in a house at that--we had a, a house because we had--my aunt was living with us, with her two children.  And I remember the--right on the same block with us there was two old Jewish shoe- shoemakers we used to call them.  They had their shop right down the same block from us.  And the reason I'm mentioning that, because the car came through the street one day, open--they were standing in an open car and shooting from--just shooting at random from one side to the other.  And they killed one of the old men.  And then right across the street from where we lived, there was a, a man--it was a two flat building.  And he was reading his Bible and they shot him.  And he just fell over like this.  I remember that very--but we--
Speaker 1: You actually saw this yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we all ran--oh, we all ran quickly into the house.  'Cause we were--had been sitting outside.  And of course it, it was terrible.
Speaker 1: So these, these are the white people from the beach that came up, or from Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well I don't--we don't know where they was from, but they, they just drove through like that.
Speaker 1: So did that happen all day long?
Speaker 2: Yeah, nobody was able to do anything, or afraid to go out.  People couldn't go to work.
Speaker 1: And how long did it last?
Speaker 2: It didn't last too long.
Speaker 1: A day or two, a day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it last more than a day.  Just the other day they had something about the riot on TV.
Speaker 1: Did--what did you understand at the time to be the cause of the riot?  Did anybody try to explain what the cause was to you?
Speaker 2: Of the riot?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: At first I thought, I thought when really until later, that the--when--what was his name?  Till- Williams.  What was that young fella that was, was killed down in Mississippi?
Speaker 1: Emmett Till?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to think it was when they--at the 31st Beach [Chicago, Illinois] when the people went to--when black people went bathing and I thought it was an incident that something had happened there.  But that really wasn't it.
Speaker 1: What, what, what was it?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm trying to remember.  I don't know because the beach is when we, when we used to go to the beach, I left (unclear).  We would--right there in the Jackson Park Beach, we weren't able--the blacks weren't able--they put a, a fence up and--to divide, the black people could only swim on one side of that fence and they weren't allowed to go on to--on the other side.  And that was when my children were coming up.  We left that out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They can remember that.
Story_ID: 188115
Speaker 1: Let, let me ask you about your daughter Barbara [Bonner].  I think Barbara passed.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: You mean her age and--
Speaker 1: No.  Just about her, about her and her, her passing, Barbara.
Speaker 2: Well of course she was married and had two sons.  One that's--one was--it was just before they graduated from--one was gonna graduate from college, and the other one was from--was gonna enter high school when she passed.  And I can remember how she was--one of the last things she told me was "Mother, I've got to get well because my children are graduating."  This--she passed in--when did Deborah pass?
Speaker 1: From 1986?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think what--she passed in September, yeah.
Speaker 1: September of '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Now she lived in Park Forest [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's out in the south suburbs.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And of course she became a--she was a teacher then.  And I'm so--I'm confused now.  Her sons graduated eventually.  He's a doctor.  The oldest son is a pediatrician.  And they live in--he lives in Pennsylvania, a suburb in Pennsylvania.  And the other son lives in New York now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both of them are doing well.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And Barbara had one granddaughter, Elisa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell, tell me about some of your grandchildren.  How, how many do you have?
Speaker 2: I had nine grandsons and one granddaughter, Barbara, Deborah who is just wonderful.  And they always--Deborah--I've always--she's always come--when my birthday, she never miss, no matter where she is, Deborah.  She's the oldest grandchild and the only girl.  The rest are boys, I had nine grandsons.  And they're all doing well.  One is as I said a doctor.  The other had moved to London [England], and he has five children, four, expecting a fifth one.  And the other is in Highland Park [Illinois].  And a very good job there, he's in some kind of business.  And he's the youngest, and he's here now.  I don't know, I can't go through all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To tell you more.
Speaker 1: It's a lot of them.
Speaker 2: Yes, but they're all doing very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many great-grandchildren do you have?
Speaker 2: Nine or ten.  They be coming so fast now.  Because I'm expecting one in Mar--in May and another one in, in July.  So they're coming kind of fast.  But I think it--I have--I think living I have ten.
Story_ID: 188116
Speaker 1: Tell me what do you think in, in the year 2003 is important for black people to know?
Speaker 2: What's important?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's important for black people to know now based on your experience?
Speaker 2: I think they should--I feel terrible about the gangs.  I don't know really how to, to express myself.
Speaker 1: I know there's--there was a big gang problem in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When, when did you move from Englewood?
Speaker 2: Wait.
Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]?  Was it in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: I can't--I'm confused now.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: I've been advised that it's 1977 I think.  Does, does that sound about right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen what?
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].  Is that about right?
Speaker 2: I think it is because I was in Hawaii.  She's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was living in Englewood 1107, and I was in Hawaii when the--this apartment became available.  And through Beverly who had moved to the Harper two years before, and she was able to get me--to lease the apartment.  And then I moved here in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you think about the world now in 2003?
Speaker 2: I feel so sorry for the young people.  They have no--it's nothing really for them right now to look forward to because everything is--all we're talking about now is war.  And I think they--I imagine a young person has very little to look forward to.  However, I don't think we really gonna go to war.
Speaker 1: So you don't think it's really gonna be a big war like, like World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: No, it never would last that long.  But I don't think--I think the reason they're going to war now is about the oil.  And I really think that it's a--Bush is trying--the President [George Walker Bush] now is trying to finish something that his father [President George Herbert Walker Bush] wanted that did not accomplish, and he's trying to finish it.  I don't know, I'm not expressing it right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds right.
Speaker 2: But that's, that's what I'm feeling.
Speaker 1: It sounds like that now since a lot of people have come to--so it's--I understand exactly what you're saying.
Speaker 2: It's unfair.
Story_ID: 188117
Speaker 1: What's your, your take on how religion plays a role in, in the shaping of the, the world that we live in?
Speaker 2: Religion?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think they're becoming, are becoming more religious now.
Speaker 1: You think people are more religious now?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Is it due to the--is it helping?
Speaker 2: Yes, because they are--I think as I said, I think they live in fear now.  Especially right along now with the war and they're--since September--
Speaker 1: Nine one one [September 11, 2001]?
Speaker 2: Nine one one [September 11, 2001].  People have--they're--there's hardly any life.  It's a fear always.  That's always before and I really believe that they are becoming more religious.
Speaker 1: Now what has religion meant for you, you know?
Speaker 2: It meant everything.  I believe that I could never have survived if I did not have the faith, the religion.  As I said my rosaries and my faith in God has helped.  Whenever I feel down, I'll get my rosaries and say--I don't know, I can't say more.
Speaker 1: Now, now you attend the church here--are you still a, associated with Saint, St. Thomas the Apostle Church in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I'm not able to go now much, very often, very seldom.  And there's a young man that lives in the other building, he comes over and give me communion.  And like Ash Wednesday, he came and gave me ashes.
Story_ID: 188118
Speaker 1: What do you see now after--you're ninety-nine years old, and what do you see as your legacy?  Yeah, yeah what have been your major achievements?
Speaker 2: She's telling you.  You're trying to help me.
Speaker 1: That's a question a lot of pe--people don't think about.  I mean you don't necessarily think about that (unclear) you know.
Speaker 2: My son, my grandson wrote something and he sent it.  He, he now out of the, the nine grandsons, he's an ordained minister of Protestant, I mean of Baptist.  And he wrote something, it was very lovely, that he wanted everybody to know, to be more conscious of, of the, of the older people, caring for them and what he said he learned.  He spent a day with me and he learned more that day than he had all the time that he knew me.  But we had quite a bit--I don't know how to express myself.  I'm, I'm getting--
Speaker 1: You seem like a--I, I understand that very well.  How do you feel about what your--you've been able to achieve as a mother with your, your--and your children's achievements?
Speaker 2: That I was--I'm able to see them grown, to be such fine men and women.  And they've never, never given me any trouble at all.  And they, they're raising families that are I think they're role models for their families.  Well you can see where Deborah is, how beautiful she's doing.  And all of them.
Story_ID: 188119
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a good person.  Remembered that I would never go to bed angry.  I, I was a good Christian and raised--I feel that I raised a good family.  They have nothing that they have against me.  I really want to be remembered that way.
Story_ID: 188120
Speaker 1: Ma'am, I'd like to ask you what is your secret for longevity, or is there a secret?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you, I believe in a lot of walking.  I walk--if the bus stop, like it stopped here.  I would walk five blocks to, to get the bus in order that I could walk.  That's in the mornings when the weather was--and I, I was--I've been very careful with my eating.  And as of course garlic is my main thing.  And then I have a lot vegetables.  I like a lot of carrots because I have a problem with my eyes, broccoli, and that's all the stuff.  And I think I never drank or smoked.  I think that helped me.
Speaker 1: You, you've pretty good health, you know.
Speaker 2: My health.  I'm--I don't know when I've had a cold.  But I--the whole thing is right now is just my eyes and that's heredity.  My, my grandmother had the same thing that I have, and an aunt.  But my mother's eyes were--they--just before she passed, 'cause she was never in the hospital.  The--she used to go to Weibolt's, I don't know if you remember that store.
Speaker 1: Weibolt's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where she would get her glasses.  And he--they used to tell her that her eyes were equal to a twenty, twenty year old.  She had very good sight.  And--but I was just the opposite.  She lived to eighty-eight.  And my grandmother lived to eighty-six.
Speaker 1: So you think it's diet and exercise.
Speaker 2: I think I know it's--
Speaker 1: Try to stay away from poisonous things.
Speaker 2: And I never, and I stopped eating--I don't eat--as now yet I don't eat meat unless I'm out and somebody will serve it.  We eat--I do eat a lot of poultry and fish, I eat a lot of fish.  And I don't care for catfish though--it's got too much whatever that is in it.  The catfish has.  And I like, like Lake Superior, that kind of fish.  I like a lot of salmon.  I eat, I eat at least twice a week I have fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I never fry anything.  It's always broiled or baked.
Story_ID: 188121
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  This is a follow-up interview with [HM] Mrs. Irma Barber.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing are Beverly Martin and Vaughn Barber.  Ma'am, can you tell us about the land question in, in Louisiana?  Some of the issues over land that you saw there.
Speaker 2: Right, well this was really I think the land was in Mississippi.  And these men, two white men went over to visit his mother, my father's [Jefferson Mason] mother, who I think you had in the other--her name was Julia.  And she of course looked white and they figured that--they said now we'll have to go and see where the son, your son that this land is left to.  And when they went over to my mother [Albertine Mason] and saw that my mother was brown skin, black, then they said well--and all the children, they wanted to see all the children.  And they said well we'll have to wait until this youngest one is eighteen.  And my mother--they never followed it up.
Speaker 1: So they were--according to law, they could take the land if, if you were black?  They, you know--
Speaker 2: Well if you didn't prove--prove that you were--you know I was just about six years old.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, whatever it was, her, her appearance, she looked, she looked like she might have been white.  Is that what--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was--
Speaker 2: That was his mama.  So they assumed that the son was white, the same as she.  But when they went to my mother's house and my mother opened the door, they saw she was a brown skinned lady and then all the children.  They wanted to see the children.  And then they looked and they saw the youngest one was about three I think.  And they said well we'll have to wait till she's eighteen before they could claim the land.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And these were the--some sort of officials from the county or something.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where exactly was that?  Can, can you tell us?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: In Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, near the Gulf?  On the Gulf Coast of Mississippi, near Louisiana, or do you know?
Speaker 2: I really don't--you see I was--this was only told to me.  I was so young I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188122
Speaker 1: And another question I should ask you is about the buses, how they segregated the buses in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well this bus on St. Charles Avenue was the only--no the streetcar, there was no bus down there when I was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) streetcar.
Speaker 2: Streetcar, yes.  And there was a screen that would be put on the--as far as the--between the black and white.  And if you got on and there was no seat available for the black, and there was white but you could not go and sit in those seats, you had to move the screen and put it where the white person was sitting so that you could be back of them.
Speaker 1: So what, what was the screen made out of?
Speaker 2: Well I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was it cloth or something?
Speaker 2: No, it was in a frame.
Speaker 1: A frame, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to handle it.  It would stick at the, you know, the back of the seats.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they could move it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be moved.  And if a black person got on and there was seats in the--in front of those--that screen, but no seats in the back, you couldn't go and sit in the front without moving that screen.  You had to take the screen and put it in front of the, the black person so that there would be a separation.
Story_ID: 188123
Speaker 1: Now you, you took your family--I think your, your family went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] in 1951 and I was asked to ask you about what conditions were like in 1951 in New Orleans when you went back.
Speaker 2: Wait.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were on a--she's saying that you were on a train that stopped in Texas and there was, there, there was some benches I think that you couldn't sit on.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah because we were waiting for--between trains.  And we were waiting to--we were on our way to New Orleans.  And we couldn't sit because the, there were no seats available where the blacks were supposed to sit.  And we had to stand.
Speaker 1: But there were empty benches but you couldn't sit on them because they were designated white.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's terrible.  What about the bathrooms and other facilities?
Speaker 2: Well they had separate.  On the door was black and colored I think at that time they used.  Colored and, and white.
Story_ID: 188124
Speaker 1: I don't know if we asked this last time, but can--what is your secret to longevity?  Is there a secret to this?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things I know I did a lot of walking.  And I was very, I was careful with my eating.  And my mother [Albertine Walker]--it was longevity on my parent--my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I think you should bring out the very strong religious (unclear).
Speaker 1: Does your spirituality have anything to do with your longevity?
Speaker 2: Yes it does because I have--I'm very--my mother was very religious.  And I, I am.  Whenever I have--am disturbed or anything, they--I'm Catholic.  And we have the rosaries.  And I can just go and sit down and say the rosary.  It seems to calm me.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  Are there any questions?
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I think that you--I think there's one last--is there one last thing you wanted to say before we end the interview portion?
Speaker 2: What about those--the streets.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  You wanted to say something about your appreciation for doing the interview [unclear] and Deborah.
Speaker 2: Okay, but before that, I think they had pictures where I--remember you had asked me about the street that I lived on.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  We'll go back to the pictures. We're closing the interview now.
Speaker 2: We'll go back to that.  I see.  Yeah, my--it's my granddaughter.  I had one granddaughter and nine grandsons.  And my granddaughter is the one that wanted to have this done.  And Deborah Martin Chase.
Story_ID: 188125
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my grandmother.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, yeah that's grandfather.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Louisiana, you know they organized militias, their own militias and fought the Confederacy [Confederate States of America].  You know a lot of black soldiers did, a lot of the Creoles had their own militia.  There was a guy named Cal Yu [ph.] who got--was wounded in this battle or they shot him in the heart or something.  They took New Orleans [Louisiana] early on in the war; that was the only victory they had. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Now this is, this is Paul Dionne Boucree's son.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.  It got the date.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This goes beyond that--this starts beyond that.  I mean I can have this picture there, this is beyond that.
Speaker 1: It starts before?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It starts--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  In 1838 Paul Dionne Boucree [ph.] was born a slave on the Dionne Plantation located just outside New Orleans.  His mother's name was Julia Jean Jacque [ph.].  As the story goes, Julia, a very beautiful young slave girl, had caught the eye of Frenchman Paul Boucree whom we believe was visiting the Dionne Plantation.  It is believed that Julia had been sold to the slave owner Dionne giving, giving rise to the fact that she may have had siblings under the name of John, John Jacque.  Anyway Paul Boucree and Julia became parents of Paul Dionne Boucree.  Paul was listed as an Octoron, meaning he was one eighth black.  Also we believe Paul had sisters and brothers under the name of Dionne or Boucree or even Dionne Jacque.  The Dionne Plantation was located just outside New Orleans and relatively close to the Tina Gidrey [ph.] Plantation in St. James Parish in, in Convent Louisiana, about fifty miles west of New Orleans.  On January 17, 1846, [unclear] Gidrey Albert was born on the Gidrey Plantation to slaves.  Matild and the spoken language was French and the Catholic religion tradition prevailed.  By 1862, Union soldiers led by Admiral Farragut, sailed their ships around the Gulf of Mexico where they entered and captured the undefended important port city of New Orleans.  Shortly thereafter, the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 yielded slaves their freedom.  Paul and his buddies and many others were so excited about their new status, they could hardly wait to enlist in the [U.S.] Army camp on January 10th, 1963.  So the war had separated Paul and his beloved Philomena, but the vowed that someday they would be together again.  Paul and his friends served in the Company B, Tenth Raider U.S. Heavy Artillery of the USCHA and documents reveal that Paul attained the rank of Sergeant on June 21st, 1863 and mustered out on February 8th, 1886.  Ten months had passed and one month before Philomena's 21st birthday, they were married on December the 11th, 1866 at St. Stevens Church in New Orleans, Louisiana.  On the marriage license, Paul abandoned the Dionne slave surname and assumed his biological father's Boucree.  We believe Philomena dropped her slave name Gidrey and took her father's given name Albert for her surname.  Paul was a skilled carpenter and cabinetmaker, a trade that has been passed on for generations.  Philomena had a difficult-- the happy couple remained reside--the happy couple resided at 4830 Perrier Street between Lyons and Bordeaux Street, a lovely home that they owned.  They remained married for about 40 years until Paul's death on May 18th, 1906 in New Orleans, Louisiana.  They had eight children.  The third child, Matilda and the fifth child Edward, died at a very young age.  The other children were Albert Boucree, Albertine Boucree Mason--our grandmother--Paul Stanis [ph.] Boucree, Samuel Boucree and Bernardine Boucree Sedonia Boucree Adams.  Philomena had a difficult time when she filed a claim for widow's pension.  She had to prove that Paul Dionne and Paul Boucree were one in the same person.  On some of the forms, it asked for a physical description of her husband.  It is interesting to note that she could not reveal his true physical description because he had Caucasian features and she knew that they would not believe that she was married to a person fitting that description, so she had to fake it as shown on an affidavit dated December the 8th, 1906.  In 1919, Philomena migrated to Chicago, Illinois with her daughter Bernadette and other members of the family.  She resided at 4523 South Champlain Avenue until her death on October 4th, 1925.  She is buried at Holy Sepulchre Catholic Cemetery [Alsip, Illinois].  I can go on, but I don't think (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  We're ready.  Wanna tell us what that is?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is the, the home of Paul and Philomena, located at 4830 Perrier Street.  It's between Lyons and Bordeaux Streets in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, okay this is the home of--wait a minute, I'm not certain of this.  What's your father's name?
Speaker 1: Jefferson [Mason].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Jefferson.  Well this is the home of Jefferson and--
Speaker 1: And Albertine.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And Albertine Mason.  And it's located at 4826 Perrier Street, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And I was born there and raised till I--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, okay she--this, and this is the home where Irma Barber was born and raised.  She left there at the age of--
Speaker 1: Fourteen.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Fourteen.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is another shot of the home at 4826 Perrier Street.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Well I was--this St. Stevens Church, and I was christened and when we would attend Mass, the black families had to sit in the back of the church.  Church is right across the--from the school that I attended when I attended public school.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the school I attended.  We first attended Catholic school and was transferred to the public school, which was right down on Number 6.  Later on it was sold.  Who was it sold to?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear) Episcopal.
Speaker 1: My mother, gosh.  She's--I can't even see.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Oh that's good. The background is cut out and she's sharp. That's good.
Speaker 1: Mama never wanted to have her picture taken.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  We have any idea of when this photo was taken?
Speaker 1: No.  I would--I know it was in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and we were on our way to--we used to meet at a certain place, the children and have like a picnic.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and she was on her way.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Was this taken during the time when you were like a teenager?
Speaker 1: No, that's when I was married.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This was after you were married.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had my family.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  [Unclear] 1925.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And did you have any kids at that time?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And do you know how many kids you had?
Speaker 1: Well I had about three I guess because I was living at Prairie.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty Ninth--61st and Prairie.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  So you had three kids, so it had to be after 1934.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  So it had to be somewhere about--maybe--were the kids young?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Very young.
Speaker 1: [unclear] right at that lagoon around the corner from St. Anselm's, down the street from St. Anselm's.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, so this had to be somewhere about 1939.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Right, about 1935.
Speaker 1: My grandfather.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I thought that was your father.
Speaker 1: My father, yeah, God.  Father and grandfather.  Now that's not the picture that's down there now.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes it is.
Speaker 1: That's my father.  Because my grandfather had sideburns.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Do you know the year or approximate year this photo was taken?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And this is in New Orleans, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  She has the same eyes he had.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Well I, I remember, I remember when I first--when they first--was, was first built.  But then later it was much--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Was this near--close to the time it was first built, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, this, this was after it was--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, after it was built.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's just a, a visit, a Sunday probably visit to the park.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And you were just sitting on a bench near the Fountain of Time.
Speaker 2: Sitting on the rail, I mean the fountain.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, sitting on the edge, ledge around the Fountain of Time at age twenty-two.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Mother these are--you probably can't see these, but they are pictures of your sister Deborah and Eula standing in a park.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, you don't have any idea about when that might have taken place?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, all right.  Deborah was Irma's youngest sister.  And she died at a very early age.
Speaker 1: Thirty three.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Thirty three.  And Eula was mother's first cousin.  The daughter of Bernadette Boucree.
Speaker 1: Not Bernadette, Sedonia.
Speaker 2: This is the bride--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a picture of my wedding.  It's the only picture we have of Jimmy your brother, so we're going to zoom in on him.  Start with the wedding here and then zoom in on, on Jimmy.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is his mother right here in the green.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Well [unclear], that's his sister and brother at the end.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And we'll have a--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This particular picture now just reflects her son Vaughn and his wife Blanche, her sister, Irma's sister.
Speaker 2: Is that my sister next?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.  Edna and her brother Jimmy.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  James.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And on this picture, is just a--an extension of the last picture also shows Irma on that far right.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  On September 17th, 1966.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a photograph of three of the sisters of Albertine Mason, three of the, the children of Albertine Mason.  The fourth as I previously mentioned had passed by this time.  On the far left is Irma and sitting is Maude DuPart [ph.], and standing on the far right is Edna Johnson.  These are the Mason sisters.
Speaker 1: Wait now, this is my wedding day.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  You give the date.
Speaker 1: Wait, September the 22nd, 1925 at St. Elizabeth's Church in Chicago.  At the 9:00 Mass.  Then we had a breakfast at my house, at my mother's house, rather.  And then in the afternoon we had a little reception.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Who was in the wedding?
Speaker 1: Deborah, my youngest sister was my bridesmaid.  And his best man, the last name I remember is Rogers.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  [unclear].
Speaker 1: No, Rogers.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  [unclear].
Speaker 1: No, Rogers.  I don't remember who the--I had a picture that--I remember that picture.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, now can you tell us about this picture, Mother?
Speaker 1: It was taken in Los Angeles [California], and a belated honeymoon, which was on September the 9th of--September the--yeah.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Was it the same year that you were married, or--
Speaker 2: Nine months later.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Nine months later, okay.
Speaker 2: It was belated.  It was later.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  So it was the spring of the following year.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It must have been around June then, right?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  April, June--
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  June of 1926.
Speaker 2: It was after we were married.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Quite a bit after, he looks so old.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well it was, probably.  And you know he died young, so.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  That's true.
Speaker 2: But that was after.
Story_ID: 187371
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's a trip to New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a trip from--and I was with my daughter Beverly [Martin].  And it was so hot that we just stayed on it and paid five cents to cross it and go--we kept riding up and down, up and down.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Is that the Staten Island Ferry?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Staten Island.
Speaker 2: Staten Island, yeah.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  So 1954?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Can you see that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what is that of?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's a photograph of you with your three daughters.  Barbara is at the left, Beverly is seated next to you and Shirley at your far right.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And this is Barbara, and this is me, and that's Shirley.  But there's your Barbara, yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Can you just say that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, this is a photograph of [HM] Irma Barber and her three daughters.  On the far left is her daughter Barbara Bonner who is now deceased.  And her--just to her right side is Beverly Martin, and to her, to her right is Shirley Dillard.  And this picture was taken about.
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Well the only way I can tell is the picture on the wall there.  It was taken--my youngest son.
Speaker 2: Barbara was still living.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Late '80s [1980s], mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  When did Barbara die?
Speaker 1: In '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, this was about then I'd say around 1980 then.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Twenty-two years ago.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a picture of Irma and her son Vaughn.  This was taken--I had black hair.  We're in--this was just in Flossmoor, Illinois.  And I can--I have no idea the date because it--it had to be in the--I'd say early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: You said I had my black hair.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I had black hair.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  They're only two you had--one from the law school and one from the business school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was taken there.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  One of the things that we have always been--mother has always pride herself on, is that she has been able to attend the graduations of all of her, her grandchildren from college.  And all of her grandchildren, all ten of them have completed college, undergrad and in most cases, graduate school.  Here we have a photograph of mother on her, Irma Barber on the far left and Deborah Martin Chase, who is the person responsible for this, what do you call this?  For this project.  And Deborah is--well I'll move on.  And then on the far right is Clifton Barber, who is I think in this particular photograph, has just graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Both Deborah and Cliff [unclear] completed Harvard.
Speaker 2: And my grandson.  My grandson.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a relatively old photograph, but it kind of gives some idea of the number of grandchildren that Irma Barber had as of 1979.  Well the, the total family in 1979.  It like I said, an older picture.  It's--but it does give some indication of the number.  She presently--at that time she had ten grandchildren.  And I think all of them are on here except the one who took the picture, who was [unclear].
Speaker 2: And do we have a hat on?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  No hat.  This is a very--photograph, or are we ready?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes we're ready.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, this is a photograph of Rhoda Mudridge [ph.], who is the mother of Vaughn Barber, Irma's husband.  I'm sorry, I have no idea of the date of this photograph, but I guess you can tell something by the, the attire as to the, the date.  So it had to be in early, '30s [1930s] or
Speaker 2: Early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's a very nice photograph.
Speaker 2: Looks like it was taken in a place with palm trees.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah it does, looks like it's California.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it must have been California.  Probably when we were on that--
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This photograph that you have here was probably taken around--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Chris was born in '67 [1967].  He's about--he's in my arms.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay about six--about 1968.  It's another photograph of the extended family of the grandchildren and the children of Irma Barber.
