Story_ID: 670400
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey; observing is June Christopher.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: June Michelle Baldwin [HistoryMaker June Baldwin], J-U-N-E, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E, B-A-L-D-W-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 4th, 1950, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.  My title is senior vice president, general counsel, corporate and legal affairs for KCETLink [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: December 20th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Los Angeles, California, at my home.
Story_ID: 670401
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Two, greens and blues.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere outside of the Unites States.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Everything's in divine order.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 670402
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Baldwin, Jr.] side, but separately, and then we'll try to put them together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Audrey May Harris [Audrey McLaughlin Harris], A-U-D-R-E-Y, M-A-Y, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 2nd, 1926, Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them, and what kind of occupations did they have?  What, what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-grandparents on my mother's side.  My--actually great-great--my great-great-grandfather was a barber, and his name was Robert McLaughlin [ph.].  And his daughter was Lelia Berry [Lelia Berry Yates], and she was a renowned school teacher in Virginia, in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your--so Lelia Berry?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. L-E-L--
Speaker 2: L-I-A, B-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what was she well, well known for--just being an excellent educator, or did she start a school or?
Speaker 2: I don't know, just being well known for an excellent--being an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now she would have been your?
Speaker 2: She was--she was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: That's on my mother's father side.
Speaker 1: Okay, go on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry, okay, and she birthed, among others, my grandfather, Moody McLaughlin, also born in Danville, Virginia.  And he was a factory worker, he was a seasonal laborer.  And then he and my grandmother [Ruby Luck McLaughlin] had two daughters, my mother and her sister, Lelia [Lelia McLaughlin].
Speaker 1: Now is there--there's a--is there a story behind how--why Moody McLaughlin didn't, you know, go into education as well or?
Speaker 2: He decided to stay, I guess, in the country on the farm.  He had friends and they chose to go to the city, eventually to go north, and he chose to stay with his family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, well--okay, so Moody McLaughlin was your grandfather, and he stayed in Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so your mother--that's why your mother was born in Danville.
Speaker 2: Actually my mother was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They moved.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so Moody did move.
Speaker 2: Eventually.
Speaker 1: Okay, to Philly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But education was always extremely important in our family.
Story_ID: 670403
Speaker 1: The family roots are in Danville [Virginia] with your--so your mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] moved to Phil- Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Now, now was she (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was born in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Now she had a chance to, to go to college and everything, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did she have any story about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she had to move back to Vir- they had to move back to Virginia because my mother had rickets, because I guess there wasn't--she wasn't getting enough sunlight.  So her formative years were in Danville, Virginia.  And she talks--she's always talked a lot about her teachers, a particular teacher, Ms. Merritt [Alice Merritt].  And Ms. Merritt was actually quite the scholar and poet, and she was actually nominated to be the poet laureate of Virginia until they found out that she was black, in which case they rescinded the offer.  So--because they didn't have integration, they had the best of the best, and my mother had excellent teachers and the standards were always so high.  And my mother would quote things that they'd memorized in school, and she always loved school.  She was skipped twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now this is--so do you remember Ms. Merritt's first name?
Speaker 2: Alice.
Speaker 1: Alice, okay, all right.  So, where did your mother go to school?
Speaker 2: Mother went to school in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where--well, where did she go to college?
Speaker 2: Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And does she have any stories about Temple?
Speaker 2: She didn't graduate; she attended.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what, what did she end up doing for, for a living?
Speaker 2: She was an educational fundraiser for colleges and universities.  She worked for seventeen years for the United Negro College Fund, and then for eleven years for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And her second career is her passion--another passion of hers. She's a yoga instructor.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And is there--
Speaker 2: And just--she studied with Bikram Choudhury, who's well known all over the world for what some people call the hot yoga.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what's the difference between the hot yo- yoga and the cool yoga (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, the hot yoga, the twenty-six postures that Bikram chose for his class, when you do them in the heat, it allows your body to stretch.  He always says your body's like steel, so you need to heat to stretch.  And so he has thirteen postures standing, thirteen on the floor; and you start in with the breathing exercise.  And you really are getting all of your body from head to toe, and it's just fantastic.  It builds your immune system, makes your metabolism more efficient, gives you energy, keeps you youthful, keeps you healthy.  So we're, we're big health advocates and big yoga practitioners.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know your mother was just here a little while ago, and she did walk like a very--like a younger woman.  She (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --moves, moves very fluidly.
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother always says she's ageless.  She never tells her age just because people, you know, try to put you in a box and, and limit you, so.  But she's an amazing role model.  Everyone says they wanna be my mother when they grow up.
Speaker 1: Now, now did they have a--does she have a story about how she started--she got involved in, in, in, in, in, in yoga?
Speaker 2: Well, my--being from Philadelphia, my brother [William James] and I didn't actually know that we had a jock for a mother, because it's not conducive to exercise outdoors back East.  But when we moved here, and my mother worked at UCLA, she actually--I was in school abroad, and my mother had come to visit me.  And we at so much good food in Italy, we'd gained some weight.  So when we came back, my mother said oh, we should go run at UCLA's track.  And she took to the running, and that--she was I believe the first woman to just run regularly.  I mean, she never stopped for twenty-one plus years, with the guys at the track.  And she did the New York [New York] marathon so she really took to the running, and we were quite surprised.  I did it for about eight or nine months and then I (laughter)--it was not for me, so.  And then three different people told her about the yoga, but it took her about six years to finally get to the class.  Because when she heard it was a place where a lot of celebrities went, she wasn't interested in that and she thought it would just, just be a fad.  But she finally got there, and she knew from the first class that she would do it the rest of her life.  And she went out and she bought a ticket for seventy-five lessons.  And now she's a private yoga instructor, after having practiced for thirty plus years.
Story_ID: 670404
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family, then we'll try to find out how they met.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: John Michael Baldwin [John Baldwin, Jr.], J-O-N [sic.], M-I-C-H-A-E-L, B-A-L-D-W-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 7th, 1916, and he was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not as much.  My great-grandmother [Pauline Newsome] was part Haitian and I guess American, and she had ten children.  And her father was a composer and piano teacher.
Speaker 1: Do you have his name or, or both of their names actually?
Speaker 2: Goodness.  Her last name is Newsome, and I do have it, but I can't--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: And your, your grandfather was a composer?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry--my great--
Speaker 1: Your grandfather--
Speaker 2: --grandfather [sic.].
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a piano and music teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did he teach then?
Speaker 2: I guess in Philadelphia.  I don't know a lot.  My parents divorced when I was three, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what kind of music he focused on?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is your great-grandfather now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --now, do you know your grandparents?  Did, did you know--what, what can, can, can you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: Actually, you know what?  He would have been my--no, I guess that's right--the grandparents.  My grandmother was Marie Carter [Marie Newsome Carter], born Marie Newsome, and again, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  She had six children.  Her husband, John Baldwin, Sr., was a salesperson; he traveled a lot.  The marriage didn't last, and it was decided that my grandmother would send her three oldest children to a Catholic boarding school because she didn't have enough room in the house where they lived.  And so that's how those children became Catholic and how I came to be Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother was one of the three that was sent?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Oh, your father--I'm sorry--your father, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.  So this boarding school is in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: No, it was outside of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he went--he went (unclear) when he was seven.
Story_ID: 670405
Speaker 1: Did he ever tell you any stories about growing up in that boarding school?
Speaker 2: Just that he loved it; that he loved the nuns, that they were very kind to them; and he was a devout Catholic.  And from there he went to a military academy in Virginia, the name of which I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now is this for college or high school?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: High school, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he took some courses at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but he did not.
Speaker 1: All right, now is, is there a story about how your parents [Audrey McLaughlin Harris and John Baldwin, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.  I think they just met through friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--all right, so did they meet be- before the war or, or during or after?
Speaker 2: I believe they would have met in the '40s [1940s], so probably after the war.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking now--did he serve in World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a picture, actually.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: He did, but I don't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't know if he left the country or what he did?
Speaker 2: I believe he left the country, but yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year did your, your parents get married?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would--in the late '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 670406
Speaker 1: Now are you the eldest of the children?  Are you the--
Speaker 2: I am their only child.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] had been married before and so I have an older brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1948 or '49 [1949], they remarried and then--then you were born in 1950?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, now when you think about--I don't know--did you spend much time with your father [John Baldwin, Jr.] at all or, or you--
Speaker 2: Sporadically, not a lot and then I went to a boarding school [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].  So after age thirteen, I didn't see him much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sporadically.
Speaker 1: Now from what you know, I guess, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walked, talked, looked, their talents, who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Actually both of them, because they both were very similar.  They both had--my father was an artist; he was a singer, but of course he was born at a time where he wasn't able to follow his passion.  He was a vocational teacher.  He taught shoe repair.  And my mother had wanted to be a singer as well.  And so they loved the arts, and they both are--had big hearts, very sensitive and empathic people, very kind, very generous, and very committed to advancing things on behalf of their race.
Story_ID: 670407
Speaker 1: So were they involved in any organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about organizations, but my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] got involved with politics somewhat.  She was the--I guess she was the first black to be the head of the polling station in our neighborhood.  Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], the esteemed jurist, was a family friend and lived nearby, and he got my mother involved with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, Leon Higginbotham went on to be a federal judge, right, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, he should have been on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: That's what everybody says.  That's--
Speaker 2: He was extraordinary, extraordinary, and I feel very blessed that he was someone who was in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, now what about your father [John Baldwin, Jr.]?  Do you know if he was involved in any organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or (unclear)--CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], or?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't--I don't know.
Speaker 1: So did he teach in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and--okay, all right, and your, your mother worked for United Negro College Fund--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the same area--okay.
Story_ID: 670408
Speaker 1: How long were they to- together before they split?
Speaker 2: I was three when they separated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you really don't remember much of a life with them together at all at age three, you know, so--
Speaker 2: Actually I have good memories--I mean I do remember being with my father [John Baldwin, Jr.] and being in the house.  And the one time I was bad (laughter) and my father came home and--I was little.  I mean, I was like two, and I don't know what had happened, but anyway, I can remember my father scolding me and thinking that he shouldn't be doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have--well, tell us--tell us about your siblings.  You, you have like one--just the one brother?
Speaker 2: One brother [William James] whom I grew up with.  I, I have a half sister with whom I did not grow up.  My father had been married before my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris], and they had one daughter, Jo [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she lives in Maryland, but I did not really grow up with her either.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you grew up your household consisted of your, your older brother--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: Any, any--
Speaker 2: --myself.
Speaker 1: --any grandparents live with your or anything like that or cousins--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went every Sunday to my grandparents, my mother's parents [Ruby Luck McLaughlin and Moody McLaughlin].
Speaker 1: Okay, but the household just the three?
Speaker 2: Just the three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 670409
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do.  When I was under one--do you know how they put babies?  They wrap them up and swaddle them.  And I remember trying to get out of this and feeling very uncomfortable and sort of--you know, just very restrained.  I remember that, and I remember being in a high chair that was strapped up to the beams of a door and sitting there, and we have a picture.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember playing with children when I was two and three in the neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 670410
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like?  What was the name of your neighborhood, and was it all black, or integrated, or?
Speaker 2: It was--it's called Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And at the time it was known for being an integrated neighborhood.  It was a neighborhood where if you were an interracial couple that was the neighborhood where people chose to live.  And over the course of my childhood, though, the neighborhood, which was primarily white, became primarily black.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you--we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember when it would snow, and my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] would go out in the backyard and she would make snow ice cream for us, and that would always be a lot of fun.  I remember always having music in the house and always dancing.  I especially remember when some famous jazz musicians came to my home.  They were the Miles Davis Quintet, and Wynton Kelly and Paul Chambers, and I'm not sure of Jimmy Cobb; but anyway, a group of people came and they were partying all night.  And my mother said she was afraid to open her door in the morning, but Wynton Kelly was playing the piano and the neighbors just said, "Oh, my god, who was that playing, it was so fantastic."  So I have a very fun, nice memory of that--
Speaker 1: So your mother had a lot, lot of friends that were musicians I guess.  These, these are some of the greatest musicians--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, and we all love music.
Speaker 1: So did, did you grow up in a big--a big house?
Speaker 2: It seemed big, but it wasn't.  It was a row house.  It was a very nice street.  Everyone kept their house nicely--had little lawns and backyards.  And, and my mother is--well, starting with my grandmother, my grandmother was an amazing housekeeper, and she could do everything.  And her house was perfect and just you could eat off the floor and in fact you could only eat in one room, the kitchen.  You couldn't eat anyplace else in the house.  And our house was the same way, you know, always very clean and pretty.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what, what other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Sight and sights--well, I remember being on the bus going to--we didn't have a car, and--going on the bus to my [maternal] grandparents [Ruby Luck McLaughlin and Moody McLaughlin].  As I said, we did that every Sunday.  And I remember walking to school with my girlfriend.
Story_ID: 670411
Speaker 1: And I would go to church every Sunday.  As I said, I was raised Catholic.  My parents, you know, separated, divorced when I was very young so my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] didn't raise me in her faith.  She honored my father's [John Baldwin, Jr.] wish because she knew how important that was to him.  So it was actually a little strange that I was being raised in a faith that really was quite critical of my mother's faith, and I couldn't go to my mother's church; and yeah, that would have been mortal sin.  And--
Speaker 2: What was your mother's church?  She was a--
Speaker 1: Baptist.
Speaker 2: Oh, Baptist, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And so I went to Catholic school [St. Madeleine Sophie School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I would walk to school, and go to church on Sunday mornings.  And my mother--even if it was snowing my mother would say, "You don't have to go to, to church," but I would go.  So I remember that.  And let's see what else?  I remember the summers, and I remember the kids out in the street playing dodge ball.  And it was a--it was a nice neighborhood [Germantown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I remember the neighborhood where I used to go and buy ice cream--yeah.  We also lived in the neighborhood where [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison lived.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I remember going to ballet school, and sometimes Judith would take me if my mother couldn't take me.
Speaker 2: Did she stay and criticize you (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Shakes head).
Speaker 2: No, okay.  I was just wondering if she--okay, so, so--all right, so she would take, take you to ballet classes.  I ca- I can't imagine Judith Jameson--so, so she was dancing would--did, did she dance in the same school?
Speaker 1: She took classes from the same school, Ms. Dorsey [Essie Marie Dorsey].  I don't remember the name of the school, but yes.  So I wanted to be a dancer when I was younger and, and an actor, so I thought.
Speaker 2: It seems like a really interesting neighborhood with Judge Hig- Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Judith Jameson.  And you know, Miles Davis comes over just to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wynton Kelly, his, his players.
Speaker 2: Wynton Kelly.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 670412
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: St. Madeleine Sophie [St. Madeleine Sophie Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On Upsal [Street] and Greene Streets.
Speaker 1: And, and this is where you went to school too, right?
Speaker 2: This is where I went to school from first through fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--so would you normally go to--did you stay there for church as a matter--or, or even though, though, you went to other schools or did you--or does it--
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I then went to another private Catholic academy.  But I must have gone to St. Madeleine Sophie still for church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, so--okay, so what was the racial composition of St. Madeline Sophie School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly white, but mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't feel like the only black child there?
Speaker 2: No, there were enough other black children so that I didn't feel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --isolated.  I believe I was the only black child at--in my class at Ancilla Domini [Ancilla Domini Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my next school.  From then on it changed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But those first formative years.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I loved school.  I loved learning.  I have great curiosity, and I had wonderful teachers.  And the Catholics--I'm, I'm very grateful for having being raised Catholic because they teach you discipline and deferred gratification.  And I think that those are two very important traits for being successful in society.  I think what's a little sad now is that everyone expects and needs for everything to be immediate, and instant gratification; and somewhat of a sense of entitlement to have things right away instead of understanding and learning that you have to work your way to achieve things and that things don't always come right away or on the time frame that you'd like.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, do you have a story about that that you can tell us from school?
Speaker 2: Well, I think Catholics, when they have Lent, that really is what instills sacrifice and deferring your gratification because you'd be giving up a favorite food. And usually for me it would be something to do with sweets, because I was a big sweets eater.  And so that taught me--that was one way in which it was taught.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now did you have a favorite subject in, in school--in grade school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember having a favorite subject, but I suppose it would have been English.  But I don't remember it being--I, I liked all my subjects.
Story_ID: 670413
Speaker 1: Were you an ad- avid reader?
Speaker 2: I was, and my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] worked in an office building where there was a children's book publisher, and so the executive at that company used to send me books.  And I remember reading the Nancy Drew mysteries and the Hardy Boys and other books.  But I was a big, big reader.  In fact, that's how I really ended up going to boarding school because I had read a book about boarding school, and it seemed like a lot of fun.  One particular scene that I thought was fun was a midnight brownie party.  And my mother being an ed- being in education, when she read in Time magazine that the Shipley School for girls [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] wanted to integrate, she asked me if I still wanted to go to a boarding school.  Because after having read that novel, I had said at one dinnertime that I wanted to go away to boarding school.  And actually, having been in Catholic schools, I was very aware that in high school, in particular, they did a lot of brainwashing.  My brother [William James], who originally went to Catholic schools as well, was taken out because it was too strict of an environment, and he was very precocious.  And he would share questions about some of the Catholic ideology.  And so I knew I didn't actually want to go to Catholic high school.  And my mother had said I could go to a very, very good public school called Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in tenth grade, but there was ninth grade, and I didn't want to stay.  That would have been the beginning of high school.  I did not want to be at Ancilla for a ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you--okay, you were at St. Madeleine [St. Madeleine Sophie School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] first through fifth?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then where did you go?
Speaker 2: Ancilla Domini [Ancilla Domini Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Ancilla Dom--
Speaker 2: Ancilla Domini.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a private Catholic academy.  And some of my teachers were Cuban nuns.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they Cuban nuns who had come over after Castro [Fidel Castro] ascended--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to power.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I first learned my foreign language, Spanish.
Speaker 1: Okay, but now did you know when you were talking about boarding school, did you know that your father [John Baldwin, Jr.] had been--
Speaker 2: No, I (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or raised in a boarding school--
Speaker 2: --did not.  I did not.  I did not find out about my father's boarding school experience until I was an adult.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: It's very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very interesting (laughter).
Story_ID: 670414
Speaker 1: So, let me back, back up a little bit and just ask you, like, through your grade school years and your years, I guess, in junior high school [Ancilla Domini Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--first year of high school, were you--had you come up with a profession that you wanted to pursue, or did you--
Speaker 2: In junior high I thought I wanted to be a dancer and an actor.  As a child I had been in summer stock.  I had been in a--in the play 'The King and I' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] at St. John Terrell's music theater [St. John Terrell's Music Circus, Lambertville, New Jersey], and that was in New Jersey.  And my father [John Baldwin, Jr.] used to share driving me from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from New Jersey to go to practice.
Speaker 1: Now, now what role did you play?  Did you--did you get a starring role (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played the little girl who said, "Dear Ms. Anna [Anna Leonowens], please don't go."  And what I can remember is the director saying cut, and then telling people they weren't doing their lines.  And he said--and then he said, "The only one who's doing her lines properly is little June [HistoryMaker June Baldwin]."  (Laughter) So I, I really thought that's what I wanted to do.  But when I got to Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] in the ninth grade, because I was integrating the school and it was difficult, I think the defense mechanisms that I had to develop kept me from accessing my acting abilities or making myself vulnerable in a certain way that's required if you're going to act.
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: So I was still in school plays, but--you know.
Speaker 1: But you really couldn't come out the way you wanted to.  You didn't feel comfortable, is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't--it wasn't that I couldn't come out; I was--I guess just very reserved.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Let me expound on that.  It's not as if I was consciously thinking about it.  It's just it was a response to the environment.  I mean I was very popular.  I was a student leader.  But at the same time all that was going on, there were some painful things going on.  So those are the things that, as I said, in terms of going out for roles and--I didn't take the roles that I might otherwise have taken.
Story_ID: 670415
Speaker 1: So you said some painful things were going on.  What was the environment like?  Can you give us some examples?
Speaker 2: Very polite, but for example, someone asked me to room with them and then came back and said, "Sorry, my mother won't let me room with you because you're black."  Going to the dances and you had a dance card.  And so there were the name of four boys on the cards, and so you dance with the first three, two dances, three dances, and then you spent the rest of the time with the fourth person.  And so everyone would always ask the first person who was the fourth person so they could check that person out.  And, and that first year since the male boarding schools who would come that we would have the dances with, they had not integrated so they were all white.  And when they would see that I was their dance partner for the evening then they would disappear--so things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so this, this is at Ancilla Domini [Ancilla Domini Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, this is at the Shipley School [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Shipley School.  So, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Shipley School.
Speaker 1: --you did go to the Shipley School--
Speaker 2: This is the board- this is the boarding school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did go to the Shipley School.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is your sophomore year?
Speaker 2: No, my, my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Freshman year.
Speaker 2: I ended up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I ended up going in ninth grade.  That summer my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] had read the article in Time magazine and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we went out and were interviewed.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Can I have some water?
Speaker 1: Sure.  Now, now where, where is the Shipley School?
Speaker 2: Is in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania.  It was actually a school founded by three Quaker sisters, the Shipley sisters [Hannah Shipley, Elizabeth Shipley and Katharine Shipley].  And it was founded as a feeder school for Bryn Mawr College [Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's right across the street from Bryn Mawr College.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this what Philadelphians [Pennsylvania] refer to as the Main Line--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Bryn Mawr, yeah.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And what I did realize it turns--it turned out that I actually have a family out there in Ardmore [Pennsylvania] and Haverford [Pennsylvania], and I had no idea--on my mother's side.  And--yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas why your mother didn't mention the fact that you had family there?
Speaker 2: Because my mother--they were estranged from that part of the family at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I don't think my mother was that aware, and there was no contact.  And I mean it's really quite--when I look back, because the head of school a Ms. Speer [Margaret Bailey Speer], who was an extraordinary woman, she was a missionary in China, and she founded [sic.] a women's college [Yenching College for Women, Beijing, China].  And she was actually responsible for my being able to attend Shipley in the ninth grade as opposed to the tenth grade, because although I was accepted for the ninth grade, they had already given their scholarship money out.  And so they said, "We don't have any more money; she can come in the tenth grade."  But my mother really wanted me to go in the ninth grade.  And Ms. Speer reached out--unbeknownst to us--she reached out to a, a friend of hers, whom she had studied with in China, and her name was Mrs. Henry Sloane Coffin [Dorothy Eells Coffin].  And she actually became my benefactress.  And unbeknownst to us until I graduated, she was the person providing me with my scholarship.  And so Ms. Speer--of course, you can imagine being in that environment.  And I think as a culture black women have always been obsessed with their hair, and I wanted my--I had to get my hair done.  And how was I gonna get my hair done in this all-white environment.  (Emotional) And Ms. Speer was very kind.  And she drove me into a black area in one of these places, and she would sit while I would get my hair done.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this meant a lot to you from those days--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --in terms of your self esteem and--okay.
Story_ID: 670416
Speaker 1: I take it you were a good student?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and by this time in high school had you gravitated towards some subject matter that--
Speaker 2: I liked English and French.  I actually thought I might like to be an interpreter at the United Nations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know how they say be careful what you ask for.  Because I always had a sense that I was gonna do something important, and that I was going to have office and there would be a lot of papers on the desk (laughter).  And I have come to rue that (laughter) because I would so love to be able to have a desk that had almost no papers on it, so.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But I had that thought and image when I was fifteen years old there at Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, now how did you find Shipley different from Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't religious; you weren't going to church; you weren't being taught religious studies.
Speaker 1: Were, were you a religious young lady at that juncture?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess I would say so.  I mean, I was your good little Catholic girl, and I became head of the Christian association at Shipley.  And that was a position where you were responsible for the Sunday vespers service; and so you would have speakers come to speak.  And I actually--we were able to get Wynton to come--Wynton Kelly to come and play at the service.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the, the service could be, you know--
Speaker 2: Jamming (laughter)--not normally, not normally.
Speaker 1: It wasn't--it wasn't like a Mass or anything.  It was like--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --a very--(unclear)--it was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --an eclectic kind of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --situation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he--did he play some spirituals or what did he do?
Speaker 2: I, I don't believe he played spirituals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.  But--I mean I did not perceive myself as being religious, but when you ask--you know, I was--I was dutiful.  I was always--I always was someone who liked ideas.  I was always idealistic, and I believed in honor, and truth, and nobility, you know, the nobility of the spirit.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1964, I guess, when you started.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Right, and by this time now you had been exposed to Judge Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.].  Had you given any thought to law at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that came much later--came in college [Stanford University, Stanford, California].
Story_ID: 670417
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes or sheroes in those days?
Speaker 2: I did, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Nelson Mandela.  I remember--one of my memories from when I was very young, maybe between six to eight--and I just wonder how this happened but I can deduce how it happened--I used to think about Nelson Mandela and the struggle over in South Africa.  And I was very taken with the notion of bravery, and I used to imagine would I be brave enough to withstand torture.  And I used to think about scenes where I would be being interrogated, and I would think about Nelson Mandela and, and, and also Communism.  So clearly I got the Communism aspect.  I can remember that from school.  And I must have overheard my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] and her friends talking in terms of South Africa, so.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about Communism?
Speaker 2: Well, that it was something bad.  You know, as I got older, philosophically I liked the idea of--that there should be a level playing field, and that there shouldn't be the extreme disparity of wealth among peoples.  And I still very much believe in that.  I think it's--it--it's abhorrent that at this time in our country we have an extreme disparity between the wealthy and the poor as bad if not worse than before the golden age when it was at its worst.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I think this doesn't serve anyone.
Speaker 1: The Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area is rich with museums and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --cultural experiences.  Did you--did, did your--did you and your brother [William James] and your mother as a family, you know, visit museums and go--and go--
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  There's a beautiful art museum, the Philadelphia art museum [Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that we went to and--again, at Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] we used to have many field trips.  We also tutored (unclear)--we tutored students in the inner city--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I was at Shipley.
Speaker 1: In places like Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania] and places like that or?
Speaker 2: No, we went into North--
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: --Philadelphia [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was, was there a program, I mean, set up for that?
Speaker 2: It was.  There was.  There was a program that we were bused into the city to tutor the students.
Speaker 1: Now wa- were, were there any other af- African-American young ladies in, in school with you?
Speaker 2: When I went in ninth grade, they had admitted a senior.  And then of course after that year, I was the only person in my class of color.  And every year they--thereafter in the boarding school they admitted a black girl.  And at some point they admitted a black day student.
Story_ID: 670418
Speaker 1: Now I imagine the tuition [at Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] was really--
Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) high.
Speaker 2: It was three thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 1: So to put it in perspective, in 1964 that would have represented an entire year's salary for many people, you know, working in factories.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes, I mean, you know, I consider that I grew up in a middle class background, but I was catapulted into this upper class WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] background.  And I am so very grateful that I had a--that my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] had raised me with such a strong foundation and a strong sense of self because when you go into those types of environments, it's easy to lose your sense of self.  And because of the way I look, they always wanted to make an exception out of me.  You know, you're not really black.  And of course the girls had basically only been exposed to black maids.  So it was--I was--I was mindful of that.  Although I do--I do remember once being somewhere and, and hearing an older gentleman speak, and he wasn't speaking proper English.  And I was with the girls, and I remember feeling ashamed, and then being ashamed that I was feeling ashamed (laughter).  So--but as I said, overall I was--I had a very clear sense of self.  And I did a, a fundraiser the same weekend as the Poor People's Campaign.  And in fact, I missed a debutante party because I was conducting this fundraiser.
Speaker 1: So is this--would this be in '68 [1968] or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--or maybe it was--we went to one of them.  I'm getting it confused. I may be getting confused.
Speaker 1: I know Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in--in April.
Speaker 2: April of '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: And--yeah, and the Poor People's Campaign, they went on to march into Washington [D.C.].  I guess by June everybody was there--by May or June.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.  So yes, I was doing that, that fundraiser.  And again, another example of, you know, the times.  I mean, as I said, you're talking about, you know, the wealthy, the Main Line, and those country clubs were not integrated.  And so one of the scoots--one of the day students, however, really wanted me to come, and she was very upset when she found out I couldn't come because I was black.  And so her father arranged for the bylaws to be changed so that I could attend.  But my fundraiser was more important to me.  And when I later met this gentleman at another debutante party, he came over and he was curious and wanting to meet me.  And I guess he couldn't believe that I hadn't attended the party because he had gone through such effort.  And of course at that time, I really felt like well, that's very nice and I'm glad you did that, but that's what you should have done.  And what I was doing was more important, so.
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school, it was right after the March on Washington, Freedom Summer's going on in Mississippi in '64 [1964], Democratic National Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], Malcolm X assassinated in '65 [1965], a lot of things going on in '66 [1966] and '67 [1967].  Dr. King--your senior year I guess he's, he's assassinated in April.  The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was actually at home for Easter vacation, and my mother was afraid she wasn't going to get me back to school, the roads being closed and everything.  But we got back and actually it was a--it was an opportunity for everyone at the school to come together.
Story_ID: 670419
Speaker 1: We had actually had some issues in terms of where I was going to apply to college.  Because even though I was a very good student, the college counselor was suggesting that I go to certain colleges that were not the Ivy League schools.  And my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] knew that's where she wanted me to go.  And it was after Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination that that particular person apologized to my mom.  And I ended up getting into Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and Occidental [Occidental College, Los Angeles, California], and Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] (laughter), and all these wonderful institutions.  And--
Speaker 2: Now this is interesting, because our usual bad counselor story from a black student at all-white schools that the counselor tells them they shouldn't even go to school (laughter), you know.  But in this situation at Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] they're telling you, you shouldn't go to an Ivy League school.
Speaker 1: Here I am at a prep school where they prepare you supposedly.  That's the reason what they're there for.  But I must say--
Speaker 2: Saying everything is relative.
Speaker 1: Everything is relative, and I have recently found out that that also happened to a white student, where she was counseled to go to a school that, you know, was really not appropriate for her.
Speaker 2: In her case what was the reason?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  That was quite strange.  As I said, I literally just found this out last year, because by the time I graduate from Shipley, although I always, always appreciated the education--always; it was fabulous.  And in fact, when I was in tenth grade, when I was having a hard time with the dances and all that kind of thing and I was unhappy, and my mother said, "You don't have to stay; you can come home."  And I knew I was too young, really, to be going through these kinds of things, but I also knew this is what life had in store for me.  And I appreciated the education, and I thought that I should just learn how to deal with it now then.  And so I opted to stay because I knew it was going to give me the options that it, it indeed did give me.  And so I went on to Stanford.
Speaker 2: Okay, now were there, there any special teachers or mentors at Shipley?
Speaker 1: I did have an English teacher who unfortunately did not stay.  He name was Ms. McKee [ph.], and she was excellent.  She was--she didn't fit in to Shipley; she was sort of a hippie, and I'm sure that's why she didn't last.  But she was an excellent English teacher, and she was someone who represented an alternative--an alternative set of values and lifestyle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I remember my history teacher.  I guess I had gotten--I don't if--I guess I got a B minus on a test, and of course I could have done better, but I was very involved with what was going on.  And she told me, "You know, you have to be better than everyone else because you're--," in fact, we may have been saying Negro then--"you know, you're a Negro, and you have to be better than everyone else."  And I remember being so angry on the inside and thinking why is that?  Why, why do white people get to be mediocre and still succeed, and that's not a choice.  Not that I wanted to be mediocre, but it was the principle; it was the principle.  And of course, at the time I was angry about it, but I now appreciate it and understand she was trying to protect me.  She understood what lay ahead for me.
Story_ID: 670420
Speaker 1: Well, tell us the Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] story.
Speaker 2: So obviously Shipley was a seminal event in my life.  And for all of the, the challenges, I developed some wonderful friendships with a few girls there who are lifelong friends, like sisters.  And they saw me; they--it didn't matter to them that I came from a different background or that I was black.  And so they were my rocks, and we're still very, very close today.  Also in 2003, Shipley gave me the distinguished alumna award, which was a huge shock to me because I had not had much contact at all with the school since I left.  And I had an opportunity to tell my story, which I had never done.  But I wanted them to know that I loved and appreciated the education that I got and that I saw it as a very positive thing.  It was very difficult for my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] to decide to send to me to Shipley.  That was not something that we did in the black culture.  You don't send your daughter off during her adolescent years to be part of a social experiment.  And I'd never really realized how much that had weighed on my mother because, of course, that shaped the rest of my life.  So they gave me the award, which was very lovely, and they honored and acknowledged my mother.  And the school official said, "I don't think I would have had the courage to send my child away like that."  And so I was very happy because although it's been my journey it was also my mother's.  So fast forward, I ran into a Shipley classmate at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] whom I hadn't even been friends with at Stanford.  Again, when I left Shipley I sort of didn't wanna have anything to do with Shipley.  Fast forward, I run into this classmate, and she's a, a writer for The New York Times and she said, "I ha- it's great to see you.  I have an idea and I'm wondering if you'd be interested."  And the idea was to create a school sca- a class scholarship for an underprivileged girl of color.  And she wondered if I thought that was a good idea, and if I would work with her on it.  And I said oh, I think that's a great idea.  So last May we went to our forty-fifth reunion, and we proposed this to the class, and that is what we're going to do.  And sh- they have said that it was because of knowing me, and it was a time when their lives changed that that inspired her to want to do this scholarship.  And so it just was so overwhelming for me to come out of the blue after all these years.  Because I think when you make personal sacrifices--I mean I did it willingly and gratefully.  I appreciated the opportunity.  But at some point when you look at where race relations are today, and you say was it worth it--you know, was it worth it?  And so this validates that.  It was worth it.  I mean, I decided it was worth it, but this is a, a, a really gratifying validation.
Story_ID: 670421
Speaker 1: And so the class has already pledged almost eighty thousand dollars, and we will be raising funds for a scholarship for an African American girl.  And I will be involved--once the school admits--you know, we're, we're, we're up the criteria.  And we would like it to be for a girl such as I, someone who had been exposed and well educated, but who didn't have the financial means to go to a school like Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].  And Shipley now is--I think it's thirty-six thousand dollars a year.  So it's actually come full circle.  And I'm having an opportunity to get to know the women whom I went to school with as girls who--there was a, a divide between the day students and the boarders, so they didn't have, you know, that much interaction.  And so this is a day student whose idea this was.  And so we have a core committee comprised of two day students and two boarders, myself and another woman.  And it's really just wonderful to get to know these women, and to see who they've become, and to see that they care and that they wanna give back in that way as a thank you to the gift--as a thank you to the school for the gift that the school gave us.  Shipley has--its motto is: courage for the deed, grace for the doing.  And I, I believe in that.  I mean that, that resonated with me when I went there because I believe that one should approach life with an open heart, which is really what courage is about--you know, derived from the French word coeur, the heart.  If you have heart--if you have the strength of heart and the courage to face life with all of its obstacles, and then to perform, to execute with grace--and I think as black people, no one has any control over the cards we're dealt, but when you're born into the world as a black woman or a black man, you've been dealt a certain set of cards.  And so you have to have courage and you have to deal with it with grace.  And that's why I think that my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] always says we're a miracle.  You know, we can criticize and, and look at our shortcomings, and there is always so much room for improvement, but when you think of the residual legacy that still is institutionalized and very much alive and well from slavery in our society, and you look at the accomplishments that we have made in spite of, you know we have so much to be proud of--so much to be proud of.  And, and The HistoryMakers is playing an important role in documenting the achievements of all of us, so.
Speaker 2: Okay, well thank you.
Story_ID: 670422
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968], as you were graduating, was there--now Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had just been assassinated; I, I suppose--did you graduate in May or June, or?
Speaker 2: June.
Speaker 1: June, okay.  And you said the, the--there was a trip that, that Shipley students took to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for the Poor People's Campaign?
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris]--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --took me.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was just really fascinating.  We went down on the train, and I was--actually, was it the Poor People's Campaign right before he was assassinated?
Speaker 1: Well, they were marshalling themselves to do it, but--
Speaker 2: Because there was another--
Speaker 1: --and it--
Speaker 2: --there was the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: That was in '63 [1963].  Now that would--that would have been when you were in eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--is that--
Speaker 2: That is--that's what I--
Speaker 1: --that's what you--
Speaker 2: --went to.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I stayed at Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] doing the fundraiser for the Poor People's Campaign.  I did not attend it.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right, okay, so this is--all right.
Speaker 2: And so it was--
Speaker 1: So '63 [1963] you went down with your mother for the March on Washington?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just remember the throngs of people, and it was so exciting.  And I just loved it.  I absolutely loved it.  There was such a sense of empowerment.  And, and I remember very vividly.  I remember a couple, they were--they must have been teenagers, you know nineteen, twenty.  And, and he had--I just, I just remember them being very affectionate with each other.  And then my aunt lived in D.C., and so we were staying with my aunt.  So I was very delighted to get to go to the march.
Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing Dr. King's speech and--or you know, did you think at the time it was historic or?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very aware that it was historic, absolutely, absolutely.  Yes, I--all of that informed who I became.  I always wanted to be an agent for social change, and that's why I chose media because I thought it was one of the most powerful mediums for change; and that's why I became a lawyer.
Story_ID: 670423
Speaker 1: Now but at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], now, now you're accepted to Stanford; you go to Stanford I guess in fall of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?  And at Stanford you majored in psychology.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: So how did this come about?
Speaker 2: Well, I majored in psychology because I--I've always--I'm an interior person.  I'm a thinker, and I liked--I seemed to be a natural counselor.  People would always tell me their problems, and so I, I majored in psychology.  But I watched a program on the justice system narrated by Ramsey Clark.  And I was so inspired by that that I decided I wanted to be a lawyer and go to law school.  And I helped found an organization on campus called the Stanford Prison Information Center.  And we put on a tutorial to inform the students about the criminal justice system.  And there was also a tutoring program--that was a separate program--at Soledad [Soledad State Prison; Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California].  And [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, who was a professor at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he was at Stanford when I was at Stanford.  He's three years behind me, and he was very active in that as well.  So I decided I wanted to be a criminal lawyer and reform the prison system.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, even as you were majoring in psychology, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it changed.  It changed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --in that last year.  Well, also, at the time I was interested in humanistic psychology, and that was a very new budding field; and none of the sort of Ivy League or top universities had that as a major.  They had behavioral scientists--be- behavioral psychology, and I was not interested in that.  So there was really--the only place for me to have gone would have been a school that was--you know, the department was new, didn't have a history or a track record.  And so I was--I knew I wanted to go to a major graduate school, so (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 670424
Speaker 1: At Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], when you got there in '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --was it 'Black Rage' by [HistoryMaker] Price Cobbs and William Grier [William H. Grier] had been published and was very pop- popular on campuses, the work of--
Speaker 2: Eldridge Cleaver.
Speaker 1: Well, Eldridge Cleaver, now that's a different kind of--I, I wasn't putting that in the psycholog- but you--but he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --but I (laughter)--the reason I, I just--it just--free association, because he came and spoke because, you know, we had these speakers on campus and we were demonstrating.  And so everyone's psychology was being challenged and tested.  And Stanford had its first black provost, Jim [James E. Simmons]--oh gosh, I'm blanking on his last name--but he played a very important role in all of our lives.  And I was--I had done a year abroad.  I did my first six months in Florence, Italy.  And because of the nature of what was going on in the states at that time, students weren't signing up to go overseas because they wanted to stay home.  And so they offered those of us who were already over in Europe the chance to stay for another six months, so I opted to stay for another six months.  And--
Speaker 1: So what year was this you were there for that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went first to Florence, Italy, for six months, and then I went to tour France.  And it was while I was in France that the provost offered us a trip to go to Algeria to actually visit with Eldridge Cleaver.  Eldridge Cleaver was in Algiers [Algeria] and--
Speaker 1: So he was exile--he was in exile (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in exile.
Speaker 1: He was--he had a warrant for him in, in California?
Speaker 2: He was in exile.  He was holding Timothy Leary under house arrest.  So while we were there--the, the three days we were there, there were three of us, and Time magazine came down to interview, I guess to check on Timothy Leary to see how he was.  And being--as I said, being very idealistic, wanting to reform the--you know, just, just being idealistic, being very much a part of the Civil Rights Movement and speaking French, Eldridge Cleaver asked me to stay on and be an interpreter for them.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that--now I'm a little confused now.  This is--so Timothy Leary actually, is actually is in Algeria at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With--and he's being held under house arrest by Eldridge Cleaver?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now how is this legal in Algeria?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is just something he was doing, but it wasn't--I, I, I mean assuming--was, was the Algerian government--I know a lot of people went to Algeria to--you know, where they're a revolutionary government at this point, right--a new one?
Speaker 2: And so they obviously were giving asylum to Eldridge Cleaver and--
Speaker 1: And Timothy Leary too.
Speaker 2: Well, Timothy Leary--I, I don't--I really don't know.  All I know is that we showed up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was there.
Speaker 1: Now for those watching this and don't know anything about him, in the future, 'cause a lot of people won't see--are gonna watch this and never heard of Timothy Leary, he was a professor from--
Speaker 2: Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Harvard, okay--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was involved in psycho--
Speaker 2: Psychedelic.  He, he was--
Speaker 1: Psychedelic drugs and--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a psycho- I don't know if he was a psychiatrist or a psychologist, but he was an experimenter in psychedelic drugs.
Speaker 1: Right and--
Speaker 2: And so people at that time were taking acid trips--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to see, you know, how the brain would be affected.
Speaker 1: And he was world famous.
Speaker 2: He was world famous and renowned.  And I don't know how he came to go visit the Panthers [Black Panther Party] there in Algeria--I don't know.  But he was there and evidently he was not free to leave.
Story_ID: 670425
Speaker 1: Now who was in the Panther [Black Panther Party] entourage, I guess, in Algeria besides Eldridge Cleaver?
Speaker 2: The names of the other people I don't know.  I don't remember.  What--I was very excited to be there.  Eldridge Cleaver was extremely nice to me, very respectful.  As I said he wanted to--me to stay on because I spoke French and be a translator.  And I think as a result of my Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] experience and my own sense of identity, I had the big Afro, very much wanting to claim my identity, and wanting to have a quote, unquote revolutionary experience.  I was a big supporter of the Panthers.  You know, they were doing wonderful work; they were feeding children; they were educating children; they were providing healthcare services.  I mean, they were being portrayed as terrorists, but they were doing many wonderful things.  And they were just really seeking social justice for a lot of oppression that was going on.  And so I wrote my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris].  I also was still interested in being the actor, so I had tried out for 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'].  There was a--in Marseille [France].  And I was finished with school [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and so I was a quarter ahead of myself because I had gone a year straight through.  And I didn't wanna graduate early, so I wanted to stay in Europe for another three months.  And I thought I'll try out for this play.  Maybe I'll get this role.  And then I went to Algeria and was asked to be the translator and it--and at first really wanted to do that.  And so I said to him, "Well, you'll have to write my mother."  And so he did, and my mother still has the letter in pale blue stationary with the Black Panther insignia that jumps out at you.  And he wrote her a very nice letter asking permission for me to stay on for a couple of months and be a translator.  And by day three, there used to be--everyone would be upstairs in a room and listening, talking, and the--there were concentric circles and I was in the second circle.  And someone got up and went down to do kitchen duty, and I--who was in the first circle--and so I moved up to be in the first circle.  And then the person came back, and I wasn't aware the person was going to come back, and so I said, "Oh, I'm sorry I took your seat."  And he said, "Oh no, sister, you didn't take my seat; it's the people's seat."  And in that moment I realized, hm, everything is communal here, and there weren't--there weren't any women.  I wasn't seeing any women.  And all of a sudden I realized, hm, I might become communal property (laughter) if I didn't affiliate or associate with someone.  And of course that wasn't what I was wanting.  You know, I was wanting to have this political experience.  And so I decided that I didn't wanna stay, and so I did not.  Meanwhile, I would have come--had I gone back--I would have still gone back to France and then come back.  In the meantime, my mother got the letter, and she and my brother [William James] were quite horrified.  And they admired the Panthers.  It's not that they, they didn't, but they didn't want their daughter there in Algeria with--
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: --Eldridge Cleaver.
Speaker 1: I mean 'Soul on Ice' [Eldridge Cleaver] had been published in 1960 [1968]--well, I know I read it in '67 [1967], so it was already out.  And he was--he made some remarks about women that weren't really very--
Speaker 2: Misogynistic.
Speaker 1: --encouraging.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but that's what I'm saying.  That's what was so fascinating, because he was not like that at all with me.  He was just this amazing gentleman and intelligent and just lovely, lovely.  Now I was only there three days, but that was my experience.  And when my mother decided--my brother was, "You tell her to get on a plane and come home."  And my mother was like, "No, no, I'm just going to use the truth and, and add something."  And so she told me she was going to have to have surgery, and she really would like me to be there for the surgery and so would I mind coming home.  I still hadn't heard about the play.  And she said, "And if you get in the play, then I'll send you back;" so I went home.  And she was having surgery, but it wasn't, you know, as serious as I had thought (laughter), and they just wanted to get me home so.  And then I did not get into the play so I did not go back.
Speaker 1: Now did you--did you happen to talk to Timothy Leary?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.
Speaker 1: Or see him even?
Speaker 2: I got a glimpse, but no.
Speaker 1: And was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they had him in a room.  You know, we were staying at a hotel, and we would come over and be there during the days and the evenings.
Story_ID: 670426
Speaker 1: So--well, so you come back.  This is 1971, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right, so you come--you come back to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in '71 [1971] and finish your--
Speaker 2: My last year, my senior year.  And it was very funny because my first year at Stanford--again, you have to remember that was the year, in '68 [1968], where, you know, the Black Power movement was strong and everyone was highly judgmental of what it meant to be black.  And fair skinned people had a hard time.  And that's okay because, you know, the truth of the matter is--is that no matter what our sufferings may have been, the world was kinder if you had lighter skin.  That's just a reality, and that needs to be acknowledge, so.  However, I--what--one of the things I'm most proud of Stanford about is that they instituted a policy of admitting students not based on need--I mean without regard to need.  And then they would give people scholarships, and they really took strong measures to recruit students from different socioeconomic backgrounds.   So there were a, a fair number of students who came from the inner city, and then you had people such as myself.  And so I came from the East Coast.  I was a preppy.  I had the nerve to fall in love and, and be involved with a Chicano, and I was ostracized.  So, I would go to the black student meetings.  I mean I would go faithfully, but no one was having anything to do with me; and then I went away to school.  So but by the time I came back--so that was my experience in my first year and a half there--by the time I--by the time I came back, I was a senior.  And the younger students had all heard--oh, here's this [HistoryMaker] June Baldwin.  She was there with Eldridge Cleaver (laughter), so it was quite funny, the reception that I had when I came back.
Speaker 1: So you were considered blacker when you came back than--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think--I think things had lightened up.  And I remember always feeling everybody talked a good talk.  And people were wearing their dashikis.  And I used to always think, you know, talk is cheap, you know.  I've lived my life.  I--and continue to live my life, you know, and I, I will--if we have to go there, you know, I will take you on, because I'm not just talking.  You know, I, I live my life.  I lived for four years and integrated that school [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], you know.  I went to--I wanted to go and meet Eldridge Cleaver, so--and I--by that point, I had chosen to be a, a criminal lawyer and I really thought I was going to save the world.
Speaker 1: There was, there were a number of cases that were coming to national attention around--in the cal--in California around--was the Angela Da- Davis [HistoryMaker Angela Davis] case, and that was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that, that was '71 [1971], '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Yes and George Jackson and--
Speaker 1: George Jackson, yeah; the Soledad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --brothers.
Speaker 2: Soledad brothers, and my brother [William James] was close friends with Elaine Brown, who was the temporary chair of the pa- Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] when Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] was in prison, and went to China and met with Mao [Mao Zedong], and was on the cover of Time magazine.  So, yes--I mean it was--it was a wonderful time--wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Huey, Huey Newton met with Mao prior to Nixon.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: Right, so '72 [1972] is when, you know, Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] goes over and made international news.
Story_ID: 670427
Speaker 1: You graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]--
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) June of '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: And you had--you had applied to--now Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is a, is a place where I think a lot of inspiring lawyers would, would want to go, so was that your first choice?
Speaker 2: Actually it wasn't my first choice.  Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] was my first choice.  Again, wanting to be--Boalt [Boalt Hall, University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] had a more progressive law school.  And I applied to Harvard really just for my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] and to--she didn't know I applied, but I was doing it for her and just to see if I could get in.  Because she had always wanted one of her children to go to Harvard, and so when I was accepted I told, and she was so surprised because she hadn't thought that I applied.  And--anyway, she said, "So, are you going?"  And I said, "No, I'm going to Boalt."  And so meanwhile time was passing.  And I was believing that they were letting me make my own decision, and I was choosing that.  And then one Sunday, one weekend, we had a little family counsel.  And it was my mother and my brother [William James] and some extended family who lived underneath, and the husband's Jamaican.  And so we were having this conversation and talking about my future, and what it boiled down to was don't forget who you are; you're a black woman in America, and it's 1972; and you don't have the luxury--you are going to need every advantage that you can to be successful in life.  And so, even though I really didn't wanna go to Harvard because I knew I would meet up with the boys from the boarding schools, I did.  I, I went.
Story_ID: 670428
Speaker 1: All right so your class was a big class of African Americans, right--the largest--
Speaker 2: We were the first class--the time Harvard admitted this size of a class.  The law school's fifteen hundred--it was at the time--and fifty blacks were admitted, nine women and the rest men.
Speaker 1: So who, who was in your class?  I know some famous people now.  Probably really--
Speaker 2: Yes, Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], chair of American Express [American Express Company], Pat Williams [Patricia J. Williams], the MacArthur Fellow [MacArthur Fellows Program], professor at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]--oh, Ted--goodness--Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore V. Wells, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Ted Wells, right.
Speaker 2: --major litigator, defended Scooter Libby.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Of Scooter Libby fame.  Yes, we had quite--we had quite an impressive class--Mario--Mario Baeza--he went on to become a--I believe a venture capitalist in Latin America.  I'm trying to think (pause) yeah.
Speaker 1: You'll probably think of some more as we--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --go through this, but--so were there any black professors at Harvard at that point in law school?
Speaker 2: We had the first black professor, Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], whom we all loved and adored.  He played such an important, important role for all of us, such an important role.  Harvard also hired its first female professor, a, a professor who taught family law.  I don't remember her name but--so those were firsts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well, as I said, I think off camera, that was the year of 'The Paper Chase' movie, where everybody saw John Houseman as the Harvard professor, asked the students to look to their left and right, and tell them that the other person's not gonna be there anymore, you know, and pretty soon they'll be weeded out basically.  So what was the fir- was it tough?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Now mind you, I was prepared to go to Harvard.  I had gone to private schools and Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and it was tough because it was psychological, and especially being--you know, it was the first time Harvard decided they were going to admit black students and see what it--how it would work, and so there was an expectation that you might not do well.  And Harvard being, you know, what it was, sort of the last bastion of elitism of a kind that's very old world.  And so I was used to racism among--you know, between blacks and whites.  But what I saw there was prejudice and a regionalism even, you know, the North versus the South.  When a white southerner would speak, you could cut the contempt with a knife, just the response to the accent.  And women were not called on basically in my first year--occasionally--but basically we were not really called on, and so the pressure, you know, very cutthroat.  I mean, people would say about the movie--they would say, "Oh, it wasn't that bad," and I would go, "No, it was worse" (laughter), so--
Speaker 1: So was the movie the Walt Disney version of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I think the movie depicts people actually undercutting other people for--'cause I don't know.  Is it graded on a curve or something or where you--where you sabotage other pe- people you rise or, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, and a--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--it was crazy.  It was crazy.
Story_ID: 670429
Speaker 1: And so how did you negotiate it as an African American student?  Did you--and a woman--did you--'cause I know study groups are a big part of graduate school on any level, and certainly Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so--
Speaker 2: That was a mistake.  That was a huge mistake on my part because I did not get into a study group early enough, and so I was doing a lot solo, which made it all the harder.  So it was, it was very tough, very tough.  But by--well, I still wanted to be out of there.  Well, actually, six months in, I knew I'd made a mistake.  I no longer wanted to be a criminal lawyer; I hated law school; but I didn't have the wherewithal to walk away from Harvard.  You know, I think one of the things I'm most proud of is that I represent truly the classic American story of opportunity.  I had grandparents, you know, who were factory workers, and my [maternal] grandmother [Ruby Luck McLaughlin] was also a domestic, and they worked in the tobacco fields.  And, and my grandmother got a high school--what would, what would have been the equivalent of a high school education.  My--which was going through eighth grade.  My [maternal] grandfather [Moody McLaughlin] went through fourth grade.  And two generations later they have a granddaughter who has the finest education that the company--that the country has to offer.  And so that's a lot of pressure on you.  You don't just say oh, sorry, I don't like this.  You know, I, I, I think it's part of my own nature.  I have a stoic side, and it was--well, and also what was the alternative?  You know, I still couldn't go into psychology because there still wasn't the kind of school that I wanted to go to.  But I did enjoy writing my third year paper.  I got to work with a professor by the name of Louis Loss, and he'd written the textbook on securities.  And so the, the part of the course that appealed to me was trying to protect those without a voice from securities fraud--so the elderly, the unsophisticated investor.  And so I--he was writing a, a, a treatise and my paper was on it--that topic, securities fraud.  And so that was something I felt good about.  But at the end of law school, I really didn't wanna be a lawyer.  I had applied for a clerkship, and I was very fortunate to get a clerkship [with Luther M. Swygert].  And that was--that was my best legal experience up until recently actually.  So--
Story_ID: 670430
Speaker 1: You were a clerk for Judge Swygert in--
Speaker 2: Luther Swygert [Luther M. Swygert], Seventh Circuit court of appeals [United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit].  And in fact, my best friend, Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], who's now a judge on the Seventh Circuit court of appeals, she and I clerked together.  We were the first two black women to clerk for the Seventh Circuit court of appeals.  And so Luther Swygert was one of two liberal judges.  And I got to work on desegregation cases, and the busing cases.  And he was a renaissance man, and he was just--he played a major role in my life; and I was very, very, very blessed.  And that's why, again, you know, when I look back and yes, Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] wasn't fun, but I don't know that without Harvard I would have gotten my clerkship.  And you know, that was--because I was always--what I loved about the law, I loved the law in theory; I loved its possibilities; I loved the idea of meting out justice.  And so as a law clerk, that's what you were able to do.  You didn't have to take a side because you were being paid to take a side.  You weren't representing a client.  You were just meting out justice.  And so that was--that was thrilling, and it was wonderful to be part of that process.  And I am so very proud of my friend who now is on the Seventh Circuit, so.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the cases that were being adjudicated when you were--
Speaker 2: The busing cases in Indiana.  And we got to work on those opinions where they declared that there was de facto segregation, and they had to bus students.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so these are the schools in Indianapolis [Indiana], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was--did, did you work on the Hare Krishna [International Society for Krishna Consciousness] case at, at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Air- okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now that's one he was listed down here for, Judge Swygert in--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did you--so you, you were there how long as, as clerk?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year, and this is in--
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975] to seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay, '75 [1975], '76 [1976], okay.  All right, they have an--was he working on the Black Panther [Black Panther Party] case at that time--I mean the suit against the City of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.
Speaker 1: For the--I think for, for the murder of Fred Hampton.  I don't--had it been--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear)--yeah.  Yeah, that was may, may- maybe it hadn't come to him yet, but.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 670431
Speaker 1: So you were there for a year and then--and then what were you thinking, 'cause you say you really didn't wanna be a lawyer at this point (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I didn't, but I had clerked for a firm by the name of Morrison and Foerster [Morrison and Foerster LLP].  And it was known for being the most progressive of corporate law firms.  It had a pro bono practice, and so that was very appealing to me.  So I had worked--it was a San Francisco [California] law firm, so I had worked in the San Francisco office during the summer after my second year in law school.  And then I clerk and then they extended an offer.  And in the interim, they had opened a small Los Angeles [California] office, a seven person office.  And so I was the first woman and only black in their Los Angeles office.  And I did not enjoy the experience, and left after a year, and still always attracted to the arts.  And so--
Speaker 1: So what, what happened there when you, when you left?  I mean you just--
Speaker 2: At the law firm?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is it just--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, actually, they told me things weren't gonna work out, but they did it very nicely.  They gave me three months notice, I could look for another job, and that's what I did.  And I went into entertainment at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is what, 1978?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977] to--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause I would have started--I came to Los Angeles in the fall of '76 [1976], so '76 [1976] through seventy- sometime in '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 670432
Speaker 1: Right, so you started looking at entertainment?
Speaker 2: Right, because I--you know, I knew the corporate environment wasn't for me.  I mean at the time I had--I'd cut off my big Afro and I had a very short Afro.  And I remember one of the partners saying to me one day--I had gone to get my hair cut--and he looked at me and he said, "Why did you have to cut your hair?  It was just beginning to grow."  And this was a time when again, as I said I was the first black in that office [Morrison and Foerster LLP], and these firms--we were the first to be in these law firms, and so they would have to prepare us and prepare their clients that they were assigning a black attorney to represent them.  So you know, I was beautifully dressed and well coiffed, but he did not like that short Afro.  So you know, I mean I knew I was never going to fit in there.  And it is about a culture, you know, people have to want to work with you and, and think you, you know, they obviously just determined--
Speaker 1: So this was a, what you characterized as a fairly progressive law firm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, was it as progressive as--
Speaker 2: Well, they did have the pro bono, and there were some nice partners there, there were.  And there was anoth- there was another black man who was in that office that year, so they had two blacks.  So it was--you know, it's all relative.  And it's a wonderful firm, and they, they really keep up, keep up with all of their alums and you know.  It's--when we tell our stories we have to always remember what it was like at the time, just to put it in context, compared to the other firms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they didn't have pro bono.  They probably--they may not have had anyone black.  And again, you need a mentor.  You need a mentor in these firms, and if you can't find that mentor--I think had I stayed in the San Francisco [California] office I would have had a mentor, but I didn't have one in the Los Angeles [California] office.
Story_ID: 670433
Speaker 1: You started investigating entertainment law, right?
Speaker 2: Right, because I had decided that I really--I wanted to be on the creative side.  I, I wanted to be around production.  I really wanted to produce.  I wanted to--I wanted to be part of using the medium to transform consciousness.  I wanted black people to see themselves on the screen.  I wanted women to be on the screen and playing certain roles.  And I thought, you know, television, film, you can really change things through telling stories.  So I went to my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris], who I had mentioned before was a runner with the guys at UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] track.  She ran with the very famous copyright lawyer by the name of Mel Nimmer [Melville Nimmer].  And he wrote the treatise and textbooks on copyright law, so it's 'Nimmer on Copyright' [Melville Nimmer].  So when my mother told him that--I mean, he knew all about me because they used to run, and people would tell stories about their children.  I remember being so surprised that this man seemed to know something--you know, a fair amount about me.  And so when she told him that I was interested into entertainment, he actually gave me the names of five firms and gave me their personalities, and told me which one he thought was best for me--this all in about a half hour conversation.  And so I contacted the firms, and I was able to use his name, and I got a job with an entertainment--a small boutique entertainment law firm--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and practiced TV and feature film.
Speaker 1: So, so what was the name of this firm?
Speaker 2: Silverberg, Rosen and Behr [Silverberg, Rosen, Leon and Behr]--Behr, B-E-H-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so, so this is--yeah, there are a lot of--well, you're really filling in the gaps in our information here 'cause we didn't know--so, so at Silverberg, Rosen and Behr what did you learn there that--
Speaker 2: Well, that's where I really learned I loved the feature world.  We represented Jon Voight and the film 'The Champ' was out.  We also represented Reggie Jackson, the baseball player.  I, of course, was the only black lawyer in this firm--about fifteen lawyers, two women.  So there was as much going on in terms of being black as it was being a woman.
Story_ID: 670434
Speaker 1: There was an organization that was founded called Women In Film [Los Angeles, California], and it was to create a network to support women's advancement in the business.  And I got involved with that organization and became a board member, and was on its board for five or six years.  And they also had a Women In Film Foundation, and I was on that board as well.  And that foundation provided completion funding for films, and so it was a major--a major resource and networking organization.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is--this is 1979 I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: And was there, there--who, who were some of the women filmmakers that, that, that, that your form--your firm [Silverberg, Rosen, Leon and Behr] helped?
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't at the firm--they--Barbara Boyle was a lawyer and an executive with a major studio.  I think it was United Artists [sic.].  I really don't remember.  But she invited me to become a member of Women In Film, as well as the founder of Women In Film, who was a woman by the name of Tichi Miles [Tichi Wilkerson Kassel].  And Tichi Miles owned the Hollywood--she and her husband [Kassel's first husband, William R. Wilkerson] owned The Hollywood Reporter.  And my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] used to run with Tichi and her friend, Kayla [ph.], again, at the track.  So the track played a big role (laughter) in a way.  I'd never thought about it like that, but just talking about it now, so--
Speaker 2: So your mother actually moved from the East Coast out to Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She moved out after my first year at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], because actually we were supposed to have moved to Los Angeles when I was seven or eight.  My mother had remarried and she and her husband [Leonard Harris, Jr.] had come to Los Angeles for their honeymoon, and my mother fell in love with Los Angeles.  And we were supposed to have moved here, but the marriage didn't work so we didn't move.  But when it was time for my brother [William James] to go to graduate school, my mother encouraged him to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And my brother was the first to come out in '65 [1965], and got his master's and then his doctorate in English romantic literature from UCLA.  And then my mother moved out in '69 [1969], and then she--
Speaker 2: Okay, so they were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --already out here.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right, so, so now, now what did--okay, so, so you, you, you're volunteering for Women In, In Film?
Speaker 1: On the board, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the board.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 670435
Speaker 1: You're working for the law firm of Silver--no--yeah--
Speaker 2: Silverberg, Rosen--
Speaker 1: Silverberg, Rosen and Behr, yeah.
Speaker 2: Leon and Behr [Silverberg, Rosen, Leon and Behr].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Okay, so (pause) go on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, sorry, so I left--that was not--I knew that law firm practice wasn't for me, but again, I had no mentor, I had no one to talk to.  I just was trying to figure it out.  So I was doing film and TV, and I thought, hmm, I always loved music.  I thought well, maybe I'll like--maybe I can practice music.  Maybe it'll be better there, and also because part of being in a law firm is building a practice and so you have to have clients.  And so I thought I have more contacts in music than I do in TV.  So I went to another law firm, Barovick--Barovick, Konecky, Braun and Kay [Barovick, Konecky, Braun, Schwartz and Kay] and that was a major New York [New York] law firm with a Los Angeles [California] office.  And they represented people like Neil Diamond, and Bob Dylan, and Michael Jackson, and Diana Ross, and Barbara Streisand.  And it was quite the law firm.
Speaker 1: So this is a big--yeah, this a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a bigger one than the other one--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And my office was right next door to John Branca's office, who was Michael Jackson's lawyer--went on to become Michael Jackson's lawyer, who was Michael Jackson's lawyer then there at the firm.  And it still didn't work for me, and I was very--I just was like, I don't like the law; I don't wanna practice; what am I going to do?  Well, I was involved with a--the Beverly Hills Bar Association, and it had a pro bono component program.  And one of the people, as it turned out, on the committee was someone who had gone to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], but I had not known him really.  But it turned out when I was in Italy, he was in London [England].  And he had a friend too who was in Italy, so he knew--he knew me--of me.  He was aware of me.  But we finally met on this bar committee.  And I had decided that I wanted to go into business affairs, because by that point in time I knew how the industry worked.  And I thought that's on the front line; that's where you make deals; you're close to production, and eventually I wanted to be on the creative side, so I thought this, this would be the way to go.  And I shared my goals with him, and he told me--his name is Jordan Kerner.  He went on to become a movie producer himself.  And he said, "Oh, I know there are two business affairs openings, one at NBC and one at CBS.  I'll introduce you to these people," and he did, and I got an offer at NBC.  I was going to get one from CBS I, I was told, but NBC wanted an answer and I decided to go with NBC.  And so that was the beginning--that's really what I consider the beginning of my entertainment career, because I was doing business affairs--
Story_ID: 670436
Speaker 1: So what--what year is this when you go to NBC?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was there six years, 1980 through 1986.  And I felt like I had finally--even though that was very hard, I was the--wow, I think first and only ever black woman in business affairs at, at NBC and certainly the first black woman business affairs executive at a network.  It was so hard back then.  Subsequent, CBS hired a black woman in business affairs, and she didn't have a positive experience then.  I just remember, you know, you would--if someone didn't have a positive experience collectively, the few of us, we would just feel oh no, they're not gonna hire anybody else because it was so hard to get the jobs to begin with.  But anyway, I was assigned a wonderful account, Johnny Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'].  And the way you advance at a network is you don't stay a long time typically, at least back then.  You moved around, and that showed you had ambition; and that's the way you got salary increases; and how you developed a breadth of experience.  Well, you could only get your next job based on who your clients were.  So--or what--they wouldn't be called clients 'cause it wasn't a law firm--but who your producers were.  And although I had the crown jewel on paper, I was never gonna be able to go work for Johnny Carson's production company [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California] because he was known for being so loyal, which was something that's not known in the entertainment industry.  Most clients are not loy- loyal to their first managers and agents, but Johnny Carson was, and he had his team in place.  And so that wasn't gonna be an opportunity.  And then I had a lot of other small independent producers that I did deals for.  And so--but--so I stayed.  I stayed; and then NBC--I worked on wonderful miniseries, 'Princess Daisy' and--
Story_ID: 670437
Speaker 1: So you were at the Johnny Carson show how long--'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson']?
Speaker 2: I was at NBC--
Speaker 1: NBC, right.
Speaker 2: --which produced 'The Tonight Show.'
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I was at NBC for six years.
Speaker 1: Six years and, and how long did you work on 'The Tonight Show?'
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, again, you know, everyone has a destiny, because although Johnny Carson--no one would have ever imagined that there would have been any change in his team.  There actually was a change.  And there was another woman who was--who has quite a background herself.  She was--she worked for Johnny Carson's law firm, Henry Bushkin.  And Bill Cosby was represented by Henry Bushkin, and Bill Cosby had been a mentor to Maynell Thomas.  And so he had helped her get the job in the law firm.  Well, she decided that she wanted to stop practicing law, and she was given the opportunity to become executive vice president of his production company.  So she and I knew each other, and she needed to hire a vice president of business affairs, and so she called to tell me that.  She wanted me to know from her that there was a position, but that she wasn't going to offer it to me because this was her first time on the production side; and although I had great network experience, I didn't have a lot of production experience.  But she didn't want me to think that I wouldn't have--you know, she wouldn't have made the offer otherwise, which I deeply appreciated.  Because again, at the time it was very hard to get to jobs, very hard to advance, and there was a very, very small--there weren't very many of us at any of these companies.  So a little bit later, though--about a month later she called me.  And she said, "I changed my mind, and I'd like to offer you the position."  So that's how I got to go in-house at Johnny Carson Productions--Carson Productions [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California].  And she and I were able to do something really wonderful.  Because of my experience at NBC and our being at the company, [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards was trying to get the Image Awards [NAACP Image Awards] broadcasted.  It had not been broadcast.  And so he had gone, Willis Edwards--
Speaker 1: He--he's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to talk--
Speaker 1: --the head of the Hollywood NAACP [Beverly Hills / Hollywood NAACP, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Yes the head of the Hollywood NAACP.  And he had gone to talk to the president of NBC, Brandon Tartikoff, to ask him to please broadcast the Image Awards.  And Brandon had said, "Well, if you can get a bonafide producer to, to do this, then we'll do it," and so Willis came to Maynell and me.  And he had gone to Hamilton Cloud [HistoryMaker Hamilton Cloud, II], who also had worked at NBC.  He'd been--
Story_ID: 670438
Speaker 1: In 1980, there were four, four or five black executives.  You mention one you interviewed, Phyllis Tucker Vinson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --Jackson [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson], myself, Hamilton Cloud [HistoryMaker Hamilton Cloud, II], and [HistoryMaker] Winifred Neisser.  And so Hamilton had left NBC, and Willis was offering him the opportunity to produce the Image Awards [NAACP Image Awards].  So when Brandon [Brandon Tartikoff] saw that it was gonna be Hamilton, who had worked for Brandon, and that it was Carson Production [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California] who would agree to be the production company, then he green lit producing the Image Awards.  So that's how the Image Awards got on television.  So and, and Maynell and I were very, very proud and happy to be able to do that.  And it was quite extraordinary to have two black women running a television production company at that time.  I mean that was unheard of, and, and a white person's production company (laughter), Johnny Carson's production company.  So, you know, again, the business is, it's who you know and it's not--I mean I don't even feel that that's a bad thing anymore.  You know, it's, it's sort of human nature.  It's, it's not helpful from a larger societal perspective, but that's the way business works.  And so, you know, if, if you didn't know someone and if you weren't part of a certain social setting, you weren't gonna be able to advance, and you wouldn't have an opportunity to play a significant role.  So it was really wonderful that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the production stories that I've heard, even the stories from a couple of agents we've talk to, have to do with access.  You have to get in the mix and then you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 2: --advance.  But if you never get in there, you're not--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --you're not gonna come in hire into a spot.  You're gonna--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --have to get in there and then--you know.
Speaker 1: And again, you know, it's all about contacts and knowing people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Phyllis Jackson had no idea that she would end up working for--I mean that--that wasn't her plan in college to end up being a producer for NBC.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and she transformed the children's programming, and she was instrumental in making Saban--Haim Saban, the man he became by giving him the opportunity to produce the shows at NBC, so yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so interesting.  So this is--yeah, Hamilton Cloud, his story is, you know, very similar.  You know, [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards, we interviewed him like about seven years ago.  So all these familiar names--Maynell Thomas, is a friend of Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --volunteers for The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 670439
Speaker 1: Did you wanna talk about the Image Awards [NAACP Image Awards] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, we--let's see, produ- we pro- I was there for, four years at Carson Productions [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California], and so we produced it four years in a row.  And it was very exciting.  And I did all the business affairs and so.  And it continued on and still going strong today.  And Vic Bulluck [Vicangelo Bulluck], who went on to become the head of the Hollywood chapter of the NAACP [NAACP Hollywood Bureau, Los Angeles, California], who now is with the Motion Picture Academy [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Beverly Hills, California], he was a writer on the Image Awards back then, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any stories about the production of the Image Awards?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sure Hamilton [HistoryMaker Hamilton Cloud, II] filled you in (laughter).  Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: He had some stories, and I, I, I also asked [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards.  And just as a casual observer, you know, turning on my television set I noticed that, you know, Michael Jackson won the Image Award I think it was in '84 [1984] or something--something like that.  It was right after his complexion had changed, his hair had changed, everything--he had all this surgery and everything.  And I said Image Award?  This is--I said what does this mean?  You know--I mean, that's, that's what I was thinking, and I'm sure I wasn't the only one in the country thinking that.  But someone quipped, well, he probably donated a lot of money to the NAACP, which--
Speaker 2: So that was in '84 [1984]?  That's before--
Speaker 1: I believe--
Speaker 2: That, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) somewhere--
Speaker 2: --before it was broadcast.
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]--it, it was--
Speaker 2: And I--and I would have been at NBC, so.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know if it was in--but it was whenever he won it.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --we--
Speaker 1: It might have been later, '86 [1986] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it could have been later.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], '87 [1987] I don't know, but he--but it was around that--in the mid-'80s [1980s] when he won.  And I was wondering Willis Edwards, "Yes, that's exactly right," (laughter).  (Unclear) it was--you know, not that--but you know, it was a kind of a--with the title being Image Awards and you see the image he had created at that point too.
Speaker 2: Well, but people didn't realize that he had vitiligo.  So in terms of his skin color--but of course, in terms of just choosing to alter his appearance, I mean, that's quintessential Hollywood was is it not (laughter).  Again, we're harder on our own.  And it was sad and I think you know, emblematic of the further, you know, psychological issues that he developed.  But I've--I always felt so very sorry for Michael Jackson--I mean, such a brilliant, brilliant man and I think a beautiful heart, and you know, he, he didn't have the kind of childhood that one would hope for someone.  You know, child stars they're, they're really sort of exploited whether it's intentional or not.  That's just the reality.  And they don't get to evolve emotionally or develop emotionally.  So it's complex.  Michael Jackson's a complex person, so.
Story_ID: 670440
Speaker 1: Might I go back to NBC (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: During the six years, again, it was--that was a period where there was a lot of social issue--a lot of big social issues that were still being addressed, or that were be- that were being addressed for the first time.  Two of the three proudest career achievements for me were doing the business affairs for the movie for television called 'Roe vs. Wade.'  And that was the story about the [U.S.] Supreme Court case where it granted women the right to choose and to have an abortion, making it legal.  With Gena Rowlands--no, take that back, not Gena Rowlands.  I don't remember who was in there, but I was excited because I got to actually speak to the lawyer who argued the case [Roe v. Wade 1973] before the Supreme Court, whom I met about five--four years ago through Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams] at an event where she was being honored.  So--and then we also did 'An Early Frost,' which was the first movie for television about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and that starred Gena Rowlands and Aidan Quinn.  And so, again, those, those were the types of, of films that I always wanted to be affiliated with, because they were teaching and showing people to not be afraid to understand, and presenting, you know, social, social change, important social change that--to advance society, so.
Speaker 2: Was it difficult to--well, I know it's always probably some convincing that has to take place when something like 'Roe v. Wade' or, or the the 'Early Frost' was produced (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I would say the, the TV executive and, and Hamilton [HistoryMaker Hamilton Cloud, II] was there in the movie department.  And there is a woman by the name of Joan Barnett.  And she was head of movies for the week.  So it took courage on her part and courage on Brandon Tartikoff's part to say is the public ready to see this?  Will this be received?  And fortunate they both--fortunately, they both did very well I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  You said there were four things--
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Three, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, what was the third one--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: The third was being part of the presidential forum debates when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], our president, was running for, for his first term.  And KCET [KCETLink, Los Angeles, California] was a co-producer of 'The Tavis Smiley Show' at the time.  And we produced the Democratic and national forums--debates--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and that's when I had an opportunity to first meet the now president and first lady [Michelle Obama], which was a, a real honor.  I had heard of him and known of him because of the Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] connection, but you know, that was my first opportunity.
Speaker 2: So that was 2008 I guess, right--that was--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was 2008.
Speaker 2: With KCET.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 670441
Speaker 1: You were associ- you, you also worked for Norman Lear [at Act III Productions], right?
Speaker 2: I did.  Yeah, I've been very fortunate to have worked for all the major cultural ico- television icons of the 20th century (laughter).  It's quite bizarre when I look at it.  So I went from Johnny Carson [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California] to I guess it was Norman, whom I had always admired.  Actually there were only three people whom I wanted to work for.  I wanted to work for Norman--the pe- the people were Norman Lear, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, and Oprah Winfrey.  Because I was always looking to be with a company that had shared values or what I perceived of shared values, that it wasn't just about making good entertainment.  But it was also making socially significant programming, and Norman Lear was such a person and such an amazing human being.  And he had already founded People for the American Way.  But unfortunately, six months after I got to the company, he decided to restructure his business empire.  He had, you know, theaters and publishing company, and film division, and television, and theaters, and decided to, to go in-house with business affairs and have the studio handle it, so the company shut down.  But he is such an amazing person because when those kinds of things happened, it was not common for your contract to be honored 100 percent on the dollar.  And Norman Lear and the other senior executive at the company, a Mr. Mark Pollock [Mark E. Pollock], they came to my office and apologized and said they would honor my contract and pay me a hundred percent to the dollar.  And you know, that was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now, now do I have this in the right sequence then?  After NBC did you go work for Norman Lear?  Is that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would have been in--
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, '90 [1990]--yes.  So I was there for six months.
Story_ID: 670442
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --then I went to [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is--you go to Quincy Jones in--what year is this?
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991], okay.  All right, so this is Quincy Jones' production company [Quincy Jones Entertainment Company; Quincy Jones Productions, Inc., Los Angeles, California], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.  Q and D--Q, QDE, right?
Speaker 1: QDE.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but that was his music label.  I worked for the television and film company.  And that was--it had been called Quincy Jones Productions, but again, soon after I arrived he partnered with a man by the name of David Salzman, and so the name of the company became Quincy Jones / David Salzman Productions [sic. Quincy Jones / David Salzman Entertainment].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so what, what was it like working with Quincy Jones?
Speaker 1: That was a great experience.  He is a genius, not only musically, but he has an emotional genius because, you know, the entertainment business, and especially when you're a celebrity of his stature, it's very stressful.  And I never, ever saw him take out any stress on anyone.  He was as kind and polite and gracious to a janitor as he was to the head of the CEO of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.].  So it was a real pleasure.  And I also had the opportunity to advance in my career, because although my title was senior vice president of business affairs, after a year I began to operate like a chief operating officer.  So I got to expand my responsibilities, and that was great.  And at the time we were producing 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' and had many wonderful projects in development feature film projects that unfortunately didn't go forward.  But yeah, that was--that was a great opportunity.
Speaker 2: Give us an example of your, your role in--as, as counsel and you know, vice president.
Speaker 1: Well, what it meant was is that you were responsible for all the deals that the company would be engaged in, so all the development deals, so you'd be making deals.  For writers you might make--if you--I did not at Quincy Jones.  We didn't have writer development deals, but if we were optioning a book, I would make the deal with the writer to option the book.  If we were entering into any kind of joint venture agreement for a business opportunity, I would make that deal.  Actually, 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' was not something I worked on in a daily basis because that was handled by NBC Productions because it was a co-production, but any sort of ancillary things that might be related to that.  And so we had television, we had film.  As I said, I went on to take on a--more of an operational role, so we had an office expansion.  When Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected, we produced the first entertainment program in Washington, D.C.--so being part of that, and I got to go back to the inauguration.  That was really fun.  So any and everything that Quincy--the television development and the featured film development, making the deals, and business development, and operations.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so you were with--was Quincy Jones from '91 [1991] into--
Speaker 1: To '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: And so what, what happened in '94 [1994]?
Speaker 1: Well, he took on a partner and--as I mentioned--and the company was wanting to go into a different direction.  And the partner wanted to bring on board someone who had experience in the areas that he wanted to go into.  And so it was all very friendly.  I remember at Christmastime they gave bonuses, and they gave me a very big bonus.  And they were thanking me and telling me how much they cared about me and that even though I knew I wasn't staying, my work ethic had not changed one iota.  And so that was very nice.
Story_ID: 670443
Speaker 1: I had been looking for another position and thought I was getting a position at Universal [Universal Pictures], but that ended up not working.  And I then--while I was looking I did some consulting work for an animation company, Hanna Barbera [Hanna-Barbera Productions, Inc.].  So that was great because that--that was '95 [1995]--that gave me exposure to animation, something I had never been exposed to.  And then I went to Aaron Spelling.  I got a position at Aaron Spelling [Aaron Spelling Productions; Spelling Television Inc.].
Speaker 2: Okay, now Aaron Spelling's another big producer.
Speaker 1: A huge, huge--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Mega television producer, all the--'Melrose Place,' 'Dynasty,' 'Dallas'--I mean--you know there's--there are so many, so many.
Speaker 2: So, so what was your position there?
Speaker 1: Initially I came in as number two, but after two months my boss left and I became in the--number one.  And again, it was doing business affairs, so lots of, lots of writer deals, actor deals, producer deals, producer deals, director deals, just hardcore business affairs, deal making, negotiating the deals for all of the elements involved in production, and license fees.  We did '7th Heaven.'  That was a great show, while I was there.
Speaker 2: With Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] I think it--was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: Wasn't that the one?  That's the--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --I've got that--
Speaker 1: No, you're--
Speaker 2: --mixed up then.
Speaker 1: --thinking of--
Speaker 2: 'Touched by an Angel,' right.
Speaker 1: 'Touched by an Angel.'
Speaker 2: I've got my heavens--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and angels mixed--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  But it was a feel good, very wholesome--very unlike--his other shows were, were wonderful, but this was a very--he was very proud.  He himself, Aaron Spelling, was very proud of '7th Heaven.'
Speaker 2: Different from 'Dynasty' or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, so.  But, so I sort of specialized in doing business affairs at the boutique independent production companies that were very well financed.  Johnny Carson [Carson Productions; Carson Entertainment, Burbank, California] was financed by NBC.  Quincy Jones [Quincy Jones Entertainment Company; Quincy Jones Productions, Inc., Los Angeles, California] was financed by Warner Bros [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.].  Aaron Spelling [Aaron Spelling Productions; Spelling Television Inc.] just had his own money because he was so successful.  And then, I then went to UPN [United Paramount Network].  That was an--a network that had been formed between Columbia [Columbia Pictures] and Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation].
Speaker 2: Okay, so what year is this at UPN?
Speaker 1: That is '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997] I believe.  Yeah, '97 [1997], '98 [1998], '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe '98 [1998].  And I was there a year.  I actually went there--again, by that point in time, I had actually--after I left Aaron Spelling, I was really tired of the corporate world.
Story_ID: 670444
Speaker 1: And I really--a business opportunity came my way.  And I decided that I wanted to try and see if I could make a go of this business opportunity.  And it was to raise funding--fourteen million [dollars]--for a record publishing and music label, jazz.  It was for Dr. George Butler, who was a renowned executive.  He was the first African American to head worldwide jazz for CBS.  And he was the one responsible for Miles Davis coming out of retirement.  And he, Dr. Butler--George--was part of our extended family.  So he had approached me when I was working for Aaron Spelling [Aaron Spelling Productions; Spelling Television Inc.] to see if Aaron Spelling did investments, because he was trying to raise money for this new venture he was involved with.  And then when I left, I--it was such a fabulous package and, and not knowing what I was doing--ignorance can be bliss--I, I loved the idea of trying to see if this could work.  And so I hired someone to do a business plan, and went out and did the dog and pony show, and thought I had seven million raised, and--'cause then you can leverage off of that.  But then anyone who does this knows how extremely difficult it is to do this.  You know, to raise that amount of money back then would take at least eighteen months.  And then it would also depend on what was going on with that industry and the economy at the time, and it was not a good time for music.  Anyway, you know, I wasn't working, and I was just doing this.  I wasn't being paid.  The, the money that there was went to some other people, but I wasn't being paid.  And, and I had been advised not to do it.  But I had the fever, and it was a great experience.  I loved it, but eventually I had to go in and, and go back to work.
Story_ID: 670445
Speaker 1: So there was a regime change taking place.  The chair had given notice that she was resigning, Lucie Salhany at UPN [United Paramount Network].  And their business affairs--their head of business affairs was leaving, and so they didn't know who the new CEO was going to be.  They hired the number two person as the interim while they did a search, and that interim person might have gotten it or not.  And so they were looking for a business affairs person, and no one wanted the job because there was no guarantee that it was gonna be long term.  So I was the only person who could afford to do that because I was just coming off on the heels of my, my business, my independent business venture.  And so I went over just to, you know, be there for a short term, a couple of months.  And then it turned out that that interim CEO was not selected.  And they brought in a new CEO.  And then, of course, in true fashion, as we knew, he didn't wanna keep me as the head of business affairs because he wanted to bring in his own person.  But the person he brought in was someone I used to work with at NBC, and so that person wanted me to stay on. And so I ended up staying there for--I think I was there for two and a half years.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1997, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--yeah, mid--
Speaker 2: All right, so any interesting business items from UPN days?
Speaker 1: (Pause) Nothing really to speak of.  I think what I learned there, which was great, was--you know, it was a new independent network, and I always like being with startups.  And because it was a startup, you got to get involved in things outside your own area.  So I got exposed to other aspects of the business that I otherwise would not have, and I really enjoyed that--like underwriting, you know, commercial time, how that worked; so--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 670446
Speaker 1: So you moved on to TriStar, right?
Speaker 2: Columbia TriStar [Columbia TriStar Television].
Speaker 1: Columbia TriStar.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's in 2000.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went back and worked for and with a friend from the NBC days, a former boss, and was there for two years.  By that time, throughout my career, as I mentioned early on, I always had a sense of mission and wanted to do something that was gonna help make a difference, so none of the jobs--as I said, excluding those two movies ['Roe vs. Wade' and 'An Early Frost'], I hadn't accomplished--I didn't feel like I was doing here what I came here to do.  So I had been on many nonprofit boards that reflected my values, so that was rewarding.  But I was really burnt out, and so I decided--it, it was a confluence.  It was perfect timing.  Columbia TriStar decided it was not going to continue in the primetime television business.  So it laid several people off, and I was one of the people.  And I wanted to figure out what I was gonna do.  And I thought I wanted to go into the foundation world, and I would go out for select positions.  And I would get to be a finalist, but I wouldn't get the job because they would be afraid to hire someone who hadn't had a background in the foundation world, even though they really needed, you know, a business executive.  So I was still trying to figure it out when I heard about the position at KCET [KCET; KCETLink, Los Angeles, California].  And I heard about it two days in a row from two different people, and I took that as a sign.  And my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] had actually been a volunteer at KCET.  And she had said that when she was there on the studio lot, she always said, "I wish June [HistoryMaker June Baldwin] could work here."  And so several years later it came to pass.
Speaker 1: So this is 2002?
Speaker 2: No, I worked for Columbia TriStar between 2000 to 2002.  And then I, I took off, and I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had a break from 2002 to 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: So this is 2004?
Speaker 2: Yes, 2004 (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 670447
Speaker 1: At KCET [KCET; KCETLink, Los Angeles, California]--this is the, the flagship public television station for Los Angeles [California] area, right?
Speaker 2: Second largest market in the country, yes.  So this was--it was, it was great.  I mean, I really felt at last I'm in alignment with my values.  I mean, I love it entertainment.  Don't, don't misunderstand me, but I, I had a, a need for something more.  And it was huge move, though, because I took a huge salary cut; I took, you know, a lower position.  I had been a senior vice president, and I was a director.  But on the public television side a director is a higher level than on the commercial side.  But still I took a huge salary cut and--but I was so proud.  I was so proud of everything I did.  And you could have never told me that I would have been okay with certain kinds of contracts 'cause I'd never--remember, I'd never like the lawyering.  So this was a legal job.  It had a business affairs component, but it was nothing like business affairs.  And that was a very small amount of the job.  It really was a legal job.  But I took to it right away and you know, loved that we co-produced 'The Tavis Smiley Show.'  And, and we did many wonderful co-productions, 'Auschwitz: Inside'--
Speaker 1: 'Inside the Nazi State' ['Auschwitz: Inside the Nazi State'], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And wonderful show for child givers.  It turned out that across the country 63 percent of preschool children were under the care of licensed caregivers.  But in California it was only 33 percent, so there was a real need for a program to, to help teach caregivers how to make children ready for school.  And this was funded by an array of--First Wives of California [ph.], different funders.  And they had an English version and a Spanish version.  'A Place of Our Own' was the English version, and 'Los Ninos en Su Casa' was the Spanish version.  So that had a run of six years.  We also did a--co-produced a wonderful science show for children called 'Sid the Science Kid.'  We did that with Jim Henson.  So just worked on wonderful programming, and did the legal work in all aspects affecting the station, so it wasn't just production.  It was corporate underwriting, it was facilities, it was unions.  Every aspect: membership, fundraising.  So I, I enjoyed that, and did that from 2004 to 2010, and was actually thinking I was going to have to leave because there I had been living my values and loved it--loved it, loved the people--but still wasn't making the kind of salary I needed to make; and as I said, was thinking I was going to leave when everything changed.  And we left PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] because the business motto for public television is really broken and our dues had gone up 40 percent--ten years and for- every year for four years frozen at 40 percent.  And we were basically subsidizing the other public television markets in the area--the television stations in the--in the area.  And so as much as we didn't wanna leave PBS, we did.  And we were then the largest independent public television station, so that was a huge change.  And what happened is someone left, and it allowed for people to be promoted.  So my boss, who was the general counsel--that's why I was gonna have to leave because I knew she would never leave, because why would she?  I mean, she had the cream job.  But she was promoted to the office of the president, and she went into fund- in the fundraising revenue side.  She had also handled foundations while she was doing GC [general counsel] work, and she had a family background that made her very--it was a very good fit for her.  And I became general counsel and just took to that also, because I loved all the, the breadth and all the learning, you know, learning all the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] compliance and rules.  And so it's been three years, and I'd say we've been so much.  We had a merger last year with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now--yeah, I was gonna ask you what your role in that--in the merger in (unclear) --
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I played big role (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 670448
Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us about the merger between KCET [KCETLink] Los Angeles [California] with San Francisco [California] based Link Media [sic. Link TV; KCETLink].
Speaker 2: Yes, well, of course as I mentioned, we had to leave because the business model for public media was--is not sustainable or viable.  And over the past fifteen years there's been a decline in membership revenue and--for all public television stations.  And so we were a local regional station.  And in terms of fundraising, our--we were limited to foundations who would support local programming.  And we wanted to have access to a national--to underwriters who would support national programming, but we didn't have that footprint.  So we were introduced by our board chair to Link Media and its principles, and they had a need also to, to change their direction.  And our missions were complimentary.  Their mission is to bring the world to America and to encourage social activism and advocacy and engagement; and, you know, ours is, again, to inspire, inform, entertain, and enlighten, so we decided we would merge.  And KCET was the acquiring company.  And I handled that merger with outside counsel of course.  But that was huge, my first time doing an M and A [merger and acquisition] deal; had never thought I would like that and loved it, just loved it.  So I had to oversee a team of eleven outside lawyers.  And you have to do your due diligence, and that's a very intense, long process, and get all the consents, and every contract, and financial investigation.  And so it was--took about six months from the time when we started talking in June about possibly merging to December 14th, when it was actually official.  And so it's been great.  It's a, a great--a great channel.  As I said, it can be seen on Direc [DirecTV] and Dish TV [Dish Network].  And it has international news, and international documentaries, a lot of international programming, and scripted.  It has a wonderful drama called 'Borgen' from Denmark and--
Speaker 1: It's called what?
Speaker 2: 'Borgen,' B-O-R-G-E-N, and Borgen means government.  And it's the story of the first female prime minister.  And it's gotten rave reviews.  And you couldn't buy this kind of publicity.  Shonda Rhimes, the creator of 'Grey's Anatomy' and 'Scandal,' she tweeted that what she loves to do to relax is curl up with some 'Borgen' DVDs.  So we're proud of that.
Story_ID: 670449
Speaker 1: And we're, we're still--everyone in public media is struggling.  And we're still trying to find a way to, to raise greater revenues and still exploring strategic alliances.  In the three years we also made a move.  We left the studio lot, which had been the home of the station for forty-four plus years.  And we moved from Los Angeles [California] to Burbank [California].  And so for me it was very interesting because it was like coming home full circle, because we are literally across the street from NBC.  And I can look out and see the same mountain that I used to be able to see at NBC.  So I handled the lease agreement with the landlord into our new beautiful two floor studio.  We don't have two full floors.  We have a, a floor and a half.  And so we've just gone from one--you know, selling--finding a, a, a buyer to buy the lot, and the public was--we got some negative feedback about who we sold the lot to, because it was sold to Scientology--the Church of Scientology.  But you know, we had an, an obligation to sell to the highest bidder.  And one thing one has to acknowledge is that the Church of Scientology has an interest in historical sites, and that's--that KCET [KCET; KCETLink, Los Angeles, California] site is a, is, is a historical site.  It's the production--it's that lot--is the only one that's been in continuous production from the time it started.  And some of the orig- first silent films were produced on that lot.  So it's been in continuous production.  And the Church of Scientology gets very high marks from the conservancy organization because they take very good care of the properties they acquire.  So they made a deal we couldn't refuse, and allowed us to move to Burbank with the state of the art equipment.  And so that's been a good thing for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so now you're also--you consult with Steptoe and Johnson [Steptoe and Johnson LLP], right?
Speaker 1: We have outside counsel, yes.  And Steptoe and Johnson is our outside intellectual property counsel, and Michelle Cook [ph.] is an African American woman who's a partner at Steptoe.  She handles our IP [intellectual property] matters.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so it's not you that's consulting with Steptoe and Johnson.  It's Steptoe and Johnson--
Speaker 1: No, we hire--
Speaker 2: --consulting with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We hire them.
Speaker 2: --KCET Link, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, they are our outside counsel.  You have--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --specialized counsel.  We have FCC [Federal Communications Commission] counsel; we have real estate counsel; we have estate and tax counsel, you know, because we have (unclear) and requests.  And you know, I, I work in all areas of the stations as I--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --said before.
Speaker 2: So you coordinate all, all those other lawyers.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, yeah.  And we also are a union shop, and so we have unions.  And I handle the union negotiations and--with the collective bargaining agreements.
Story_ID: 670450
Speaker 1: You're a board--you're on numerous boards--Hollywood Women's Political Committee--
Speaker 2: Well, those are prior boards.
Speaker 1: Prior boards?  Okay, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are prior boards.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Currently, I am on the ex- I'm involved with the Los Angeles County Bar Association, and they have a corporate law section.  And I am on the executive committee of the corporate law section.  And I chaired last year our corporate roundtable program, which is a series of four dinners where you get continuing legal education.  We're required to maintain our license by taking the continuing legal education courses.  And this year I am co-chairing our Outstanding Corporate Counsel Award Dinner, where we honor a general counsel who has very high stature in the community.  So that will be taking place.  That dinner will take place in May.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm involved with that.  And I'm on the board of a, a new nonprofit called Stop Bullying [Stop Bullying Foundation, Inc.].  And I have been advisory--on advisory council for the Minority Health Institute [Minority Health Institute, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you are also--are also the former chair of the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Foundation [sic. Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, Los Angeles, California] and Educational Program and Services Committee, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the program and services committee of the Television Academy, I chaired that for several years.  I was a governor for--I don't know if it was six or--six or eight years.  I don't recall, but for production executives I was the governor.  They have thirty-one peer groups, so they have writers, directors, producers, production executives, and there are two governors that represent the peer group.  And it's the organization that produces the Emmys [Emmy Award].  And then the academy has programs, and the program and services committee had three--has three wonderful programs that have achieved very high ranking.  There's something call the Princeton Journal of Review [sic. The Princeton Review], and it ranks internships, not just entertainment internships, but industry-wide internships.  And the Television Academy's summer internship program has been on the top ten list for forever.  And that's an opportunity.  It's very, very important.  It's an opportunity for people to intern in fields in which they think they want to work.  And that's how you can get your mentor, your first job.  And again, when I became a governor, it was primar- all the governors were primarily male and white.  And a dear friend of mine, Meryl Marshall-Daniels, became I think the third ever woman chair of the Television Academy.  And by the time her term ended, she--the, the governors were almost 50/50, male, female.  There are still only two black governors, myself and another gentlemen--but you know, just breaking down barriers.
Story_ID: 670451
Speaker 1: Because everything in entertainment is about networking and who you know. And so as you said earlier, access.  You know, you have to have the access to the, to people or else you got--no matter how smart and no matter how talented.  I mean, it's hard under the best--even if you're a part of the inner circle it's difficult.  It's just a very speculative business.  The, the finances, the, the economics are not good, you know, a lot of risks, very expensive production.  Production is very expensive.  I mean, that's why we've had this switch to reality shows, because it's so much less expensive, and of course, it just took off, and it's a big ratings success.  But anyway, it really is about having access and getting your first job.  And so the Television Academy [Academy of Televisions Arts and Sciences Foundation, Los Angeles, California] plays a big role in that.  It also has another program where it brings professors who teach film and TV from colleges across the country.  And it has a three day program for them where they get to hear panels, network heads, agents, managers, so they learn the business.  Because they typically tend to know the journalistic side, but they don't necessarily know the production side, the commercial side, and really how it works, so very important programs at that the Television Academy presents.  And, and again, they took on the issue of diversity as, as a result of my friend Meryl Marshall-Daniels.  And they had--they did a program on diversity, celebrating diversity.  They had--at the time, it was the first African American chair the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard].  And he came out and there was a--we did a program.  And of course the aca- the Academy did a major program on the information highway with Al Gore in the beginning.  So it's a major, major organization.  And it was great to, to be a governor for as long as I was.  And then I decided I wanted to, to stop with all the board activity because it was pretty demanding, and I was on multiple boards at, at the same time so I cut back.
Story_ID: 670452
Speaker 1: What's next for you?  Do you--is this--you think this is your terminal position or what, what would you like to do next?
Speaker 2: No, I think there is--there is still something else left.  I'm not quite sure what shape.  I, I--I'm not someone who loves to take risk, but when I do I go for it.  So, for example, you know, always been part of Corporate America, but then I decide oh, I'm gonna try and raise $14 million (laugher) in funding for, you know, two companies.  I wouldn't do that again, but I'm, I'm really glad I had the experience.  But I still would, would like an opportunity where I could have some kind of ownership in a company that would be appealing to me.  And I'm very committed, though, to public media, and I'm, I'm hoping that KCETLink [Los Angeles, California] will, will brave the, the challenges that we're going through presently.  And so I, I will still be with KCETLink in the foreseeable future.  But I do, just in terms of, you know, is there something that I would like to do.  And I haven't quite--I don't what it would be, but it--I would like it if it were something that was entrepreneurial.
Story_ID: 670453
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major move that you would undo?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I would undo is that I went into television, and I really wanted to be in feature films, but I was talked out of it.  And you know, my advice to people is to go with your--what you feel drawn toward, you know, what resonates for you, especially when you're young because you have nothing to lose.  You have plenty of time.  And you know, when I would tell people why I wanted--why I was in the business and they would say, "Well, you can affect many more people in television than you ever can in feature films.  And feature films--I mean, projects are in development for three to four years and then they don't go, and then they're not successful; and how many people see them?"  And all those, all of which are true, but at the end of the day--I don't if it's because of my own sort of artistic past interest; I don't know, but I, I love independent film.  And so if I had it to do all over again, I would not be in television.
Story_ID: 670454
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think I have made a major contribution to how the television business community responded to and accepted minorities into the business.  And I, I, I tried to be a role model to other minorities coming behind, emphasizing the importance of supporting each other and you know, remembering that we're all standing on someone else's shoulders, and all the sacrifices that were made on our behalf, and that we can never forget that; we should never forget that.  We have to honor our ancestors, and it can't just be about your own personal desires.  It has to be about what's good for the larger community.  And you know, pay it forward, and reach back and help someone else because any career is demanding and especially the entertainment.  It's very little division between your work life and your personal life, so it's very hard to get ahead.  And it takes all your time and energy.  So it can be very--it's a sacrifice to reach out and mentor other people--or take the time to help someone figure out how their resume should be written or what their career path should be and that kind of thing.  But it's, it's absolutely critical and essential that we do that.  And I, I think I've led that kind of a professional life.
Story_ID: 670455
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family.  I know--now you've never been married, right?
Speaker 2: I have never been married.  I'm a Libra, and Venus is my sign (laughter).  I'm all about love, but somehow the stars didn't align.  I was engaged, and that was a very positive experience.  I was engaged to a very successful writer, producer, executive producer in 1990, but it didn't work out and we never got married.  But it let me see that--you know, that--I think that would be very nice under the perfect--the right conditions.  But I have been very blessed in love early.  You know, I--I would have to say, you know, I've had some wonderful loves that some people never have whether they're married or not.  But all of that was earlier.  In the last--in recent history, it's very hard.  My job has been so demanding.  And I think it's very--it's hard for professional women whether you be white or black, if you really are at a senior level because many men are not interested in that type of a partner.  And then the--again, being the time that I came along in the entertainment business where everyone is so ambitious, and it's predominantly white, no one white is going to--was going to marry a black person because that's a career liability.  So there are like two exceptions that I've (laughter), you know, know of.  So there was not even a pool.  You know, I was in--my exposure, my job took up so much of my time, so it's been--that's been hard.  But a friend--not a close friend, but someone I know Richard Banks [Ralph Richard Banks], who's a professor at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], he wrote a book.  I don't know if you remember 'Is Marriage for White People?' ['Is Marriage for White People: How the African American Marriage Decline Affects Everyone,' Ralph Richard Banks]  And it's a whole study on successful African American women.  And I gather, out of all races, we are the least inclined to date outside the race--only 8 percent, as opposed to sixteen for Asians and Latinos.  And gosh, the number is somewhere like 67 percent of professional black women are single.  So you know, I was in that first wave of, of women who had an opportunity to have a career.  And I remember in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in family law, the first woman professor at the law school, one of the things she had us do was draft a marriage contract.  You know, all, all the, the changes in society that I've lived through have been huge, and there are consequences, there are consequences.  So--I mean I'm not alone.  It's unfortunately far too common, but I'm--luckily I'm independent, and I've had a wonderful, very rich life.  And I haven't given up hope.  In fact, (laughter) I just signed up for eHarmony.  I'm gonna put that on the record, because it's sort of like a joke with my friends because I said I was gonna do it.  I've been saying I was gonna do it for years and I finally did it.  So I'm proud of myself, going outside my comfort zone because again, when you're as involved in a career as I am, again, you get into that comfort zone.  And I think it's also hard, because someone said to me, "Well, you know, it would be very hard for you because most men would think you don't have time for them."  And I said, "Well, I don't think that--I can see why someone might wonder, but to actually come to that conclusion would be very strange to me."  But I guess that's also true for women who have, you know, high positions.  Perhaps men feel that we don't have the time or--but I think it's not true.  I think when you--your--if you want that, then you'll change your priorities.  And when you don't have it, then of course your work is going--'cause your work can just eat you alive; you know there's always work, so.
Story_ID: 670456
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Audrey McLaughlin Harris] still alive, and--
Speaker 2: My mother's still alive.
Speaker 1: --your brother [William James], he's?
Speaker 2: My brother--my brother's a college professor.  I'm very proud of him.  He's taught--he's been tenured at El Camino junior college [El Camino College, Torrance, California], which is the largest junior college I guess west of the Mississippi.  And he was an adjunct professor for sixteen years at USC.  He was the first chair of their African American department.  Even though his field is English romantic literature, he did his Ph.D. on the portrayal of the black man and by the romantic poets.  But he make--and he has also taught at his own school, UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  But at a community college where typically, until recently, you had a population that didn't have the ability or the same kinds of privilege as a school like USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] or a school like UCLA, he has transformed so many lives.  And I'm so proud.  My--you know, we're all about giving back.  That comes from my mother.  And my brother does it in his work, and he gets great evaluations.  And you know, students write and say how he opened their eyes to possibilities that they would have never entertained.  And even within his own field of English romantic literature, even if you didn't like that field, he's such a great teacher that he brings it alive, and he makes it relevant to the issues that are going on today.  So he's--I'm very proud of him, and he does a great service.  But we have a small family.  My [maternal] grandparents [Ruby Luck McLaughlin and Moody McLaughlin] only had two girls, and they each only had two children.  And my brother and I haven't had children.  And my aunt [Lelia McLaughlin]--aunt's daughter, she actually had five children, so.
Story_ID: 670457
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think we've--I think we've covered it.  I think we've covered it.  I, I, I, I would say in--just in terms of for the future, I would also like something that involves an international component, because I really do feel connected to the world, and en- enjoy when there is that kind of connection.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you travel quite a bit?
Speaker 2: I do or I have in the past, yes.  I've traveled in Southeast Asia and to Europe.  I haven't been to South America and I haven't been to South Africa, but I've been to Africa.  We just started actually going on cruises, jazz cruises, Dave Koz jazz cruises.  And so I took my mother [Audrey McLaughlin Harris].  She loves her birthday, and I always surprise her.  And I--we took her on the Dave Koz Cruise to Italy and Greece this past September and then to Alaska in 2011--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --where we met Chris Botti and developed a, a nice rapport with him.  He did a special birthday for my mom.
Speaker 1: Does your mother--is she still friends with, with these prominent musicians and--
Speaker 2: Well, they're all gone.  They're gone, but when, when anyone does come to town like Milt Jackson or--oh, Benny, Benny Golson--yes, she definitely sees them--goes to see them and they reminisce and, yeah.
Story_ID: 670458
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit dif- different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who cared about her fellow, her fellow travelers.  Someone who worked hard to improve the human condition, and someone who modeled a consciousness of who we really are that is much more than just the physical but that it really is about the spiritual component.  We're so much more than our mind or our bodies, and I think the--one of our major life lessons is to, to learn that and then live your life accordingly, understanding your purpose and mission, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 670459
Speaker 1: One of my passions is political activity, and I was on the board of the Hollywood Women's Political Committee, PAC [political action committee].  And I was very involved in the Obama election campaign, and I'm there with--at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] with a rally that Oprah Winfrey attend and the first lady [Michelle Obama].  And I'm with Alfre Woodard, and Tracee Ross [Tracee Ellis Ross], and Jurnee Smollett [Jurnee Smollett-Bell], and my mother.
Speaker 2: Can you name everybody from left to right?
Speaker 1: Left to right--Jurnee Smollett, her brother [sic. Evan Ross], Tracee Ross, Alfre Woodard, Sharon Jones [ph.], Audrey Harris [Baldwin's mother, Audrey McLaughlin Harris], and myself.  I was on the original board of Artists for a New South Africa [Los Angeles, California], and Alfre was one of the original board members as well.  And it became Artists for a New South Africa, and Jurnee Smollett is on that board.
Speaker 2: "Change We Can Believe In," Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] personified all of my values, wanting to bring, bring about a change in society, a better and more equitable place where all human beings can realize their potential.  I campaigned in four different states, went to the Democratic National Committee and was part of the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] election fraud team.
Speaker 1: Christmas picture with my mother and someone who's extended family and like a sister, Cynthia Shearer [ph.].  I'm very proud of this relationship because our families go back three generations.  And my great-grandmother and her great aunt were teachers together in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Part of my extended family, my roommate from boarding school--one of my roommates.  Starting from right to left, Marcia Perry, who is the partner of Meg Biddle, who's on the far right, myself, and their daughter, Celia [Celia Perry].  Meg Biddle comes from the Biddles, the founding--the founders of our first banks.  And she was one of the few girls at Shipley [Shipley School for Girls; The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] who had an open heart and is like a sister and have been a dear friend.
Speaker 1: My maternal grandmother, Marie Carter [Marie Newsome Carter].  My mother says I'm like her.  She, in her speech, used to have malapropos, where you will say the wrong word.  And she also loved sending cards, and I inherited that.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: I guess that is about '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: That's a picture with my father, John Baldwin [John Baldwin, Jr.].  And I guess I must have been six or seven there.
Speaker 1: That's a picture with me with my brother.  We're at the Emmys [Emmy Awards].
Speaker 2: That's a picture with my mother in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on Pomona Street.  I still remember that dress.
Speaker 1: Left to right (unclear).
Speaker 2: Left to right--this is the picture of one of my closest friends, the bride there, Gail Milissa Grant Costelli [Gail Milissa Grant].  She married an Italian film set designer.  But from left to right, my best friend, Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], Judge Anne Clare Williams--she married Gail and Gatetano; my mother; I mentioned Gatetano Castelli; myself; my brother; and Claire Stewart, Anne Williams' daughter.
Speaker 1: This is my third or fourth birthday party on Pomona Street with friends in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: This is last September, my mother and I on the Dave Koz Cruise about to go into dinner.
Speaker 1: Again, this is the Dave Koz Cruise.  On the bottom we have my mother, we have me sporting play hair, Melvin [ph.] and Michelle [ph.]; the next line from right--from left to right--Angelique Electra, Gail Costelli, David Stewart, Ann Williams, Ester [ph.], and Larry [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is my father's family, my grandmother, Carter in the middle.  From right to left my brother's [sic.] siblings, my uncle Clem [Clement Newsome], my aunt Marie [Marie Newsome], my grandmother, that's my father, his sister, my aunt Bea [Beatrice Newsome], and in the bottom, my aunt Myrtle [Myrtle Newsome].
Speaker 1: This is my great-grandmother, Ella Luck.  She married someone who had been sold as a slave.  She was greatly respected in her town.  She had sixteen children.  They were called giants because they were so tall at that time.  She was half Irish, and she was a formidable woman.  And--
Speaker 2: Is she paternal or maternal?
Speaker 1: Maternal.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what, what year do you think this is?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s]--
Speaker 1: Yes, definitely 1800s, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is a family portrait of me when I was just an infant with my family, my father, John Baldwin, my mother and my brother, Bill [William James].
Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandfather, Moody McLaughlin.  He was an amazing man.  He read the newspaper cover to cover every day.  He was very well educated and informed, even though he didn't have a lot of formal training.
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother, Ruby, born Ruby Luck [Ruby Luck McLaughlin].  She was an amazing woman.  There was nothing she couldn't do.  She could paint, she could sew, she could cook, she could lay down tile.  She was amazing.
Speaker 1: This is my maternal--my paternal great-grandmother, Grandmother Newsome [Pauline Newsome], whom I didn't know.  She passed before I was born.  But she--from everything I've heard about her, she was quite a refined, cultured lady, and she's part Haitian.
Speaker 2: This is my mother's only sister, Lelia McLaughlin, named after her grandmother, Lelia Berry [Lelia Berry Yates], at nineteen.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Audrey Harris, at nineteen again.
Speaker 2: This is my maternal great-grandmother and my great-great-grandfather.  They look like they're husband and wife, but they're mother and--I mean they're daughter and father.  And she, Lelia Berry, was the renowned schoolteacher known throughout Virginia; and her father was a barber.
