Story_ID: 4575
Speaker 1: [Photo 1 (from the left) Peter Bynoe; John  H. Johnson, Johnson Publishing founder; Henry Louis Gates Jr., Chair of Harvard University's African American Studies Department pose for a photo after Harvard University granted Johnson an honorary degree. Color still. Photo courtesy of Peter Bynoe. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4576
Speaker 1: [Photo 2 (from the left) Colin Powell, Alma Powell, Peter Bynoe.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4577
Speaker 1: [Photo 3 (from the left) Peter Bynoe, wife Linda Bynoe, friend on slopes at Telluride ,Colorado.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4578
Speaker 1: [Photo 4 Peter Bynoe in a publicity photo for Swissair.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4579
Speaker 1: [Photo 5 -Potrait of Peter and Linda Bynoe by legendary photographer, Victor Skrebneski.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4580
Speaker 1: [Photo 6 Peter Bynoe and Denver Mayor Michael Curley.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4581
Speaker 1: [Photo 7 (from the right) Victor Bynoe Sr., Peter's father; Sugar Ray Robinson with two other gentlemen.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4582
Speaker 1: [Photo 8 (top row) Victor Bynoe Sr, unknown gentleman; second row; unknown gentleman, famed Brooklyn Dodger, Jackie Robinson.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4583
Speaker 1: [Photo 9 Victor Bynoe Sr, standing behind a young John F. Kennedy and two others.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4584
Speaker 1: [Photo 10 -Victor Bynoe Sr. standing behind Ethiopian Emperor, Haile Selaisse. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4585
Speaker 1: [Photo 11 Victor Bynoe Sr. with government officials. No credits accompany this photo. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4586
Speaker 1: [Photo 12 Victor Bynoe Sr. meets unknown man and woman.No credits accompany this photo. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4587
Speaker 1: [Photo 13  Victor Bynoe Sr., 3rd from right, meets with others. No credits accompany this photo. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4588
Speaker 1: [Photo 14 -Victor Bynoe Sr, 4th from the right, meets with the "Brown Bomber," legendary boxer Joe Louis, second from right and others. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Peter Bynoe.]
Story_ID: 4589
Speaker 1: But what- I usually start out by just asking some- these are just simple questions.  I mean questions with short answers if you have -- if you have an answer.  If you don't, then just let me know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know what I'd like you to (unclear).
Speaker 2: My favorite food (chuckle) fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite word, phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "What's UP!"
Speaker 1: What's up.  Okay, good.  Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Purple, oh!  Favorite- I like purple, purple's a nice color.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Telluride [Colorado].
Speaker 1: That's your place.  Weren't you out there recently?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Story_ID: 4590
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I want to start with your childhood.  And I'd like you just to describe what growing up was like in Boston.  And I would like you- to take you back to, you know- I don't want to say your first memories.  But you know, your memories of your household.
Speaker 2: My first memory was when I was four years old.  And my mother came home with my younger sister, Betty.  I had an older brother and both of us were hoping for a sister.  And we got what we asked for.  And seeing her in the crib was probably my first real memory. And I was four years old at that time.  But it was a house that was always full of people, my mother [Ethel] and my father [Victor], my sister [Betty] and my brother [Victor Jr.].  We lived with my mother's mother [ name], my mother's aunt, [name] another aunt [name].  There were always people in and out of the house.  We never had a paid babysitter (chuckle).  It was always somebody that was home.  And it was just a family that had dinner together every night.  Everybody's schedule was fairly flexible.  But the house rule was that between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. you had to be home for dinner.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So every evening there were seven or eight people around the table just kicking it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So it was-- it was a good experience.  I learned a lot from my older brother who's eight years older than me.  I watched him interact with my mother and father.  It made my ability to interact with them much easier, (chuckled).  I learned from his mistakes.
Speaker 1: Now your older brother, what - With him being -- what was his name?  His name was--
Speaker 2: Victor Junior.
Speaker 1: His name was Victor like your father.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What -- when you say that you learned from his mistakes- Just to sort of- I mean I'm sure you were -- he may have been a different temperament than you.
Speaker 2: I think he is the first-born.  And you know, being Victor Junior, of the fairly prominent Victor Senior in the city of Boston was under a lot of pressure.  And not just from his peers, but also from my father and other family members.  And I think he, he dealt with it as well as could be expected at that time and place.  And he dealt with it for eight years without me being around.  During that period, my mother had another son who was born but died a couple of days later-- something that we didn't talk a lot about.  But once again, when I was cleaning out the house after my father passed away, I found a telegram from Boston State Hospital, " Dear Mr. Bynoe: Baby Bynoe is dead." This is 1947, that's how they notified people of death in the family, at least that's how they notified black people.  So I understood then why I was born in a different hospital in 1951 than that particular institution.  But you know, my brother through a similar educational process- public schools.  And when I came along, you know, it was very peaceful thing.  But as he got older, I just think there was the natural tension that there are between fathers and sons.  And I watched my brother deal with it.  And I just learned a lot from it,I learned what my father's hot spots were, (chuckle) and what his soft spots were.  So it made life for me much easier, and I'm forever appreciative of my brother, you know, taking that -- taking that weight.  But a lot of it had to do with the fact that he was born while my father was away in World War II.  So the first- probably year of his life, he was being raised by my mother, my mother's mother, my father's mother and a number of different aunts. And so when my father came home from World War II, I think his perspective was that the boy was just ruined (chuckle).  He promised that, that would never happen to me.  So it was -- it was a bilateral kind of thing.  It was not only what I learned from watching my father and brother interact.  It was also what my father had learned from raising my brother, which I think made it a little bit easier with me.
Story_ID: 4591
Speaker 1: Describe my father. Very proud, but very humble, never said more than what was necessary had to be said, communicated a lot with body language.  Took great pride in his family-- no, not just my mother and my brother and my sister, but his extended family.  He was one of six children, the oldest.  And he took great pride in that part of the family, and his mother and father and everybody.  And he was a caretaker.  Not just when he need family, but for the broader family.  And a significant amount of his time, especially later in his career was doing immigration law and so basically getting people a citizenship visa, other accommodations from the West Indies coming to the United States.  Helping them find jobs,  helping them get educations, helping other people grow their families.  A significant amount of his time and effort in the West Indian community as well as the broader community.  He was very active in local Episcopal church St. Cyprians, which had a significant West Indian population.  Began a credit union, Boston Progressive Credit Union which catered to the financial needs of not just the West Indian community, but the broader African-American community at that time.  So he was a person who cared about other people.  And, you know, he had a number of challenges in his life when he moved to the United States he was thirteen years old, but he adapted very well.  He went to Northeastern University [ Boston, Massachusetts] at a time before it was fashionable I think for African-Americans at a white university.  Despite that, he won the public speaking award three out of four years.  He was the runner up his freshman year.  But once again being the humble person he was, he never shared that with me until probably - I was thirty years old and he was accepting an award from Northeastern University when he finally told me the story.  And I asked him, you know, to what did he attribute his oratory skills?  And he explained that his mother was one of another of Western immigrants who every week would go to be tutored by an older Jewish lady on their English skills.  My grandmother could not afford a babysitter.  She would take my father along and he would just sit in the corner.  So he just picked it up through osmosis and he had a number of experiences similar to that.  He got out of Northeastern University I think in 1936 with his Engineering degree and could not get a job as an engineer `cause they were not hiring black engineers in Boston in 1936.  So he worked in a grocery store and went to law school at night.  During that time he met my mother and they became married.  He graduated from law school.  The U.S. army was so desperate for engineers that they finally decided to take black engineers. So he went to World War II and went overseas, as I said, at the same time, my brother was born.  Came back, went into private practice.  [He] was the first Black appointed official in the City of Boston.  Based on his engineering background, I think he was the director of Public Works for the city.  And then he was on the [Boston] housing authority.  And so he always did a number of different things, somewhat of a renaissance man.  He always had his private practice.  Did a number of municipal city -- statewide kind of activities and a lot of community activity.
Speaker 2: Let me- Let me go back to how he ended up coming...
Speaker 1: Hmm.  and how that experience- I know he didn't talk- you know, you said, there are a lot of thing you didn't- he didn't share.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: But did he ever talk about, you know, how it was coming to Boston at that time?  And how he felt as a young person?  You know coming from basically Barbados
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: ...to- to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, my father - my father was not a person who dwelled in the past or on the past.  He was always looking forward.  So he really didn't tell a lot of stories, share a lot of insights.  And most of- it's really funny, I guess as time gets compressed.  Most of what I learned about my father and the things that happened before I was born were only in the last few months of his life.  Where he felt comfortable just talking and sharing, you know, just giving me some perspective on who he was and you know, what he had been doing.  And I don't know to what extent that had a negative or positive impact on me `cause I always thought the world of him.  But as he got closer to death, I thought even more about him and more highly of him and I just regretted not having, being able to kick around a lot of those ideas and talk about a lot of those experiences.
Story_ID: 4592
Speaker 1: What were some of the perspectives that he did show you?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, as he watched me during the time I went to college for example, was you know, the turbulent '60's and all of the unrest on campus.  And he tried to get me to focus on, you know, really the opportunities that I had ahead of me as opposed to, you know, the problems that were surrounding me.  I mean he was the kind of person who focused on the positive, ignored the negative.  He would not make excuses because of the color of his skin, or the fact that he was from the West Indies.  That was just the cards, those were the cards he was dealt, and he was gonna play them.  And so as I tried to deal with, you know, different issues of taking over buildings and undermining (chuckle) the administration at Harvard University [Cambridge, MA] and trying to get an Afro-American Studies Department started.  He just shared with me his perspective on, you know, looking at the positive as opposed to the negative.  And really not lowering myself to what were often very racist and unfair standards.  You know, not just in the city of Boston, but throughout you know, that whole community during those times.  And that was I think the one thing that he probably gave me the most perspective on was how to survive and prosper in a place as narrow minded, backward, and racist as was Boston.
Story_ID: 4593
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now your mother, Ethel-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Her name was Ethel Stewart.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Where, where - how did they meet- what - first describe what kind of person she was.
Speaker 2: Very caring, very sensitive.  I never heard my mother say anything bad about anybody.  And it was interesting- I think that it was an interesting relationship. And I think that a lot of the drive and a lot of the business acumen I draw from my father.  A lot of attention to detail and my sensitivity to other people, I draw from my mother.  I think they were very complementary in terms of how they dealt with each other, how they dealt with other people.  I can see a lot of both of them in me, as I - you know- as I evaluate and assess myself.  My mother was from Virginia, once again moved to Boston when I think she was about two years old, when her family brought her to Boston.  For the same reason my father's family brought him to Boston, to find a better opportunity.  She was born in Petersburg Virginia, but raised and lived most of her life in Boston.  As I said, they met in the grocery store, where he was working.  And then she subsequently worked, you know, had three children.  Well four, one they lost.  And I- as I look back, you know, I felt very fortunate, and still feel very fortunate that I not only had both of them, but really an extended family, which I grew up and I never had a baby sitter.  And so, I - I'm oftentimes, I probably take it for granted.  And don't realize how special those times were, or how valuable it was to have, you know, the input from both of them.  And often very different kind of perspectives on - you know - similar kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Now one question I have is that a lot of times West Indians - there's a lot of talk about West Indians and their place in American society and how often they're viewed as doing better than...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: African-Americans.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm - I'm interested how, you know, was there - you know, 'cause it's two different cultures.  She's from the American culture.  Was any of that do you remember any of that sort of coming up?
Speaker 2: I remember - I think there was some difference of opinion on a number of things.  I think there were a number of people in my father's family who thought he should have married a West Indian as opposed to somebody from Virginia.  I didn't really understand or appreciate that until I was much older and understood (chuckle), you know, what the conversations were about.  That's one of the things my father talked about, you know, in his last year.  You know, in terms of just the pressures and how he had to deal with it.  How my mother and he had to deal with it and how they overcame it.  Because at the end of the day, no one could get mad and stay mad at my mother, no matter where she was from (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And - but there was I think, you know, the pressure that any community puts upon its members to stay homogenous as opposed to, you know, branching out.
Speaker 1: And do you think that your West Indian background has had impacted you- Do you think that- you know, West Indians are viewed a lot of times -
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: As harder workers, as more-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, you know, everybody has different perspectives.  I tend to not put people into slots or, you know, generalize, or stereotype.  I think, you know, I'm clearly a combination of both of them.  I've always worked hard, I cannot say that's because my father is from the West Indies or my Mother was from Virginia.  That just the way I've dealt with things, I really have never thought of myself as a West Indian, because I was born in Boston.  And, you know, it was only as I got older that any of these kind of labels became relevant.  I mean, I grew up in Boston at a time when schools were still integrated, and the public schools were somewhat competitive.  I did not really appreciate or understand the concept of racism until I was in the sixth grade.  And it was time to go into the next level of education.  And my principal suggested that I go to trade school, as opposed to one of the better schools.  And my father became apoplectic (chuckle).  I've never seen him go that crazy.  And he sort of explained to me what was going on.  And that was my first, you know, real encounter.  Or (chuckle) maybe I just missed a lot of things happening around me, or what really racism was.  So a lot of the labels and the stereotypes were not a part of my life.  I had Black friends, White friends, Asian friends.  That was just the school system I grew up with.  And then when I went to high school, once again it was a mixture and diversity of people.  It was really when my sister began going to school which was four years later, that you saw the unfolding or the demise of the Boston Public School system, all the issues of racism rising, busing, or whatever.  The true story (chuckle) was that the entire Boston school system was corrupt, (chuckle) and was weak.  And that the race issue was used to divide, you know, poor Black people from poor White people.  While the well-off people ran the city of Boston continued to do so.  So the whole thing was a farce  'cause it was ridiculous to bus people from terrible white schools, to terrible black schools or vice versa.  But people got caught up in that issue, as opposed to the over quality of education in the city of Boston.
Story_ID: 4594
Speaker 1: And do you think that your West Indian background has had impacted you- Do you think that- you know, West Indians are viewed a lot of times -
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: As harder workers, as more-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, you know, everybody has different perspectives.  I tend to not put people into slots or, you know, generalize, or stereotype.  I think, you know, I'm clearly a combination of both of them.  I've always worked hard, I cannot say that's because my father is from the West Indies or my Mother was from Virginia.  That just the way I've dealt with things, I really have never thought of myself as a West Indian, because I was born in Boston.  And, you know, it was only as I got older that any of these kind of labels became relevant.  I mean, I grew up in Boston at a time when schools were still integrated, and the public schools were somewhat competitive.  I did not really appreciate or understand the concept of racism until I was in the sixth grade.  And it was time to go into the next level of education.  And my principal suggested that I go to trade school, as opposed to one of the better schools.  And my father became apoplectic (chuckle).  I've never seen him go that crazy.  And he sort of explained to me what was going on.  And that was my first, you know, real encounter.  Or (chuckle) maybe I just missed a lot of things happening around me, or what really racism was.  So a lot of the labels and the stereotypes were not a part of my life.  I had Black friends, White friends, Asian friends.  That was just the school system I grew up with.  And then when I went to high school, once again it was a mixture and diversity of people.  It was really when my sister began going to school which was four years later, that you saw the unfolding or the demise of the Boston Public School system, all the issues of racism rising, busing, or whatever.  The true story was that the entire Boston school system was corrupt, (chuckle) and was weak.  And that the race issue was used to divide, you know, poor Black people from poor White people.  While the well-off people ran the city of Boston continued to do so.  So the whole thing was a farce  'cause it was ridiculous to bus people from terrible white schools, to terrible black schools or vice versa.  But people got caught up in that issue, as opposed to the over quality of education in the city of Boston.
Story_ID: 4595
Speaker 1: Peter, what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) I think you need to ask somebody else that.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm asking the question.  What was, you know-
Speaker 2: Hmm
Speaker 1: What would- you know some kids are rambunctious, some kids are shy.  So...
Speaker 2: I was pretty much with the program home. You know, basically if my mother or my father told me to something, I did it. I was not a problem child.  I was mischievous.  You know, I'd get caught in, you know, little pranks here and there, but nothing ever serious.  A couple of times I got asked to leave grammar school for you know," conduct unbecoming a young man of my age" (chuckle), but nothing ever that serious (still laughing).  No more than a day's worth of suspension.  And, you know, the most difficult part was having to go home and explain it to my mom and my father (chuckling).  All and all, I was a serious student, not that I spent all my time studying but you know, serious about my homework.  But I always loved athletics.  You know, watched my brother play football, run track.  So you have an eight - having a brother eight years older was great in terms of just getting to go out and meet people and see things.  I had a number of cousins who took me under their arms. I had a cousin in New York I could go visit every summer and go to the Apollo Theater [ Harlem,NY].  I had another cousin who was an art major, and went to Tufts University  [Boston, MA].  She exposed me to the art world.  So I had a number of- it was just an extended family of people who helped me grow and prosper. And they really looked out for me.  And hopefully I reciprocate it.
Speaker 1: Now I - were - when you were young, were there things that - did you dream of - of being someone?  Or did you dream - or did you have ideas about what you wanted to do at that point?
Speaker 2: Not really, I think the first time I started dreaming or having any visions, I was about 12 years old.  My mother drove me through Harvard Square and told me that's where I was gonna go to school.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Before that time, I really hadn't thought about college.  I hadn't thought about, what, you know, what kind of career I might pursue.  I really enjoyed my childhood and I think - one other thing my father told me, when I was very young, and I was always trying to do things that my brother was doing.  He said," Peter, you know, if you do everything your brother's gonna do, what are you gonna do when you grow up?  You gotta save something for later on."  (chuckle).  And so I tried to pace myself.  And I think it worked out for the best.
Story_ID: 4596
Speaker 1: Now what area of Boston [Massachusetts] were you in?
Speaker 2: An area called the South End.
Speaker 1: Back Bay?
Speaker 2: Not Back Bay, the South End.
Speaker 1: South End, okay.
Speaker 2: Which has been a neighborhood that has changed a number of times since the time I was born and left, from good to bad, to better.  I mean there were a number of brownstones in our block that probably sold in the $5000 to $10,000 range and then later on they were selling for $400,000 or $500,000.  It was a neighbor - neighborhood that gentrified significantly during the course of my growing up.
Speaker 1: Now describe your neighborhood.  I mean you've described your family good.  But describe your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: A mixed bag, I'd say lower to middle income.  But then, you know, they got older and it became a better neighborhood as it gentrified (chuckle).  But, you know, everybody hung out together; there weren't a lot of issues of class or money.  Everybody always seemed to have what they needed.  You know some had more, some had less but I never even thought in those terms.  (chuckle) I always had what I needed; I never felt that I wanted for anything.  There was always plenty of food in the refrigerator .  There was always a - I mean there was always a new car, so I mean I lived a very comfortable life.  I can't say in any way that I was disadvantaged.
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like you to share a couple of other memories.  Like you know, you shared the memory of being four years old.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Story_ID: 4597
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like you to share a couple of other memories.  Like you know, you shared the memory of being four years old.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Any other memories, you know, elementary school or junior high or-
Speaker 2: I think probably the one everybody in the family talks about is I was probably five or six years old.  We were down in New York where we had a significant number of relatives on both my mother and my father's side.  It was a big party on a Sunday.  And I had on a white suit and I jumped in a bucket of oil, I never lived that down, (chuckle).  They remember it (unclear).  I was somewhat mischievous and would get into trouble, but nothing too serious.  Nothing criminal (chuckle)...
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: -that I can talk about.
Story_ID: 4598
Speaker 1: Anything else?  Discussions around the table or any, you know, sad points in, you know, your fam - you know any crises that occurred?
Speaker 2: Crises, sad points- Like I said, my brother took most of the weight.  When my father passed away, I- we had a memorial service I spoke at.  And I said," You know, the one thing I will always remember was their interaction.  And one time when my brother was in high school, I think I was in grammar school at the time and he cut school for the day.  And he came home, you know, for dinner at 6:00 p.m.  And my father was waiting for him .  And he was- and now this was before all this issue about no corporal punishment and spare the rod and whatever (chuckle).  And he basically asked my brother if he had gone to school that day, and my brother said,"Yeah, I was there." He said," No, no." And we lived in a brownstone.  And my brother and I lived on the top; the fourth floor was where our bedroom was.  And my father basically beat him all the way up stairs to the fourth floor and back down and then told him he couldn't have dinner.  So  I knew that cutting school was inappropriate behavior.  At least getting caught was inappropriate behavior and that, that--that was one of my father's hot spots.  I mean the whole educational thing was just very important to him.  Because that's how he perceived himself as overcoming a number of the challenges presented to him.  And he just insisted that we deal with that.  And, you know, he was disappointed in a number of things that happened educationally with my brother.  And he - basically he stayed on me about it.  So, it wasn't- I didn't have an option, I knew that I was gonna go to college .  I knew that I was gonna go to grad school at a minimum.  Those were things I knew I had to do.
Speaker 1: ... and did--.
Story_ID: 4599
Speaker 1: off camera : I wanted to ask about growing up in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: I know you said that it was, you know, it was diverse.  And you think it is such a different city
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Than, you know, Chicago [ Illinois].  I myself am from a - you know - very small town.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, how it was growing up as a black person in a city like that?
Speaker 2: Oh I think, as I say, it got worse as I got older.  As the issue started getting raised, as people started pressing for change for, you know, sharing the wealth.  People really became very adversarial to the point when I was in high school, you know, there was a group of white people who attacked a black person in front of City Hall with a flag pole [Pulitzer Prize winning photo of the attack in 1976 see  < http://legacy.poynter.org/worthalook/wal040201.htm> ]  That was the Boston I remember as an older person.  As a younger person, I probably was oblivious to it because no one was challenging anything.  I think the number of minorities in Boston was so small, that no one felt threatened.  As the number grew, as people started pressing for change, equal opportunity, then it became very contentious and people turned very ugly.  And there were parts of the city that just - you know, you didn't go to. You didn't go to East Boston, you didn't go to South Boston, you didn't go to Charlestown, especially in the evening.  You know, if you had to go there for work, or whatever, you were careful about which route you took, and well, when you came and when you left.  It became divided and very divisive city and community.  And that's the way it was when I left.
Speaker 1: And what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Boston Latin School.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a public school.  And there was a Roxbury Latin School, which was a private school.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But you know, for example, my - my class, I think it was about 235 students in my graduating class and only six African Americans.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: It was then when I started sort of understanding what was really going on.
Story_ID: 4600
Speaker 1: And did you - now around this time when you were in let's say junior high school and high school, what was your father- your father- you knew he was- I mean he was practicing ...
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: He was practicing.  Then you said later in his life he focused in immigration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what was he doing at that point and time?
Speaker 2: He had a general legal practice; he was running the credit union. He was busy between the credit union and his practice; I think that took most of his time.  And he was on the housing authority.  I think during the time I was in junior high school and high school - Well, later on when I was in college, he was on this Selective Service board  so he was very busy,  `cause that was a contentious time.  He was also involved in a group that had been put together to fund and try and create minority companies in the construction industry, he was the head of that.  So he had a number of public/private sector kind of interfaces as well as his ongoing private practice.
Speaker 1: And did - how did he get - he was politically involved then?  I mean -
Speaker 2: Right.  He had- he had I think in the '60's [1960s], he and Ed Brooke  [Massachusetts Senator Edward Brooke- served 1966-1979, first black elected senator], who had always been good friends, left the Democratic Party, went to the Republican Party. And Ed went on to be the Attorney General of the state of Massachusetts, and subsequently a U.S. Senator.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I remember, I think probably 1967, '68 [1968], when Senator Brooke ran his first successful election campaign to become senator.  And it was funny because, the last time my father was really, you know, still solid in terms of all his faculties and knew what was going on, was back in 1996.  When he came out to visit and we were doing a fundraiser for Carol Mosley Braun, who was running for Senate.  I guess it was 1992, [she] was running for Senate here in Illinois.  And he just really got a kick out of it when he realized the amount of money raised in one evening.  He said that would have been two months work, (chuckle), the money from the time when he was campaign treasurer for Ed Brooke back in '67 [ 1967], '68 [ 1968].
Speaker 1: Did he ever explain how he had gotten involved (unclear)?  I mean what - how that even came about?
Speaker 2: I think it was a natural evolution to his commitment to the community and being a leader and a spokes person, he ran for school committee and was defeated.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: But, you know, he was in the mix, and was very active with Ed Brooke and a number of other local politicians of both parties.  I mean they joined the Republican part to make a statement.  Because they felt the Democratic Party had not given a real opportunity to African-Americans at that time.  But, you know, he was the kind of person who supported the best candidate.  And also stayed politically involved with Barbados.  He was very active with their fight for independence.  And when they became independent, he went down for the celebration with my mother.  And then served as really the unofficial counsel for Barbados and New England, they had an official counsel in New York City.  But in terms of legal activities, he was the point person in the United States.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And he maintained that relationship for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Do you remember the time- how old were you when Brooke and the - you know, when there was a little scandal and he had, you know. Do you remember that? [referring to finacial improprieites arising from divorce that his daughter leaked to the Massachusetts press]
Speaker 2: That's - I remember that so clearly.  That was later in his career, later in his Senatorial career.  I think he had served maybe three terms by that time.  And the scandal brought back a lot of memories, because I remember his wife and his two children.  And I remember the daughter who was in the middle of the scandal.  And, she was always (chuckle) that way.  Nothing had changed.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And do you remember any discussion, you know, among your father and his friends about that whole, you know, the whole situation?  `Cause that was...
Speaker 2: Oh no, I think they all felt bad for Ed.  But I think at the end of the day, Ed's doing much better now than he ever has.  I mean he's still vibrant, he's still busy and that was a hurdle he overcame.  And, you know, everything happens for a reason.  And I think that it was great that he was able to get out of politics, get back into the private sector, and that's all behind him now.  And I think he just had a great life ever since then.  So it all worked out the best for him.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And your - your - in the- you said that there were always people coming and going in your house.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: I was wondering was there a lot of - were there political activities occurring, or political type meetings, or were you privy to any of that?
Speaker 2: No, I mean everybody that came to the house you got to meet, so I mean I met a lot of interesting people when I was young.  The Prime Minister of Barbados and his wife used to come stay with us all the time. I met a number of different celebrities. I can remember most clearly Nat King Cole [famous jazz performer and composer] came to the house one night.  My father was taking him, my mother and my brother out for dinner.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I was too young to go.  I never forgave any of them for that.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So people of that ( ilk and temperment?) would come through.  My mother's aunt [name] who lived with us was very active in the Pentecostal church.  So the Bishop of the church and other high officials would come and visit and stay with us.  There was always a, you know, a grou- there was always people around the house.  There was always action, you know, there was always, you know, intellectual stimulation.  It was always, you know, it was always a fun place.
Story_ID: 4601
Speaker 1: So okay, now you are - what about your friends?  What type of friends did you have and, you know, what were their sort of interests and, you know, and sort of the talk?  I mean I'm just, you know - I'm - I'm really looking at the time that you're in your teens.
Speaker 2: Well the - the people who were my friends in my teens were the people I went to school with, so we had similar interests.  A lot of it was around sports, people I played football with.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: People I, you know, ran track and threw the shot put with.  I think a lot of it - you know, my closest friends were the people I was in school with at that time.  As I got older, that branched out. Unfortunately, you know, as I look back on it, I had an experience that probably really put a lot of things in perspective.  I think when I was in college, I used to work- two of the summers when I was in college, my summer job was working at the District Attorney's office for Suffolk County of, you know, which Boston was a part.  And just the number of young people whom I'd grown up with, who had been friends, who had gone in a different direction, you know, were coming through- indicted for, you know, robbery, possession of tools with intent to rob, drugs, whatever.  I just, you know, would sit there, every day and would look at them.  And say, but for the grace of God there go I.  And just very- felt very fortunate.  And you know, I don't know to what extent, you can stay in tough with the people you grew up with.  But so many of the people who were my real good friends at that time, you know, everybody just dispersed all over the world, and every once in a while you bump into them, or hear from them.  It's always refreshing, but you know, my best friend growing up was, a young guy.  We went to grammar school together.  My family moved to the suburbs, but we still were very close.  We went to the same church, his father was our family doctor, and I can't think of a closer friend.  I went to Harvard he went to Stanford.  Dropped out after a couple of years to pursue a musical career.  And, you know, the way the year 2000 started off was he got killed.  You know, somebody was burglarizing his studio,he showed up unexpectedly and got shot to death.  So you know, so many of the people I grew up and were friends you know, have just passed away, at what I see as a very young age.  A number of my friends died in Vietnam.  Two of them on the plane on the way to Vietnam, they never even got there.  They just died in a plane crash going there.  I had friends who went to Vietnam and came back completely destroyed.  Another best friend guy, who I played football with- he was tackle I was a guard.  And then on defense, I was a linebacker he was a tackle.  He probably was my closest friend in high school. Got drafted, he never drank, never smoked, never did drugs.  Went to Vietnam, got in a firefight.  I think he was the only survivor and thought his captain had survived and carried this guy for three days over his back.  And didn't know- realize until he got back to the camp that he was dead.  And he came back, was a drug addict, could no longer get along with his wife.  I ended up having to help commit him.  So I, you know- so many of the people I grew up with and were close with are just no longer, you know present in my life, or even present in anybody's life.  So once again I feel, very fortunate I survived a very crazy kind of time.
Story_ID: 4602
Speaker 1: And do you think it was the case of the times being crazy, or do you think it's the case of just being black in Amer- black males in America?  Or do you think it was the case of the family that you came out of versus the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: A combination of all three, and I was lucky.  You know, just - I had another friend who his father was an undertaker, a very prominent member of the community. I mean this was the first time I really felt close to somebody who died.  He was sixteen years old and died of spinal meningitis.  And he was a guy going away to boarding school, and his parents thought they were doing the best thing for him by sending him to boarding school.  He was the apple of their eye.  He goes to boarding school, you know, gets this bacterial infection and dies at sixteen.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: You know, what can you do?
Speaker 1: Now let's - at the time that you were in high school -  you know it was the '60's [1960s]...
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: It was Vietnam going on
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you actively involved in the movement?  Or were you just sort of watching from the periphery?  Was your, you know, was your fam-
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Was your father involved at that time?  Or was he-
Speaker 2: I think we were all involved, but in different levels, different levels of intensity.  I mean in high school, I had a sense that things were changing.  But I can't note- I can't say I was marching, or you know, part of that activity.  Once I got to college, I think things heated up significantly.  And I became much more involved.  Probably my greatest level of activity was when I was in college that was part of the experience of my growing up.  I remember my freshman year in college was when the SDS [Student Democratic Society- 1960's leftist student protest movement] had taken over a building and it was just an ugly episode in the history of Cambridge, Harvard University and you know, the academic communities in general, the way they were removed from the building by the police.  Subsequent to that, there were a number of activities on campus around Afro-American studies, job opportunities for minorities, which I was a part of, never got as violent as that first encounter between the police and the SDS.  Once again, people had learned from their bad experiences.  But, you know, I think that really stimulated my perspective on, you know, who I was and where I was going.  And the fact that, you know, I owed a lot to a lot of different people and probably stayed very active but in a different way and going on to business school and law school.  And became a very different kind of activism and not taking over buildings, shutting down construction sites, but getting really active and recruiting.  Say for example, when I was in law school, I - I contributed time to go out and recruit people for Harvard Law School, you know, that kind of thing.  I saw my role, my activist role of really trying to give people opportunities in the educational world that they might not otherwise have.
Story_ID: 4603
Speaker 1: Now your- let's, what do you think you learned about that period?  You know, after the activism, the '60's [1960s] activism?  I know you were talking about, you know, later...
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You were active in different ways.  But what was that- you know, what was the Peter Bynoe of that period sort of like?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) Which, high school, college, or?
Speaker 1: College.
Speaker 2: It was a learning experience for me.  It was - I had been away from home.  I used to go to camp every summer, which was probably my best growing experience, having six weeks away.  I had a great camp experience.  There was always forty- I guess it was sixty campers every year, usually half males, half females.  That was just a real growing socialization process.  So when I went to college, it wasn't really the first time I'd been away from home.  And I really wasn't that far away from home - cause I was just on the other side of the Charles River [ in Boston ,Massachusetts].  But it was the first time I was independent and had to make decisions on my own.  So deciding what was right, and what was wrong, what I would do and what I wouldn't do I think helped me grow more than anything that's what else. I think that's what college is essentially about, beyond the academics, which you still have to deal with.  It's you know, who are you gonna be?  What's important?  And I think what was helpful for me, is that I was able to communicate with my mother, and my father and get some additional perspective, and also my older brother, and just bounce ideas off of them.  So I was nev- I never felt like I was alone.  And at the same time, I was able to resist peer pressure to do things that I didn't think were necessarily appropriate.  If I'd been 2000 or 3000 miles away from home and if I didn't have my mother, my father, or my brother to kick ideas around with I might have gone in a different direction. I don't know.
Speaker 1: (break)
Speaker 2: Did you- when you - what- I know that your mother had told you at age twelve
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That Harvard was where you were going.  Is this - was that your first choice of schools?  And you know, what did- how far did you look?
Speaker 1: (slight chuckle).
Speaker 2: Did you ever look at going outside of Boston?
Speaker 1: I only looked at two other schools.  At that time they were heavily recruiting African-American students, you know, trying to change the profile of admissions in a number of different colleges.  The only school I seriously looked at other than Harvard was Swarthmore [highly competitive college in Pennsylvania].  For some reason they pursued me, and it's always nice to be pursued.  I visited the campus a couple of times, liked it.  Enjoyed being, you know, in sort of that country kind of feel outside of the city.  But at the end of the day, I just felt comfortable with the Harvard situation.  I also looked at Yale [University], but didn't like New Haven [Connecticut] that much and ended up at Harvard.  Also our high school had a special early admissions program with Harvard.  So, I knew very early where I was going and I didn't have to spend a lot of time pursuing other schools.
Story_ID: 4604
Speaker 1: Peter are you - would you say that you're the type of person who has mapped out or had an idea or where they're going?  You know, some people sort of wander through life and-
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And other people know,"Okay, I want to be a lawyer." Or,"I want to go here."
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Well do you think that, that's what your whole thing was?  That you sort of knew?
Speaker 2: I never really knew.  I see myself more as an opportunist.  I never had a long-term strategic plan; I never had a real fix on where I was headed.  I think what I had been good at doing is responding to opportunities that presented themselves.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And if I found something good, I just jumped all over it.  Most of the good things that have happened to me professionally or educationally it just- I mean job wise, a classic example: After my first year of business school-- in the middle of my first year of business school-- I was trying to decide, you know, which summer job I wanted to pursue.  Just casually talking on the corner with a good friend of mine, she tells me about a job and McKinsey and Company, a summer job in Tanzania [ Africa].  She gives me all the information.  She later says that she had interviewed for it, but she didn't think she was the right person.  And she thought I'd have a good shot.  I got the job.  You know, I spent the greatest summer of my life in East Africa.  Comiskey Park [ baseball stadium], I had no plan of building a new stadium (chuckle).  At the time I was trying to build a real estate practice in terms of development.  Not just here in Chicago, but also in Boston and California.  But Mayor [Harold] Washington and Governor [James] Thompson presented me with a great opportunity.  I took advantage of it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That's been really the story of my life.  No great plans, just trying to be prepared to take advantage of opportunities when they present themselves.  Just, you know, maximizing.
Speaker 1: Now, I have some thoughts about that.  But I'll - because you know, people say that, - people say that being at the right place at the right time is that you've worked hard enough to get there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4605
Speaker 1: Let's talk about going to college.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: How- What kind of experience was it?  Was it new- Even though it was across the river, was there a new world that had opened up at that point?
Speaker 2: It was a new world in terms of the- the students that were there, and the professors and the library.  But I felt very at home because I knew Boston, and I knew Cambridge.  So from a social point of view, I felt very comfortable.  And I think it was great because a number of my classmates looked to me in terms of when they wanted to go places, where to go, who to see, and where to stay away from.  So I was a local guide and, I got a lot of brownie points for that.  Probably the greatest strength I had was on Sunday, you know, I always brought people home for dinner.  And that was probably the most coveted invitation...
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: ...at Harvard College (chuckle).  Because my mother was a gourmet cook.  So every Sunday I'd take three or four people home for dinner.  And my parents loved, you know, meeting new people and just adding to, intellectual interaction.  And my co-students loved getting a good meal because the food was plentiful in the dormitories, but not necessarily that good.
Speaker 1: But did you find that with the students and the experience there - did you find college to be a growth experience?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, across the board.
Speaker 1: Were your expectations about Harvard, were they- did- were you happy there?  Were they- was it an experience that you were somewhat disappointed in?  Or were there things that, you really liked about it?  And
Speaker 2: I think college is a- college is more of a socialization process than an education process.  I think grad school was educational.  I mean, when I went to law school and business school that was very rigorous.  That was very academically challenging, that to me was education (chuckle).  College was more socialization,  getting to know people, getting to know yourself.  Getting to understand how institutions work.  And, you know, all within the perspective of just the turbulent times that- you know, I was in college from 1968 to 1972.  And the environment in which (chuckle) I was going to college lended itself to change.  And that's what it was about.  And it was rapid and it was serious, and - you know, really I think a lot of people got pushed to the max during that time.  So, it really was a socialization process.  And I think it was the greatest part of college for me.
Story_ID: 4606
Speaker 1: Now what about the draft?  Were you drafted at all?
Speaker 2: No my number was too high.  I was part of the first group that was in the lottery and my number was like 257.  So I fortunately did not have to participate.
Speaker 1: (Speaking softly) (unclear) okay.  What - now what was your major?
Speaker 2: Afro-American Studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh!
Speaker 2: Naw, I mean, I was one of the people who pushed to have an African-American studies department.  And one of the requirements of the school was that somebody sign up for it, (chuckle).  So, you know, I wasn't gonna push that they have a department and then not major in it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So I had a minor in audiovisual communications.  But, you know, just the whole process of setting up the department.  Working with the university administration.  Then you know, finding professors. That, that probably- I probably learned more about education from interviewing people for the department than anything else -
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: -during that time.  And I think- Well some people look down upon you having a degree in African-American studies.  I think at that time, people understood what we had gone through to make it happen.  And, I think they looked upon it with a much more positive spin, than subsequent.
Speaker 1: So you were a rabble rouser.  I mean if that's
Speaker 2: Some people would say that.
Speaker 1: You were- so at what point are you saying that the- you came in and they didn't have the department.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then at what- what are you talking about, your freshman, juni- I mean, you know
Speaker 2: My freshman year.  I mean this all began our freshman year.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: We started pushing for change.  Our class was probably the second class with a significant number of, you know, African-Americans in it, maybe 60 in a class of 1,200.  And the number continued to grow, and we continued to push for change.  And continued to try and make the Harvard environment one that was, you know, accepting of - of different- Let me- For example, when we were freshmen, they insisted you wear a sport jacket and a tie to the freshman union, you know for all your meals. I think the second day of school, there was a young man from outside of Chicago, specifically from Rockford, who had knocked out (chuckle) the attendant who had told him he couldn't come in to eat lunch.  They changed the rule the next day.  They had rules about - you couldn't- you know- you couldn't have women in your dormitory after 7:00 (chuckle) on weeknights, after midnight on weekends.  There was one freshman who was, you know, he had gone to the airfo- he had been in the Air Force (chuckle). He had been a reformed heroin addict. He was living with a woman.  (chuckle) I mean so how could they have rules like that?  So they changed the rule about parietals.  It was a- it was just a time of change, and we were all part of it.  The change was negative though, I mean they used to rent you a car in Harvard Square.  You could go rent a car with your driver's license and your college ID.  Until a couple of my classmates rented a car, drove it to California, wrapped it around a tree and then flew back (chuckle).  So there were a number of things that changed the whole culture of Harvard, Harvard University, Harvard Square, Cambridge and how people interacted with each other.  Some for the better, some for the worse.  But overall, I think for the better.
Story_ID: 4607
Speaker 1: Hmm.  You know what I think- What I think is interesting when I looked at this, you know, the picture over here with you Skip Gates [Dr. Henry Louis Gates - director of African American Studies Department at Harvard, scholar, authority on black America] and John Johnson [John H. Johnson].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the fact- I didn't know you had helped, I mean start the African-American ...[Studies Department]
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: (unclear) look, look at it as the premiere department.
Speaker 2: But it's gone through a number of changes since the time we started it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And I don't know if any of us, when we started it had the vision that Skip has.  But, you know, it's been interesting over the last few years now that I serve on the Board of Overseers to just watch out and see how people perceive it.  And it is well respected and I think Skip has done a great job. And you know there've been a number of times that I've now sat evaluating the department.  And it's just- it feels funning having been there at the beginning and now sitting to evaluate it.
Speaker 1: Now what- what I want to -what was your intent then?  Do you think it was just that the university was not addressing our needs as a black person?  I want to have, you know, I want to be able to major in something that represents myself and you as an institution is to provide that.
Speaker 2: (softly) Hmm.
Speaker 1: Was that the modus operandi then at the time or (chuckle)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that was the motivation.  The Department was the easiest way to sort of establish- institutionalize an African-American presence on the campus.  I mean Harvard University is an institution that has been around for 350 years. It does not change quickly.  And, you now, just achieving something like that was major for us.  To just establish a presence beyond the number of African-American students increasing, actually institutionalizing our presence and really giving credibility to the African-American experience.  And I think, you know, that's where the department has done so well over the last few years.  And under Skip's leadership, it's just people really respecting the academic integrity and the intellectual capacity of the African-American experience.  And I don't know if we understood it at that time, but we knew we had to institutionalize something.  And the department seemed to be the best vehicle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So not only- so you - did you picket?  Did you do all these things, (unclear) sit-ins?  And what was, what was...
Speaker 2: Oh we shut- we took over the president's office; we took over the administrator offices (chuckle), we shut down a construction site.  We took a number of proactive actions, over a number of months.
Speaker 1: And you said you were also involved in interviewing...
Speaker 2: Now I think when I got into grad school, I think, you know, given the rigorous nature (chuckle) of what I was doing and I think things had changed.  And I had changed.  I mean my activism then switched and really shifted gears into trying to increase the number of African-Americans at the institution and getting as many people as possible the opportunity to come share that educational experience.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  But the, the program at that time, were they- did they do a good job of recruiting for the program?  You know, the program that you helped start.  Did they do a good job?
Speaker 2: Recruiting professors or students?
Speaker 1: Professors.
Speaker 2: No.  I think, you know, as I look back we had some good professors and we had some bad professors.  It was clearly a case of something we tried to do very quickly.  And there were some people that were supportive and some people were not supportive.  And anything that starts that way does not have the optimum chance for success.  But, you know, they kept working at it and it kept getting better.  And now they have an institution and department which is, you know, world-renowned.
Speaker 1: When others are sometimes-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering- I mean what is this budget, a million and a half?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  (unclear) Okay.
Speaker 1: Whatever it is, he fights for it every year.  And the school is an equal opportunity institution when it comes to denying people money (chuckle), white, black, yellow or otherwise .
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  But now do you have any views then on African-American history and sort of its importance?  Since you know, you played that role?
Speaker 1: Hmm
Speaker 2: You know a lot of African-American Studies Departments around the country have never really reached their full potential.  And you know, in a lot of cases it's - you know, sort- It is equal opp- you know, it's like, you know, that's our affirmative action (unclear) there.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: But, I'm just wondering from a theoretical or philosophical sense, you know, what your views are?
Speaker 1: From my philosophical perspective I think it's something that's important.  And I think that it needs to be available.  I think that, you know, white people need it as much as black people, to understand.  You know, where we've been in society,  `cause- you know, where we've been dictate so much of where we're going.  I think if I- If the department was already in existence, when I went to Harvard, I probably would have taken courses.  I don't know if I would have majored in it.  As I look back, my perspective on college and grad school is that I probably should have taken alot more out of it.  Not just in terms of, you know, the socialization process, but the educational process and meeting people and developing relationships.  But that's all, you know, hindsight, which is always 20/20.  But, you know, I majored in Afro-American Studies probably because we wanted to have the department.  And that was something I had to do. I don't regret it.  If I had the decision to make over again, I might do something differently, and just take courses in the department.  But, you know, I think everybody needs to have that choice, and I think that's what our focus was.  Giving people the choice `cause they didn't have the choice when we got there.
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Now, okay.  So --
Story_ID: 4608
Speaker 1: So when was your decision to go to law school?
Speaker 2: I think the decision was- well, it wasn't a decision just to go to law school.  I never really thought in terms of law school.  I thought I wanted to do something different `cause I had saw how hard my father [Victor Sr.] worked, I saw how hard my uncle worked.  And I respected that, but I just said,"Hey there's just got to be another way."  And I had a friend in undergraduate school, he had really become an advisor, a guy by the name of Barry Williams.  And Barry had been one of the first people to do the joint program between Harvard Law school and Harvard Business School.  And he had really become my counselor.  And so we talked a lot about my career aspirations.  And to the extent that it was clear if I wanted to do it, he highly recommended the joint program.  So I applied to both the law school and to the business schools.  I was fortunate enough to get accepted to both.  And that's how I ended up going to the joint program.  I did the year of law school first because that's what I felt the most comfortable with.  Having come, you know, from a family where, you know, there were significant conversations around those issues.  But then found myself most excited by the business school experience.  It was new, it was different, it was refreshing.  It was much more interactive.  So, as I got out of grad school, the initial part of my career was much more business related.  And still is even though I'm at the law firm,  I spend more of my time on business developments, strategic planning, you know, transactional kind of activities, then any kind of real legal work.
Speaker 1: And who was the person at this point, you know it's you're in law school and business school.  You're saying, you know that it's more work at that point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But how, who- who was the person at that point?
Speaker 2: I think I was still very young, still very impressionable.  I don't think I was naive.  I had seen enough things change and happen during my four years of college where I was maturing.  But I was still looking for direction.  It was not clear where I was headed.  I think once again I was preparing myself for as many different things as possible, with an MBA and a JD.  I was basically - which had sort of been my mantra all my life.  Be prepared to take advantage of opportunities.  And having a law degree and an MBA I saw as the best way to do that at that time.  Having no real idea where I was headed with it, my first summer job I got a job with the federal government, which got canceled two months before the summer, and some cut backs by the Nixon administration.  Signed up the first summer working for an advertising agency, a job that was facilitated by my uncle.  The next summer I had the greatest job ever when I worked for McKinsey and Company [international managment consulting business] after my first year of business school.  And that was just great spending a week in London and spending the summer in Tanzania and getting to travel to East Africa and West Africa on the way home was probably the most educational experience I've ever had.  I've always found travel to be the most educational experience available in terms of interacting with other people and how they live and how they make decisions, and what they see as right or wrong. And just being in Africa the summer of 1974 when [President Richard M.] Nixon resigned and seeing how the rest of the world saw it was so different than the way the United States interpreted the same historical event.  The next summer job was at Citicorp on their international banking desk in New York.  So, all my summer jobs were in the business sector.  So it was natural (chuckle) that when I got out of school, I would go into the business direction, as opposed to the legal direction.  And that's what I did, going back to work with Citibank.  But it became very clear early in my career that I was not cut out to work in a 50000-person institution.  So I ended up coming to Chicago [Illinois] to work with a small start-up.  A gentleman whom I had met at McKinsey and Company had subsequently left, started his own firm.  And that's how I came to Chicago and started my career, and, you know, really then to pursue the legal career. Until probably four years into that relationship, I knew it wasn't going where I wanted it to go and I needed to have some options.  So, I sat down and took the bar exam, and you know, became officially an attorney.  And then went out on my own in 1982 and had the law degree- had the, you know, being a member of the bar, but once again never really used it.  It was only business at- business things.  Even when I came to finally be at a law firm, it was really for business reasons.
Story_ID: 4609
Speaker 1: So you came, you came to Chicago, you said you- did you start with (Lowery?) when you first came?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's why I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: He recru- he recruited you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he a hot shot at McKinsey and Company and that why it was - 'cause I mean a lot of people go with the larger route.  Even though you
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you know...
Speaker 2: I know.  He had been in McKinsey and Company, but had not made partner, so had went out on his own. This was the path, for a number of people at that time and, you know, I'd met him when he was at McKinsey.  He had one of the people who interviewed me and gave me the job in Tanzania [Africa].  And had then done some executive search work, just helping him recruit for McKinsey and other institutions while I was still in graduate school.  And it just, you know, was an entrepreneurial opportunity.  I figured I had nothing to lose at that time and came out.  It was a good learning experience.  Met a lot of people, got exposed to a lot of different situations.  But as often is the case when you're dealing with an entrepreneur, they own- they make the final decision.  They make all the decisions on compensation.  And I didn't feel that that was the best venue to really exploit what I saw as my talent.  So I went into business myself and was very fortunate.  A number of people that I'd met reached out to support me and help me.  And I was not only able to go into business myself, but really diversify out of the consulting and get into real-estate development.  And really working with assets as opposed to just ideas was much more appealing to me.  And it was really that real-estate background that led to my involvement in the Comiskey Park project.  Hmm.  So I want- when you- when you came to Chicago, was that- was it a new experience here?  I mean you had...
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Spent most of your life,
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Even though you went to Africa and everything,
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: You had spent most of your life in Boston.
Speaker 1: I was an East Coast person (chuckle).  The only time I had spent in Chicago[ Illinois] was when I was recruiting for the law school.  I had done a tour of the Midwest where I recruited the University of Indiana [Indiana University- Bloomington] and the University of Illinois at Champaign/ Urbana, Northwestern University,[ Evanston, Illinois] University of Chicago [Illinois], and the University of Wisconsin at Madison.  I had been in Chicago one time before I moved out here (chuckle) and it was a complete change.  But I fell in love with the city; I just was taken by the city, by its architecture, by just the expansiveness of it, by the lake, just the whole downtown.  I've always been a downtown person.  And I fell in love with the city right off.  And that's despite the fact that the first thirty days I lived here, it never got above freezing.  I just- I was taken by the city.  And it's been home ever since then.
Speaker 2: And were there things that you learned during your time of working with (Lowery?) you think have, stayed with you during your, your career?
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely.  I think the importance of, you know, clients are never wrong, the importance of completing things that you begin, the importance of being on time, meeting deadlines, professionalism, attention to detail, were all things that I learned.  As I said, it was a good learning experience for me.  I met a lot of people, got to travel.  Not just domestically, but also internationally.  So it was a great five years for me in terms of just growing and learning and understanding how business is done.  And so when I feel that when I went out on my own I knew what I was getting into.  I knew what was important, what worked and what didn't work.  And there's no question in my mind that those five years were very important to my development, as an entrepreneur and as a businessman.
Story_ID: 4610
Speaker 1: And do you- okay.  Were you politically connected during that period?
Speaker 2: I began being politically active but you know, I really did not get active until I went into business myself.  I really got politically active the first year I was in business, '82 [1982], '83 [1983] was when Harold Washington was running for mayor.  And his press secretary was one of my best friends, Grayson Mitchell.  And Grayson got me involved in the campaign in terms of, you know, contributing and spending time.  And, you know, I've been political ever since.  I just realized how important- I mean I realized how important Harold was, not just to Chicago, not just to the black community here.  But he became a national hero in terms of, you know, the black political movement, and it's never been the same since.  And it will never be the same again.  I mean he was- I mean there were other black mayors, but Harold took it to another level.  And I think he was one of the first- it was the first time you had a situation where, you know, the first term was so contentious.  I mean "Council Wars" [fracas among factions aligned for and against Harold Washington in the Chicago City Council ] were just raging.  But he stayed the course and then got overwhelmingly elected.  And unfortunately just when he was at the pinnacle of his power, you know, his demise to an untimely death.  It was like a- what would you call it?  What kind of story? A- I forget.  Ha?  What's the word?
Speaker 1: I forgot.  I forget them too.
Speaker 2: But I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, all right.
Speaker 1: ... of major proportion.  A tragedy, sort of like a soap opera.  I mean just, unbelievable.  But really watching him, watching the city change under his leadership.  Just the people I met, the opportunities.  I mean in- in I mean he proved a very important lesson.  I've been politically active since then.  I served and I think I served well.  You know, Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer and Mayor [Richard M.] Daley.  I was chairman of the Landmarks Commission for thirteen years.  I'm now Chairman of the Plan Commission for the City of Chicago.  I've serve- represented Mayor Daley on the Illinois Sports Authority for the last eight years.  I think I've always had the ability.  I don't know if I would have gotten the opportunity to showcase that ability but for Harold Washington and that was the difference. Harold just brought a number of people into the political, in the municipal mix that would have otherwise not have had that opportunity.  And that's what was great about him.
Story_ID: 4611
Speaker 1: And what  what about- I want to go back to, you know, just this whole thing of Chicago.  I know when I first got here I had great anticipation, you know, about Chicago because it was so much business here.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And you know you had the  Johnson, all the Johnsons [referring to John H. Johnson and George Johnson CEO of Soft Sheen Products].
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, and I had great anticipations.  But I found the people to be a little backwards, when I met them.  I mean I thought they were.  You know.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And then I - in people, I had certain judgments when I went to the city.  When I exp- people were splitting their verbs.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: But I had learned a respect for them.  And I'm wonder if there were, you know, any surprises in the mix, you know.
Speaker 2: No real surprises in the mix.  I found Chicago to be a somewhat insular city, you know, people- being from Boston, being from the East Coast, I was viewed as an outsider.  I had to basically prove myself, which is fair, but what I found unfortunate is that even though in terms of the socialization process in Chicago was very much around the Black community and the political socialization.  And my politicalization was through, you know, the Harold Washington campaign. My business career really developed around relationships that I developed with older, White entrepreneurs, you know, when I did, you know, my first real-estate deal, you know, when I was doing Comiskey Park.  All the major significant transactions I've done since that time.  My greatest supporters not just financially, but in terms of technical expertise, direction, vision, focus and support have always been white.  And that was my only disappointment.  I assumed that given the talent, the depth and the breadth of the Black business community here, I would have been more pulled in, sucked in, you know, made a part of that.  But you know, maybe that was my fault as well as theirs. But I think at the end of the day, you know, when I sort of line up the people who helped me, you know, have some success, other than, you know, Mayor Washington, you're looking at people like Jerry Wexler [famed music producer?], and Ed Ross [title],  who helped me do one of my first real-estate deals.  Doug Crocker [Chicago based former CEO of Equity Residential] and Howard Eckerd [title] who were in a real estate deal with me in California, a guy by the name of Bob Bob.  You know, we bought a parking lot across the street from City Hall back- I think it was 1987. You know when I did the Nuggets [Denver Nuggets basketball team] deal, it was Jerry Wexler, Ed Ross Howard Ross [title], Jay Pritzker [patriarch of the Pritzkers-multibillion dollar Hyatt Hotels chain and other real estate/financial holdings], you know. Now when I look at the deals I've done most currently, Sam Zell [billionaire Chicago real estate developer], other folks. Well, the good thing is I think there's a whole new generation of Black entrepreneurs and business people who I'm doing business with, doing deals with, who are clients, who are investing with deals with me and that makes me feel good too.  To me that's positive, that's very important change.  So now you have people like say Jim Reynolds  with Luke Capital , David Moore  with Quality Croutons [is that really the name?], Lyle Logan [title] at Bank of America who are not just friends, but they're business partners, they're investors.  And they help me do things just like the Tom Reynolds who was the Chairman of the Sports Authority [a sporting goods company], and then Ken Picket [title] whom I met through him, who I've done deals with and just really taught me how to put together structure and get deals done.  They've now been joined by a cadre of you know, African-American business people who I can say are partners and investors too.  So I think, you know, it's taken twenty-three years but it's been worth the wait.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  That's great.  You know Peter, what strikes me is that in your recount of things, is that if you had gone the corporate route, you know, do you think you would have had- 'cause you essentially had you know white mentors.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4612
Speaker 1: You think that would have existed if you had gone to work for Citicorp?  And that's one question.  The other question is what did people you saw in you
Speaker 2: I don't think it could have happened.  I  I don't think I was cut out to be in a corporate atmosphere. I'm too much of a maverick.  I guess I'm unpredictable.  I think, you know, there have been a number of board of directorship opportunities that have been presented to me.  I've been successful at a few, but not as many as I should have because I'm unpredictable.  I  you know, I'm gonna do what I think is right.  I'm not- I'm not saying I'm not a team player.  But I don't- I basically want to be independent.  I want to be able to say and do what I think is the right thing under the circumstances.  I think a lot of people in corporate structures are afraid of that, they feel threatened by it.  Therefore, the people who have accepted me have been the more entrepreneurial people who saw in me some of themselves.  I  I think most of the people, you know, the people who supported me early on were very entrepreneurial, they saw in me the same, you know, sort of- I think Jerry Wexler said one time as I walked in to have breakfast, he said my eyes were sort of dancing in my head.  He liked that, he liked that kind of excitement, that kind of energy.  But along with that comes you know, unpredictability which is somewhat contradictory to the corporate kind of, you know, structure.  So, I think I understand and respect the corporate structure.  I have, you know, when I've been on the board of directors situation or serviced a client, I've been able to understand it and react to it and service it.  But at heart, you know, I'm an entrepreneur.  I - I like to do things that people say can't be done.  All the projects that have come my way, have been projects that people thought were gonna be a disaster, (chuckle).  My first real estate is San Francisco- deal in San Fransisco was a disaster (chuckle).  But it wasn't a big disaster, so I was able to learn from my mistakes.  Comiskey Park, everybody thought was gonna be a disaster.  But we had a great team of people.  We had a few winters of good weather.  We were successful.  I've basically been able to take difficult situations and create some value.  And I've been able to deal with rich people, poor people, black people, white people in a way that gets them to do things more than they thought they could do before I got involved in the situation.  And I think the people who have invested in me and supported me and given me direction, have seen that kind of excitement, have seen that willingness to deal with all kinds of people.  Have seen that commitment to get things done the right way, and to do well and do good.  I mean I like to get involved in things where you know, there's a positive impact on the community.
Story_ID: 4613
Speaker 1: Comiskey Park, how did that come to you?  And what was the, you know, all of a sudden you were sort of the man about town.
Speaker 2: (Chuckle).
Speaker 1: Well, you were.  And so, how did- what, what did you learn also from that experience?  And how did it you know, sort of help you grow?  Because you like sports, you said.
Speaker 2: Well, now I'd always been a sports fan and you know, I was doing the real estate.  I mean Mayor [Harold] Washington called me because he and Governor Thompson [James R.] had decided to go forward in trying to keep the White Sox [American League baseball team] here in Chicago.  The way the deal had been structured in Springfield was the Mayor got to appoint the executive director with the Governor's concurrence.  The Governor got to appoint the chairman with the Mayor's concurrence and the Governor had already chosen Tom Reynolds to be the chairman.  And you know, Mayor Washington and everybody else knew there was no way you could criticize Tom.  He just was- he was at the top of his game.  He had built Winston and Strawn [influential top Chicago law firm where former Gov. Jim Thompson is partner], and was just a quality guy.  And I did not know Tom, but knew of him.  And as I got to know him, found out that he was even better than that.  So it was a situation where I was just in the right place at the right time.  The Mayor asked me to go it.  Governor Thompson was on board with the idea.  And Tom and I got together and made a commitment that we would swim or sink together.  And I think because of that commitment, because of the relationships he had, and also my commitment to get the thing done, we had a successful public works project, that we were able to get finished on time and under budget.  Which was, you know, contrary to most public works projects, especially at that time.  You know, I learned a lot from Tom, Tom learned a lot from me.  But it was really being exposed to Tom and the circle of people that he introduced me to.  That was probably the most educational part of that process for me and allowed me to have the confidence and also the relationships to get the project done.  I mean the best thing about having Tom as a chairman was when people would call me for favors that were inappropriate, that were untimely, that would set me, you know, back time-wise or budget-wise, I would just refer them on to him, knowing that his answer would be no.  He was "Dr. No."  And it made my life much easier so my staff and I could just stay focused on staying on time and staying on budget.  We didn't owe anybody anything, didn't have to accommodate anybody.  All we had to do was get the project built on time, and on budget.  And when you stay that focused, you can often achieve things despite the adverse circumstances.
Story_ID: 4614
Speaker 1: Now okay.  So you had- you successfully finished Comiskey and then at this point, your business is growing.  You're doing more real-estate deals.  What is-
Speaker 2: Now that really at that time the biggest thing that happened during the Comiskey was we got it under construction was, I was presented with the opportunity to buy the Denver Nuggets.  And that was probably the most challenging of my experiences.  And because the gentleman who presented me with the idea and whom I worked with on the idea for six months, when it came time to put up the money (chuckle) he showed up a little bit short. So I spent six months scrambling, you know to raise the $65 million to get the deal closed.  And once again other people came to my rescue, you know, Tom Reynolds , Ken Picket , Jerry Wexler, Jay Pritzker, Howard Ross.  I- Delbert Coleman [title].  It was just- it was a great mix of people who stood up and then ultimately David Stern , because David wanted to get the deal done.  David knew that, you know, I had done everything I had committed to do.  David and I were both surprised that my partner did not, you know, provide the financial wherewithal that he had led us both to believe he had.  So, you know, David stepped up to help me too.  And that was probably the closest I've been to I'd say a real disaster in my life (chuckle).  Because if that deal hadn't fallen together, I think it might have been very difficult to recover.  But, you know, I stayed the course.  I stayed focused.  I knew what I had to do.  And people such as the (unclear) stepped up and help me get it done.  And that- those- you know, really with the Comiskey Park experience and, and fall right after that with the Denver Nuggets experience which probably changed my life more than anything else, in terms of just taking me to another level.  In terms of the kind of problems I could solve.  The kind of complex issues, I could resolve and the kind of people.  It really call comes back to people.  The kind of people I was interacting with on a regular basis.
Story_ID: 4615
Speaker 1: And do you- With that, that little experience with the Denver Nuggets, what- that was the first time that there was black ownership right?  Of the NBA?
Speaker 2: I think- well I think there had been other African-Americans who had invested in teams, such as Ed Gardener [CEO Soft Sheen Porducts] here with the Chicago Bulls [NBA basketball franchise].  But, you know, we had a situation where I was the managing general partner and actually had control of the assets.  And ultimately that's what, you know, the big issue became.  And that's what was most important.  And you know, ultimately I got out of the business because my largest investor, because they had the largest amount of equity in it, they also wanted to have control.  And at the end of the day, we worked out a situation where both of us walked away pleased with the final results.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And do you- how- what was the- I mean how did Denver receive you as a black person?  I mean that's- because you're gloss- You know, you're sort of - not glossing over things, but this was
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: But this was pretty significant.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think the best way to summarize that time in my life was a friend of mine said, " You know Peter, I read about you in the Chicago papers. And I think, you know, you walk on water."  (chuckle).  "I read about you in the Denver paper and I think you're the devil incarnate now."  (chuckle).  "Who's the real Peter Bynoe?"  I said, "Probably a combination of both," because I've never been one to fight with the media 'cause they know how to fight with people by, you know, ink by the barrel.  But it was a very contentious time in Denver, it was a situation that required a lot of change.  It was a team that had been mediocre and was gonna stay mediocre.  And we had to completely reconstruct it on and off the court.  It had the oldest average aged team in the league. You know, they  they accepted mediocrity.  Every year they'd finish, you know, they'd get into the playoffs, finished in the first or second round.  Get a  you know, 12, thirt- 13 middle-round draft pick.  So it was a team that wasn't going to get better and you had to get it worse to get it better.  And, you know, I was willing to make those changes and make the hard decisions to make change.  And you know, I made mistakes.  But I think at the end of the day when I sold the team, we had the youngest average aged team in the league.  The team that we put together went on to get to the finals of the western conference playoffs the next year.  So we had achieved what we had tried to achieve in a short period of time.  But it was not easy.  There were a lot of people who got bruised.  There were people who got fired.  There were a lot of people who had be- you know, the Denver community had become very comfortable with, who lost their jobs.  And here they saw a young African-American from Chicago doing it.  And I think that made some people uncomfortable.  But the people who were important, the David Sterns of the world, the people who had invested in me, they believed in me.  They supported me.  And therefore, at the end of the day, the situation worked out.
Story_ID: 4616
Speaker 1: Now with the with Michael Jordan buying into the Wizards--  This deal is different from yours though substantially?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, do you- that would be the second case of that. I'm not talking about just investors.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: But what I'm saying is that you know, a lot of times we look in the African-American community.  And we look
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And say, "Why can't a Michael Jordan, or why can't a Dr. J."  You know, why can't they own teams?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, because otherwise we're just you know, cattle or some form of advanced slavery where all that.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You know where the bod- the guys are out there performing and making a lot of money.  And, and my question is now do you feel that there will be times where there will be more ownership and that there's something to be gained by that?
Speaker 2: Well, the business has changed significantly from the time when I invested.  Back in 1989 we were able to purchase the Denver Nuggets for $65 million, I think if you look at what basketball teams are going for now, probably the latest acquisition, Mark Cuban [owner of Dallas Mavericks] acquisitioned the Dallas [Texas] Mavericks, you're looking at $275 million.  So the numbers have changed significantly.  I mean Michael's situation is very different than my situation.  And, but it- I was happy for him.  Because one of the people whom I met during my ownership was Michael and that's one of the relationships that has blossomed and has probably meant more to me than any other relationship from back at that time.  And to watch him not only flourish as an NBA player as, you know, six-time world champion.  But then, you know, becoming a businessman and then becoming an investor.  I mean I take great pride in that.  And hopefully, you know, part of our relationship has helped him focus on and do those kinds of things.  But his situation in Washington I think is the best of all worlds, he gets an opportunity to not only invest in a basketball team, but a whole sports enterprise because at the end of the day they're all together.  You got the Washington Capitals, the hockey team; you have the Washington Wizards the basketball team and you have the MCI Center. So you're investing not just in a basketball team, but a sports enterprise.  So you have a much greater potential sfor a great return on investment.  And also he's investing with the right kind of people.  Ted Leonis [owner of Washington Capitals team] and all the money he's already made.  I think there will be other opportunities for Michael to invest in and make money.  And then more importantly, he gets to run the basketball side and Michael knows so much more about the business than I did at the time I got into it.  I mean it was on the job training for me, he clearly has mastered (chuckle) so many of the things I was just trying to learn eleven years ago.  So I think it's a much better opportunity.  It has much more up side, even though it's a much more expensive investment opportunity, at this time.  But he brings great value.  And I think the way his deal has been structured reflects that value.
Speaker 1: Now Peter...
Story_ID: 4617
Speaker 1: [Off camera-Let's describe the Peter Bynoe where you are right now,] what stage you are in your life, what you want to do in your life going forward.
Speaker 2: Well, I think so much of what I am now has really been formed over the last twelve to thirteen years a number of things just sort of happened back to back that really shaped where I was headed.  In 1987 two things happened.  First, Mayor [Harold] Washington asked me to do the Illinois Sports Facility Authority.  And the whole Comiskey Park thing turned my life around.  The second thing that happened in 1987, I got married so I - you know that just brings a whole 'nother dimension to your life in term of having a partner, a friend, and just you a much more serious person.  I think, you know, my wife Linda [Bynoe], I had known for a number of years. But it wasn't until we got married, that I really got to appreciate her.  And when she moved to Chicago, she was working for Morgan Stanley [ investment group], [and] found Morgan Stanley to be a very different kind of institution in Chicago than in New York.  So, you know, only did that for about a year or two.  And has since that time has done, you know, just some real interesting things on the financial consulting side.  And also, being on boards of directors of financial institutions, where she just brings a lot of firepower and a lot of value added.  And so I think my life is much better 'cause I have a partner.  Somebody I can depend upon.  Somebody who helps me make better decisions, but somebody who also motivates me.  Because I think, you know, of when you're just out there by yourself, you're not driven as hard, or as fast, or as consistent or persistent as you might be when you have a partner.  So, I think between that relationship and then, you know Comiskey Park, the Denver Nuggets, the Atlanta [Georgia] Olympic stadium.  I've grown, I've matured I've gotten a much better sense of who I am, what I can do and what I can't do.  And I'm sort of in that funny kind of place where I can sort of pick my spots, you know, once again, I look to maximize and optimize opportunities that are presented to me.  But I can say no to some.  And, you know, I can decide the ones I want to pursue.  So I feel good about that, at the same time, I still feel that there are so many other things to do.  There are so many other opportunities that, you know, I haven't even seen yet.  And I- I really don't know what the future holds.  But I'm much more confident about my ability to deal with it and manage it.  And there have just been relationships that have come into me. My life, you know business wise over the last few years, that have had a significant impact, my partnership here at Piper, Marberry, Rudnick and Wolf, it's been five years now.  But you know, this institutional base has given me the ability to leverage, the credibility to reach out and do a lot of things I would not have been able to do on my own.  I've done a lot of work in the telecommunications industry over the last three years,just because Sam Zell put me on a board of, you know, Jaycor Radio Communications [ sold to Clear Channel in 1997 for 4.4 billion dollars] which grew to be the third largest radio chain.  And out of that have come some entrepreneurial independent ideas and opportunities.  Well you know, Sam has helped me put together investments and buy additional media properties, you know, it's just I feel very blessed.  I feel, you know, very confident.  But I don't know where it's all going to end.  And that's the excitement of it.  I don't know what's going to happen next.
Story_ID: 4618
Speaker 1: Do you see a lot of your father in you?  Because in many ways, you know the political, you know that he was politically active and he was a lawyer.  He wasn't a businessperson.  That-
Speaker 2: He was a businessperson in the sense he had the credit union.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I see a lot of him in me.  And I think I'm a reflection of him. But I just feel like I had a lot more opportunities than my father [Victor Bynoe Sr.] and so many that- so much of that was provided by my father.  I mean he gave me not just the role model, but the platform and the resources and the education, to play at a whole different level.  I- you know- when you talk about perseverance, commitment -you know, I don't think I'm close to my father, what he had to go through to move to the United States from Barbados at thirteen, to go to Northeastern University  [ Boston, Massachusetts] in 1936.  You know, to get rejected for jobs merely because he was an African American, I never had to deal with that at the same level, intensity and scrutiny, or just performance that he had to deal with.  I just had so many more doors open to me because of him and because of timing and just because of where I am in life.  So hopefully, I'm not just a reflection of him. But hopefully I'll also achieve as much as he achieved in terms of giving back.  I mean he just spent a significant amount of time taking care of not just his family, but his friends and the entire West Indian community in the Boston area.  And I don't know if I've- if I've really lived up to that yet.
Story_ID: 4619
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask some more philosophical questions.  But things like- I'd like to know what your views are on, African Americans in business.  You know, or, or even in the areas that we just sort of focused on.  Because there was a point where education was really, you know, in the '50's [1950s] where we were fighting for education.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And then in the, '60's [1960s], well we were fighting for education, but the civil rights movement.  You know there was (unclear).  And now what do you think is sort of the important sort of next step?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest challenge facing us is really the digital divide.  Change in our society is happening at, you know, the speed of the Internet, African-Americans are falling further behind faster if we do not some how bridge the digital divide soon, it will became so wide that we'll never be able to bridge it.  There will be the haves and the have-nots in the real sense.  And it's all driven by technology,  access to technology, understanding technology, being able to leverage and manage technology.  And that's really where there's an unlimited opportunity.  For not just African-American entrepreneurs, but also majority and other entrepreneurs.  And that's the real crises facing our society is that we've gone from a society dominated by the middle class to a society were you have the upper class and the lower class.  And unfortunately you'll see most African-Americans falling into the lower class, and that the challenge.  And therein lies the opportunity as we go forward.
Story_ID: 4620
Speaker 1: And do you- what, what in terms of African-Americans in business what are your views on that?  I mean there's an increasing push you know- in the past we had more, you know- well we had our- our in terms of the types of businesses that we were in, were limited.  Do you have any, you know, thoughts or ideas, or hopes in that particular area?
Speaker 2: I would hope that we pursue, you know the same businesses that I see all these, under thirty [year-old] multimillionaires pursuing.  You know, whether it be Internet, new technology, I mean, the world is a very different place.  The role of the United States in the world has become very different.  We're not exporting industrial goods any more.  We're exporting ideas.  We're exporting technology, that's where we need to be focused.  We need to be more quantitative.  We need to be more creative.  We need to be more entrepreneurial.  And those are the things that I think are the biggest challenges.  Because, you know, I think the African American community has always been behind, now when you get behind, you don't have much of a chance to recover because things are happening so fast.  And I think our economy is changing so rapidly, that we just have to push forward.  I don't know if the leadership is there.  I don't know if the resources are there.  I don't know if the political will is still there to push for it.  I think I don't hear enough people talking about it, doing enough about it.  I don't know if I'm dong enough about it.  But at least it has my attention.  And as I look at opportunities going forward, those are the kind of questions I'm asking myself.  What does this impact have in terms of how we bridge this digital divide?  So it's not just, you know, conversation.  But it becomes real in terms of the kind of, you know, things we invest in, where we spend our time, our resources.  Where we try and direct and focus and lead other people.
Speaker 1: Now with - you know, you had said now your working with a group of other black entrepreneurs. That makes you feel good.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering if you see any close similarities between the group that you are now associated with and the- the- I want to say, George Johnson and (unclear) you know, whoever helped take Johnson Products public
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Which was pretty, you know, very, very significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering if you have any views on that?  You know, because it's been a long period since something like that happened.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and you- one would like to see more of a progression of things going on and not just these steps.  And I'm wondering, you know, if you think your group will be as vibrant as that group was?
Speaker 2: I would hope.  I don't know if we can be as vibrant.  Because I think it's a different time.  And it's just- you know, just when they have these great- you know, when they say who is the better football team, you know the Pittsburgh Steelers of 1979 or the Dallas Cowboys of 1995.  I don't think you can compare.  You know, you got players on a different field in a different time.  I think the things that the people you mentioned, did at the time they did them were outstanding.  They were critical.  Without that, we would not be where we are, we could not be talking about doing the things that hopefully we will do.  I don't think it's a matter of doing better.  It's a matter of doing what we need to do.  And I hope that the people that I'm working with, that the people that I watch, you, know- I'm very excited about the opportunities.  I'm very excited about the people I see taking advantage of those opportunities.  At the same time, I'm apprehensive because I know there's so much to get done.  And hopefully we will meet the challenge just like, you know, George Johnson and the generations before us. And Mr. John Johnson, the way they met their challenges.  We'll do the same thing.  If we don't, I think it's gonna be a fairly major disaster for our community, but I'm confident that we will.
Story_ID: 4621
Speaker 1: What do you think is necessary for our community to move forward in a positive direction?
Speaker 2: I think, it's, it's I mean that's a difficult question Julieanna.  There's so many different issues.  Just the integrity of the community, you know, from a crime point of view, the infrastructure of the community in terms of housing, the economics of the community in terms of job opportunity, the intellectual capacity of the community in terms of education.  I mean it's, it's a whole specter of issues that have to be dealt with in a comprehensive and intensive and thorough manner.  For the whole community to move forward.  And there has to be leadership, which understands that and deals with that.  And at the same time, stays focused on, you know, the technological and financial issues, which dictate how we live every day.  I really don't have answer.  It's just- it's complex.  It's ever changing, it's moving more rapidly.  But I think, you know, staying focused, staying in tune and just not giving in are the critical factors, and being quick on your feet.  I mean things are just, you know, it's not- no longer a generational kind of thing.  It's a year-to-year things in terms of how things change and going different directions.  And I think, you know, when you look at- when you talk to me about what's most important in education now.  I think it's teaching people flexibility, adaptability, how to deal with change.  Because that the thing that I think is really most stressful, most undermining of the institutional things we've all become very comfortable with is the amount and the speed of the change and our ability to manage that will dictate our success.
Story_ID: 4622
Speaker 1: Obviously you're proud of being- I would think you're proud of being black.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that, you know, the African American diaspora has- you know, the African diaspora and we as African Americans have a role to play in the world's societies as it goes forward.  People who denigrate that or don't give it value, I think are missing out on a very rich not just cultural, but, you know, over all experience. You know it's- to me it's not about 50/50.  I think at this point it all or nothing.  Either we will survive or we will perish.  It's so longer a situation where it's status quo, where you can sort of get along somewhere in life in the middle ground.  Either you succeed or you fail. And the way things are being evaluated, and the speed at which they are happening, I don't think we have much time to decide which we're gonna do.  I'm not one to ever give in or give up.  So I'm not betting on perishing.  I'm betting on surviving and prospering.  And the real challenge is how do we do that, and how we find a way to do that.
Story_ID: 4623
Speaker 1: Who- What person have you most admired?  Or let's say, what, what businessperson have you most admired and why?
Speaker 2: (Sigh) A number of different people I admire for a number of different reasons.  I think any time you talk about black business;  you have to talk about Mr. Johnson, you know creating what he created and growing it and managing it to the point he has.  I think you have to respect that.  You have to learn from that.  You have to hold that up as a role model.  At the same time, I think you have to look at other people who are coming on.  I mean there are so many people in the corporate arena who have done well, whether it be a Ken Chenault, you know, about to become the CEO of American Express, or a Lloyd Ward, you know, who is a CEO of Maytag.  You know people who have paid their dues, have gone the corporate structure and now bring a whole new range of resources to the African-American community.  But at the end of the day, I think, you know, it always goes back to entrepreneurs.  But I think all the people like Lloyd and Ken who are doing well in the corporate world are entrepreneurs at heart.  Now they're called "intrepreneurs," but it's really been their innovation and creativity that allowed them to rise through the corporate ranks.  But I think still the greatest amount of change come from people who are entrepreneurs and create new worlds.  And I mean if you look at what's happening in Chicago, especially in the technology world.  With [Andrew] 'Flip' Fillipowski and the whole Divine InterVentures [Chicago based internet incubator company], that's the wave of the future.  That's what's gonna create jobs.  That's what's gonna create opportunity.  And I think what I'm looking for and what I'm excited about are the African Americans who are gonna take up that kind of mantle, and become the next great entrepreneurs.  The next Mr. Johnsons who will go out and create businesses that employ African-Americans, provide opportunity, provide role models and just provide, you know, real change. And you know, I see people who, I think have those kinds of skills, who have that kind of focus and commitment.  And I'm just waiting for them to come to fruition.
Story_ID: 4624
Speaker 1: Peter, okay, two more questions.  I want to ask you what your legacy- what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I think at the end of the day,  I- I'll keep it real simple.  "I said what I was gonna do and I did it."  You know, I'm just- I'm straight with people.  I'm honest with people, I do my best to assess situations and, you know, never commit more than I can deliver, and deliver it on time.  You know, I think it's for other people to decide you know, what that impact is, what the legacy is.  I just know the principles that I tried to live by.  I tried- like I said, I try to do good as well as do well.  And I basically you know, try to do the right thing in my businesses relationships, my personal relationships and I think it all runs together.
Speaker 1: And if your father, who actually saw you, a lot of this success -  if he could look down, you know, and see you now, what do you think he would say?  Because you know, he saw the child that was raised, and probably was the apple of his eye, and he also saw the- the rambunctious child, you know, who was at Harvard [University] undergrad.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And so my question is what would he- you know, what do you think he would, he would say now?
Speaker 2: The race is not over until I die, never be complacent, never be satisfied, never stop pushing.  And no matter what you've done and no matter how good you think you are, there's still a lot more out there for you to do.  There's a lot of ways for you to improve.  There are a lot more people for you to reach out to and help.
Speaker 1: That's it.  (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do I get any oversight on this editing?
Speaker 1: If you want.  I will (end of tape).
