Story_ID: 642385
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Homer Hans Bryant [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], H-O-M-E-R, H-A-N-S, B-R-Y-A-N-T.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, twenty-nine, fifty [March 29, 1950], St. Thomas, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the founder and the artistic director of the Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center [Chicago, Illinois], CMDC acronym.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 22, 2010?  Or is it the 23rd (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay, I think it's the--you got me now.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Which one is it, Matthew (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Everybody's confused, yeah I think it's the 23rd.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's the 23rd.
Speaker 1: Twenty-third, right.
Speaker 2: August 23, 2010.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center studios.
Story_ID: 642386
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we use as a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple or lavender.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The fun is in the discipline.  The discipline is in the fun. Drop me fifty (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 642387
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some questions about your family history.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Solomon Bryant] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Elesta, E-L-E-S-T-A, Steele, S-T-E-E-L-E [Elesta Steele].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October, no June 1, 1926, St. Thomas, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, can you tell us what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace her line?
Speaker 2: I cannot trace back very far.  I knew my grandfather, I knew my great-grandmother, that's all I can tell you about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew I've had family reunions in the past but I was not able to attend 'cause I was dancing with Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] in Europe or working on my own projects here [Chicago, Illinois] so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did you--
Speaker 2: But there is a family tree someplace, I just gotta, haven't searched it out yet.
Speaker 1: Well, are there stories that, I guess, are there are any stories about that side of the family, about what they were doing, you know, what your grandparents did or what your great-grandparents did?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember that my grandfather was a carpenter in St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.  He would make coffins, replicate or work on straw chairs and pictures and whatever was broken, grandfather could fixed it 'cause he believed that idles hands were the devil's workshop.  So he was always encouraging us to use our hands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Edgar, E-D-G-A-R, Steele, S-T-E-E-L-E [Edgar Steele].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, do you have any memories of your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a incredible cook.  I just remember eating grandma's food all day long so when grandfather was down in the carpet shop, grandma was up at the hill minding the grandchildren and just cooking food all day long.  But she used to have this saying, "Just wait until your grandfather gets home," if we were misbehaving, and that would put the fear of God in us 'cause he's a carpenter, he comes home with a saw and he would play the saw (makes noise) and, you know, we'd have to kneel down sometimes and get whipped with the saw.  That happened to me one time, never again, 'cause see I believe a lesson is repeated until it is learned.  I try to learn my lessons first time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he used his saw for multiple purposes--
Speaker 2: Multiple purposes, yes, (laughter) an instrument or a lethal weapon or to cut wood.
Speaker 1: Right three different uses for 'em.  Now what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Alberta--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alberta Steele [Alberta Donovan Steele].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you had a great-grandpar- mother you knew?
Speaker 2: Grandma, gra- great-grandma, oh, god, I can't remember her name.  Cammile, C-A-M-M-I-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: Now she would live down the hill from my grandparents.  My grandparents lived up on a hill and we would go down the hill to grandma, to great-grandma's house.  Yeah, but back in those days everybody lived with my grandmother, my grandmother in St. Thomas and my grandfather had sixteen kids, that was history making back then because she had two sets of triplets and three sets of twins and then individual births.  So she was a history maker so to speak.
Speaker 1: And that, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, yeah, we're talking 1920 something, you know, yeah, 1925, 1924, 1920.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's incredible.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, even for those days, that's a large family, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Yes, yes, for sure--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For sure.
Story_ID: 642388
Speaker 1: Now are there any, any stories that are passed down in the family about life on St. Thom- Thomas?  Or, or was there, is there, is the tradition that they were always on St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] or did they come from some other island or, or any stories about Africa (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Thomas--I'll say my [maternal] grandfather [Edgar Steele], my grandfather was from St. Thomas, my grandmother [Alberta Donovan Steele] was from Tortola [British Virgin Islands], one of the other islands.  She was born in Tortola, yeah.  And I think they met in St. Thomas.  My mother [Elesta Steele] used to work in Puerto Rico, that's where she met my father [Solomon Bryant], you know?  So, my folks used to travel around the different islands, my grandparents and my aunts and uncles apparently to pick up different jobs and stuff like that.  But my grandfather had this ritual of going to the beach every Sunday, which was for him very healing to go into the ocean, into the salt water and just soak and, you know, so all coming up on the islands, we would all go to beach on Sundays after church and just wade in the water.  It was great, great, great, great, very healing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Therapeutic actually (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have a chance to, to finish school or anything?
Speaker 2: My mother, no, 'cause she took off and went to Puerto Rico before I was born to work on a job and was back and forth on the islands.  I think she got her GED [General Educational Development] when she was much older and was working in the restaurant business and housekeeping business, that I know for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then to- towards the end of her life she was working at a school helping little kids, you know, in the lunchroom, feeding them and, you know, 'cause she believed if a child was hungry he could not learn.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have any stories that she told you about growing up in St. Thomas?
Speaker 2: No, it was just hard work.  You got--she was--Mama made us focus, study, work on our education and just be as disciplined as possible.  So there were not, no, you know, no stories.  Now I look back now and I'm like, "Okay, my mama was always cracking jokes but I don't remember the jokes."  She was always singing gospel songs or dancing calypso, you know, around the house whenever she heard the Carnival music on.  So it was, it's just that she was a happy person, I think my whole family was like comedians, you know, very happy, very spiritual, very--always there cracking jokes or, you know, or focusing on their work.
Story_ID: 642389
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Solomon, S-O-L-O-M-A-N, Bryant, M-O-N, sorry, Solomon Bryant, B-R-Y-A-N-T.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he much older than your mother [Elesta Steele]?
Speaker 2: No, it, this was around the same time.
Speaker 1: So what do you think, about 1924?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four, [1924], '25 [1925], '26 [1926], around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he, when I--now he was a sailor on the USS Randolph.  Over the years I've tried to track him down, he's since passed away.  Actually, I think he passed away a year before my mom did, which was 19--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was, he was from the mainland from the United States?
Speaker 2: He was from Florida, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was from the mainland and they met while was my mom was working in Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't really--
Speaker 2: I really did not know my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I met him maybe four times in my lifetime--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: So, Grandfather [Edgar Steele] was a--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --force in the family--
Speaker 1: Your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --grandfather--
Speaker 2: Our grandfather, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your mother's father (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For myself and my sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] and my brother [Henry Simmonds].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you did meet your father, did you--or was anything?
Speaker 2: The last time I saw my father I probably was six or seven so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have really no memories, I know he was just tall, dance, handsome black man, you know, tall, dark and handsome.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: From Florida?
Speaker 2: From Florida.
Speaker 1: They met in Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you, did you know what he did for a living after the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Af- no, 'cause he was, he was a career in the Navy and then he retired.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is near World War II [WWII] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess, or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And maybe, maybe Viet--
Speaker 1: Probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Vietnam [Vietnam War], Vietnam.
Speaker 1: After Viet--
Speaker 2: It would be--yes--
Speaker 1: It would be after--
Speaker 2: It would be Vietnam, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So last--when you met him the Vietnam--well, let's see.  Okay, now you were born in 1950?
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]--
Speaker 1: So, well--
Speaker 2: It would've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After World War--
Speaker 2: No, I see--After World War III [sic.], you're absolutely right.
Speaker 1: And that's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's during the time of the Korean conflict [Korean War], I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But it's not--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That wouldn't--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --wouldn't affect the St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]--
Speaker 2: Right, right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So there's a Cold War, Navy (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was a career man?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Last time you saw him, I guess in '56 [1956] or '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay, that's put it in perspective.  But, do you?  But--so you don't have much of an impression on him at all after the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  My grandfathers and my uncles are my father figures growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So have you ever tried to contact any of the Bryants a little later on?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, actually I have and then I found out that he had a step daughter 'cause he had married in Florida, but I didn't, I never, we never touched base or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Now I've met a lot of Bryants over my career though and they claim me but, you know, I don't claim people (laughter).  It's like Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] family trying to claim her I guess (laughter).
Story_ID: 642390
Speaker 1: So whe- when you--I guess--so your gran- your [maternal] grandfather [Edgar Steele] had the most influence on your character (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  For sure, for sure, grandfathers and my uncles--
Speaker 1: Did--?
Speaker 2: --and sons.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories to tell you or advise to give you growing up about how to--?
Speaker 2: Well, here's the thing about being the--growing up with my grandfather, every day after school my brother [Henry Simmonds] and I would have to go to my grandfather's carpenter shop to learn to work with our hands.  And it's funny, because he would be making coffins and we would take a nap in those coffins and then we would say, "Grandfather, this one is perfect for me, when I die this is my size."  And he would laugh, you know, he would laugh like, you--'cause we didn't realize what we were saying, but to us it was funny, it was funny.  And we saw grandpa working and working, and some days he's working the hammer where he probably hit his thumb and, you know, like it would bleed and suck his finger and all that we went through.  And that we thought was funny, you know, but we really did learn a trade growing up and going to my grandfather's shop every day.  And the girls would go up, my sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] would go up to the, to the hill at my grandmother's [Alberta Donovan Steele] house and learn to cook and clean, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you still know some carpentry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I built the walls and the floors and my bars in the studios here [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois].  So I didn't realize what I was learning back then, but god, did it stay with me, you know?  So oh, yeah, I use my hands all the time, right now, absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's great.  Now when you think about I guess, all your influences growing up, your mother [Elesta Steele], your grandmother, your grandfather, I guess, how--?  I guess you're saying you take more after your grandfather I guess.
Speaker 2: I take more after my grandfather, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think my nurturing though, being a dance teacher now for twenty years comes from my grandmother and my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: You know, so because they could tell you, "Mr. Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant] can be so mean."  I'm so forceful and I really, really, when I say drop me fifty, you're gonna drop me fifty and the fun is in the discipline.  So I joke with the kids, we have fun and then, if they're not behaving I can, okay drop me fifty, a fifty is fifty pushups by the way, you know, you know, you understand?  (Laughter) So, but I think that there's a balance there which is really incredible for me as being an educator and a dance instructor right now at this point and time in my life.  I think I've really found my niche and it's really making young people to be the best that they can be through the discipline of dance.  So I got that from my grandfather and my grandmother and my mother, aunts and uncles, that whole, you know, that whole village that raised this child.
Speaker 1: You know, that's a considerable extended family.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Sixteen aunts and uncles--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah, for sure, for sure, for sure.  And then the people that they married or you know, my cousins and--yeah, yeah.  And then I left the islands 'cause I thought I was, I had more energy and more stuff to pursue, so that's why I became a dancer 'cause I was down in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] as a kid dancing in fashion shows and talents shows and winning stuff 'cause I had the choreographing when I was in Catholic school, you know, for the little pageants for Christmas, you know, and stuff like that.  And then it just became a bigger thing, I really realized I had this passion for movement.
Story_ID: 642391
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Do you have, I'm gonna go back, way back to when--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were real little.  Do you have an earliest, earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I remember when people would come to my house, I would put on music and dance for them.  We used to have a black and white TV and I would see Fred Astaire or Gene Kelly and would imitate those moves.  And every time somebody came over, I would have to put on some music and show people what I could do and my mother [Elesta Steele] would laugh at me about that.  But I think the dancer in me was developing then, whatever my path was I started on back then.
Story_ID: 642392
Speaker 1: Tell me something about the neighborhood you grew up in.  Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time?  Or did you move (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, yes, we did not move 'til I was like maybe--we were living in a housing project on the north side of the island.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where I'm from.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The housing project?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (Makes noise) Can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can't remember.
Speaker 1: It's on the north side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paul M. Pearson Gardens [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], Paul, P-A-U-L--
Speaker 1: .Okay
Speaker 2: --M, the letter M, Pearson--
Speaker 1: P-E-R--
Speaker 2: P-E-A-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Gardens was the, gosh, whew that was a flashback right there, (laughter).  That was the name of it.  Yeah, we lived their 'til I was like eight or ten.  And then--okay, before that though we were living with grandma [Bryant's maternal grandmother, Alberta Donovan Steele], okay?  We were living at grandma's house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Edgar Steele] had a big house up on the hill with a yard and he had built an extra, you know, couple of rooms in the yards, you know, we were living there with him.  It was, there must have been like five or six bedrooms in that place.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there--give us some sense of the, I guess, the demographics of St. Thomas.  I mean it--
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, Virgin Islands is, you gotta check this, I think fifty miles long and three miles wide [sic.], or vice versa, it's not a very big place, it's not a very big place at all.  Ninety miles from Cuba [sic.], in the Caribbean, and, well, actually there's probably more people on the island now than when I was growing up, for sure, for absolutely sure.  But right now, where my mother's [Elesta Steele] house is, is close to the airport [Harry S. Truman Airport; Cyril E. King International Airport, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], when you land on St. Thomas, you look up in the mountains you can see my mama's house.  So that's down on the west side, but we were, we were on the north side when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll say, my grandparents, his house was in the middle of the island, downtown, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Now St. Thomas like--was the population mostly black people?
Speaker 2: No.  It's so mixed right now, it really is, it really is.  There are so--over the years, a lot of people have gone down for a vacation and moved down, houses all up in--
Speaker 1: When you were growing up was it mostly--?
Speaker 2: It was mostly African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of Caucasians would visit and they'd go back to the main lands, so to speak, but now people started moving down and buying property and, I mean, at my mom, when she was alive and 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened, she was telling me these people are down here, you know, carrying on and some of them upset, some of them have a good time, you know, it was just a whole, you know, they riot, they do this and that.  It's like a little New York [New York] now, you know, it's not the island paradise it used to be.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it's gen- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sadly enough--
Speaker 1: --gentrifying culture.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, but when you were growing up it was, you know--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --mostly African American?
Speaker 2: It was mostly African American--
Speaker 1: Would you say 80 percent--
Speaker 2: You could only go downtown and see tourist coming in.
Speaker 1: Would you see eight- 80 percent of the population?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five--
Speaker 1: Seventy-five?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and there's also, you know, a--and then, and the others were French, or Hispanic--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so, I mean, this is the Virgin Islands so it's a, it's a blending there of Caucasians and Spanish speaking people, you know, African Americans.
Speaker 1: Now what--was it St. Thomas that used to be at one time a Danish--?
Speaker 2: Danish, 'til 1917, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, St. Croix and St. John; the U.S. Virgin Islands were owned by Denmark.
Speaker 1: All right.  Any remnants of names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, there's some of the streets are still have the Danish names, yeah.  I mean, my name is Homer Hans Bryant [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], you know, so, yeah, my granddad, they named me after that, the Danish, you know, so.  Yeah, so it's, it's, it's powerful.  Beautiful, though; I love it.
Story_ID: 642393
Speaker 1: Now there was some legends I heard years ago, there's something called the story of the Fireburn Rebellion [1878 St. Croix Labor Riots], you know, I don't know if it was St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] or St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] or whatever.  But did you hear any stories about the days of slavery and the--
Speaker 2: You know what I--
Speaker 1: The transition, the fight against the Danes and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a slave by the name of Buddhoe, B-O-H-H-O-E [sic.], or something like that.  I remember this 'cause I went down there to film a dance movie one time and I was playing this character that, I think he was off of St. Croix or one of the other islands that had freed some slave and there was this big fire and some history, and I remember they had asked me to come down because I was from St. Thomas and be the leader dancer in this production, it was really interesting, really interesting.  And then they got Bluebeard's Castle [Bluebeard's Castle Resort, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands] and Blackbeard's Castle [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] and all the pirate stories and stuff like that.  And my [maternal] grandparents [Alberta Donovan Steele and Edgar Steele] would tell me, now very vague to me now, but, you know, you can go upstairs and stay, see some of these castles and look out into the harbor and see what, you know, imagine these big pirate ships coming in, it's like, it's fascinating, the history of the islands, you know, which are, I try to read and get into right now.  But it's really, it's an American paradise 'cause if you don't know the, that the stuff is going on there that's the killing and you know, whatever, it's just crazy.  Sometimes it can be like Chicago [Illinois], you know, shooting people and stuff like that, but it's just like you said, it's just like, it's an American city now, stuff comes, you know, they got the Internet, they got, you know, it's just, sometimes with technology, comes a lot of destruction.  (Laughter) That's incredible as technology is?  You know, so it just opens up paths to, you know, other people's lives and things that shouldn't be sometimes.  The nice quietness of, wow, let's go down to St. Thomas, and get away from it, from the world, you can't do that anymore, you know.  It's just sad.
Speaker 1: Now that's something.  I didn't realize--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it had been that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that heavily populated.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is, it is, it is and then you're--back in the day too, you used to have so many movie stars coming down, you know, then now they go probably to Fiji, or someplace where don't nobody, you know, you gotta take a boat and a plane and then a bus to get away from the world.  But that's not St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: And you said there are castles on the island?
Speaker 2: Like the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fortresses?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they're built out of remnants of castles, or what used to be, you know, pirates' castles, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The wall, stone wall, they have a ca- castles with the windows in it where you can look out and the old cannons and stuff that some still place, yeah, it's really nice to see that, you know.
Speaker 1: Are there any, any famous ones that you can tell us about?  Any--
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any names (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, like Bluebeard---
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was a pirate and Blackbeard, so there's--
Speaker 1: So these castles are named--
Speaker 2: --Bluebeard's Castle, and Blackbeard--Yeah, named after these guys, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you all could play there when you were kids?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we go play there when we were kids, sit on the cannons and look out into the, into the harbor and stuff, yeah, it's great, it was great.  That's a tourist attractions now too 'cause they keep their names, you know.  So you go down there and do a sightseeing thing, they'll take you in a van or the bus to these places and, you know, you can just look out and take pictures out to the harbor.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of the town that you grew up in, I mean, what--?
Speaker 2: Charlotte Amalie [St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], C-H-A-R-L-O-T-T-E--
Speaker 1: Charlotte--
Speaker 2: --A-M-A--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --L-I-E.
Speaker 1: Charlotte--
Speaker 2: Amalie
Speaker 1: A-M--?
Speaker 2: A-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Charlotte Amalie, okay.  I'm glad I asked 'cause I think, you know, you--I was satisfied with St. Thomas at first but then I thought was there--is that a--it's fifty miles long, there has to be--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, there's, yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, another--
Speaker 2: Yeah, fifteen miles long, not fifty, I'm thinking, we do--we need to check on that.
Speaker 1: Is it fifteen?
Speaker 2: I think it is, I think it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's really small.
Speaker 2: It is a small island, it really is, it is.  You know, mountainous, but you get the length of it, it's just, you know, right, right.
Speaker 1: So the mountains in the middle like--?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, you know, the hills and stuff so yeah, but, double check on that.
Story_ID: 642394
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I guess it's time to ask it and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Carnival, oh!  Carnival, Carnival, Carnival, colors, colors, you know, when you have a--and we look forward to that every year in April or May, we would have a Carnival.  They'll be a children's parade and an adult parade, children's parade would be on Friday, adult parade would be on Saturday.  But that whole week would be festivities going on, the most beautiful colors, the prince and princess pageant or the Carnival king and queen pageant, there were just colors and the smell of food, colors and the smell of food and the calypso music, you cannot get away.  Do you know, every show that we do here I always have a calypso piece in my show?  Especially if it's a student show, a summer show or a Christmas show, I'd--because that keeps me connected with home, we keep it.  And there's a piece we just finished doing, it's called 'Family' [ph.], very West Indian upbeat, you know, family, family and a lot--actually I was doing that when the Obamas [Michelle Obama and HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was here.  It's a beautiful, beautiful piece.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, 'cause I'm gonna get--I can come back--
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --to the sounds and smells question.  But when you mentioned calypso--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you give us like a kind of an origin on calypso and like what it means to--did it originate in the Virgin Islands?  Or how--
Speaker 2: You know what?  You're asking the wrong one, but I kind of think it originated in maybe Trinidad or one of the other islands.  And they've been doing these parades as a, sort of like coming from Brazil, where the samba and the, and the merengue and all that stuff that came from Latino countries.  But I think it spreaded around and it's just a flavor of a people that just really enjoy life and enjoy getting down and dancing and just movement.  But I think maybe the whole idea came from Trinidad, you know, from way back, they started these Carnival, parades and, you know.
Speaker 1: I know there's something in, called the Junkanoo in the Bahamas.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.  But see all those islands got such a history of festivity--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, so I--and then I, I'm sure if you got back far enough you can, you can take it back to Africa, (laughter) you know, and the stuff we brought, no matter where we landed, it's just stuff we brought, that festive feeling of a, of a celebration or harvest or whatever it was at the time.  You know, how it's for us, its Carnival, but yeah.
Speaker 1: You know we, I know we often say here that the people who live in the Caribbean--
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: --are closer to their African roots--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --than we are here.  Did you have a sense of that growing up?  I mean really?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not really, as for me growing up, all I knew was St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], you know.  I knew my [maternal] grandmother [Alberta Donovan Steele] was from Tortola [British Virgin Islands], we visited there a couple times, going back and forth from the board--we would get on a boat to go to St. Croix or get in a boat to go to St. John, the other two U.S. Virgin Islands and it was just, it's that Caribbean life, you see?  We really were not exposed to the world out here until we started getting older.  So as I got older and got more into dancing, I realized why I really wanna pursue this, I would have to leave my, the island and go to the main land.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but that's--I mean, kids growing up on the island, that's all they see, really have, you have tunnel vision, your peripheral is really not that much open, you're just like, "Wow, this is my life, this is what I'm--I'm here."
Story_ID: 642395
Speaker 1: I know, just one more question about calypso--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up--You were born in 1950?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: And one of the biggest stars--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --of the 1950s was [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: He was the king of calypso.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he was--just talking about what he meant to--I mean he was a big deal in--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Still is when--
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Daylight come and me wanna go home."  I mean he was hot, down in, in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] too.  The way we would play his music all the time and then to see him being such a superstar on this side of the rock.  And you know who else too was an influence for me actually was Sidney Poitier 'cause you would see him on TV and it's like wow!  You know, so I think I, as a kid too, I was more aware of black Americans, African Americans doing well on the mainland, so my urges was, I'm dancing here but I need to, I need--we used to call it the rock, (laughter) you know.  We're thirteen, fourteen, I want to get off this rock one day, so (laughter), so St. Thomas for us was the rock (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's odd that people want to go to the islands to get away (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right--
Speaker 1: And you wanna leave.
Speaker 2: And yeah, wanna get away, right.  You're on the island, you wanna get--and especially as you grow older and you get more mature, you know, 'cause it's sometimes, you know, jobs are hard to find, what you, what are you gonna do?  If you're talented and, you know, you can sing, act, dance or something, well, you can only go so far on the islands, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Well this is--it's interesting 'cause it's--what you're saying is true.  Sidney Poitier, he's also an islander.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: From the Bahamas, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, now remember when I came up to join Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] years later, I stayed in Harlem [New York, New York] with a little old lady that Sidney Poitier had stayed with when he first came up here.  Now she was much older, some days she would forget to call me Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant] and call me Sidney, which was ironic for me, you know, and I met him years later because of Dance Theater of Harlem, and I told him about this incident, you know?  And so we laughed at--it was, it was, it's amazing, you know?  But some- sometimes you see what happens too and I keep telling the kids, if you see somebody that's successful and you wanna take that, you know, that path on, you wanna be like them, you wanna be like that actor, that dancer, that singer, well, follow what they do, read about what they do, you know what I'm saying?  Read the positive things or even the things that, the stumbles that helped them to get to where they are, you know?  So that was my path, I wanted to be a singer, actor, dancer, but my dancing was my first love, like I said, I would create stuff, I could choreograph, my thing is I hear music and I see, I see movement to this day.
Story_ID: 642396
Speaker 1: Now let me just ask you one other--go back to the sights and--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Yes, of Carnival (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Carni--So Carnival.  We were talking about sights and sounds--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and smells.  What were the sights and sounds and--?
Speaker 2: The sights of--was, was people having such a good time, the smell was of fried fish or different stuff cooking, the sounds was hearing the calypso music or walking by the ocean and hearing the rush of the water against the rocks.  See what I mean, the--going to the market, going with my mom [Elesta Steele] to the waterfront and buying fresh fish, just get out the water and they're still jumping, the lobster, same thing, taking 'em home, putting 'em in a pot and boiling that lobster and eating, everything was so fresh, everything was--that's when you asked me my favorite food, seafood, really, it's seafood, you know, I don't eat a lot of meat.  But going to the market every day, my [maternal] grandfather [Edgar Steele] too, used to have in the marketplace, used to sell, you know, bananas and apples and orange and stuff like that, you know.  So that we would go to the market, it was just a big tent kind of thing and then we, as kids we would hang out in the market with great-grandma on Saturdays, Monday through Fridays we would be at the store, the carpenter shop with grandfather, on Saturdays we'd go to market with grandma [Alberta Donovan Steele] and just hang out there all day.  Watch--I'm a people watcher too, so I used to just watch people, like body read people, you know, and just--so it was a feast for the eyes and the ears, (laughter) as well as the nose, you just, the senses, the si- the senses, I think, were working, you know, more so, I mean, when you're young especially for kids on the islands 'cause you see it and you're listening, and you're, it's just all that that's going on all the time.  So, I learned to be aware of it at a very early age, you know?
Story_ID: 642397
Speaker 1: We're talking about growing up and was the--What were things economically like for black folks in, in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]?  I guess, was the e- economy focused on tourism mostly or what was it?
Speaker 2: You know what, as a kid growing up, we knew there, there was always two, three, four ships in the harbor, tourist boats and we would see them walking up and down town shopping.  So we knew that tourism was a very big factor, they were always there, there was constantly people walking around and then my mother [Elesta Steele] was working in the restaurant or in housekeeping at a hotel, so we didn't really suffer economically.  You know, my [maternal] grandfather [Edgar Steele] had the carpenter shop and then my sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] were working, or my aunts actually 'cause we were kids, not my sisters.  They were working and they had good jobs whether it was in the hospitals, different restaurants, legal secretary, what have you.  So we really so to speak didn't feel like we were not, we were wanting for anything.  You know, tourism was the main stuff that was going on there, the main provider for the people on the island.
Speaker 1: Did most people do pretty well, I mean--?
Speaker 2: I think most people did very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Really, once or twice you'll see somebody begging for a dime or something but that was so rare back in the day in St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, I remember my grandmother [Alberta Donovan Steele] would feed one or two homeless people, you know, that was it.  So we really didn't realize that like I realize now here in Chicago [Illinois] or up in New York [New York], when I'm in New York, people just begging for a handout though because they really are sad and poor and, you know, no place to live, just on the streets, it's a culture shock actually.  Actually coming up from St. Thomas was a culture shock and I came up to New York, it was like, "Oh, my god," you know.  So coming from a little island with the blue water, you can, no matter where you look you could see water green and, you know, mountains and colorful houses.  And, so to come to a place like this, it's like a whole different, like a culture shock, you know.
Speaker 1: So it didn't look as--?
Speaker 2: No, friendly?  No.  (Laughter) Clean?  Not at all, not at all.  Safe?  Not at all.  And then you know you're in a different place 'cause of the minute you open your mouth, witness a West Indian accent, they're like, "Where you from?"  You know, like, you know, 'cause you didn't have the slang and the Yankee talk or whatever, you know it's like, so it's like (makes noise).  So you knew you were from someplace else, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 642398
Speaker 1: Now you were saying that you all had television when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: We had a black and white TV and I watched Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, Gene Kelly.
Speaker 1: Now at what junction did you get a TV, a TV?
Speaker 2: We always had one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, so if I, we've always had a TV in the house growing up.  My mama [Elesta Steele] had this little black and white that we would look at it or sometimes news from the states or, so it wasn't that you were listening to the radio, we were just looking at television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you didn't even have the experience of, you know, waiting for the TV?
Speaker 2: No, no, never did, never did (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause some places in the South, they didn't have it--
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: --right here.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: You know, but that's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  Did--so your favorite shows were the dance, were the--?
Speaker 2: Well, my show, exactly, entertainment, arts and entertainment.  Wild life, but usually entertainment.  If you have singing and dancing on the show, I was watching it, you know, I was imitating (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite TV show?
Speaker 2: Back then?  Not really, not really, no.  Right, even now, no.  I like to watch the news, I, you know, for me it's important to know what's going on in the world, really.  I mean, I watch, 'So You Think You Can Dance' and 'Dancing with the Stars' 'cause I'm a dance teacher, I'm into that and a lot of my kids like to excel and go that far so, you know, but, usually no.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the movies a lot?
Speaker 2: Back in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]?  Unh-uh.  Not at all, not at all, growing up, I don't even remember going to the movies once.  Not at all.
Speaker 1: So the, the, the Fred Astaire and Gene Kelley--
Speaker 2: Was right there on the TV, was in the house on television.
Story_ID: 642399
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  What, what was the name of the school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Saint Peter and Paul Catholic School [sic. Saints Peter and Paul Catholic School] in St. Thomas [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did you go there the whole time?
Speaker 2: Except for my last two years of high school, that's when I came up to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So up to about the age of fifteen or something?
Speaker 2: Maybe sixteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so is the, is the Catholic school run by--?
Speaker 2: Catholic nuns?
Speaker 1: Yeah and so--
Speaker 2: Right and a priest.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, so you have to go to Sunday school and church and, you know, I would be, I was an altar boy as well, yeah--
Speaker 1: So were--
Speaker 2: --back then.
Speaker 1: --your--was your mother's [Elesta Steele] family Catholic?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right, right, were Catholic, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Now which was strange because my grandfather [Edgar Steele] was Jehovah Witness [Jehovah's Witness], and my grandmother [Alberta Donovan Steele] was Lutheran, so every Sunday we were at three different places, depending on who you wanted to hang out with.  So I went with my mom to Catholic church 'cause I was going to Catholic school.  I don't think anybody followed my father to Jehovah Witness, my grandfather.  You know, but some of them were--
Speaker 1: He was sort of the leader of the family, but--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was but you know, he was set in his own ways, he was a grandpa, you know.
Speaker 1: He had no recruits--
Speaker 2: Even my uncles went to a Lutheran or Catholic church, yeah.  He didn't recruit anybody.
Speaker 1: Out of his sixteen children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, isn't that amazing?  Isn't that amazing?  (Laughter) So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you--well, was the family very religious as such or--?
Speaker 2: Very religious?  (Makes noise) Yeah, my mom and my--her sisters and stuff, I would say so.  I would say 'cause some days my sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] and I didn't wanna go to church and you're going to church, you know, so we were there and then like I said I became an altar boy, so every Sunday, I was there, put the thing under peoples chin to give them Holy Communion and I remember distinctly, you asked about a childhood memory?  I'd be holding the little tray under my friends' chin and when the priest wasn't looking, I would hit them in their--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --Adams apple.  (Laughter) So yeah, yeah, and I'll tell you something else, I remember going into church some days and we would have to pour the wine to get ready for the priest.  Well, some of my friends and I would swig some of the wine.  I mean, we were bad kids (laughter), you know, we were, we were not disciplined.  You know, like "Oh, this wine, this church wine is good," but you know, you know how crazy kids are sometimes so, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 642400
Speaker 1: Now, now in school [Saints Peter and Paul Catholic School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] did you have a favorite (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Catholic school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, not really.  I got, I mean, I tried to--math was my worst, I'll tell you that, I mean I would get As and Bs in everything else, but not math, I would get Cs and C pluses and C minus.  Math was very difficult for me, you know, that's why even right now, when these kids--I sometimes I tell these kids, "Bring your report card, what can we help you with, you know, let's see where your weaknesses are."  But math for me was a, was a no, no.  Yeah, but I loved the all subjects, you know?  I was into learning, I really did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--was there a particular teacher that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god!  I'm glad you asked that, my second grade teacher and my fourth grade teacher, my fourth, my second grade teacher was, we called her Mama Sasso [ph.], and I don't know how to spell that, S-A-S-S-O, and I can't remember her first name.
Speaker 1: So was this woman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'll tell you--
Speaker 1: --a nun?
Speaker 2: No.  This was a regular, this was a lay person.  She taught on the islands for sixty something years plus, okay?  And I'm telling you this story about her because when she turned ninety years old, and this is a woman that was following my career all through Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] and I would send her little newspaper clippings about my success.  And my mom [Elesta Steele] called me one year and she said she was very sick and she keeps asking for you.  So I went down to the islands and she's pushing her little four wheel stuff and she's got two, so she was pushing around six legs, she said, "My baby," kissed me smack in the mouth, this was when she was ninety.  Well, she didn't die until she was 105.  Okay.  And they thought she, and they were giving her last rites when I saw her too, you know.  So she lived to be ninety-five and I was course I was speaking out, "Oh, she good," she lived to be a 100, "Oh, she good," I'm like, "When's she gonna die?"  One hundred and five she passed away.  So that woman for me was one of the most powerful in my mind, in the space between my ears, I wanted to be like her, to live that long, okay?  So that's my game plan, my fourth grade teacher, when I went home one year, she embarrasses me this way, she would tell people how I used to come to school with one handkerchief in my back pocket, another handkerchief in the other one in a plastic bag 'cause when I got to school, I would wipe off the whole shoe and the bottom of my shoe and put them, and she, and she asked me, "Why you keep doing that?"   And I said to her, "My mommy told me to keep my shoes clean."  But she said, "Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], you don't have to wipe off the bottom of your shoe" (laughter), but, so that was an embarrassing moment for me one year when I went back home and you know, I was supposed to be presented, and I'd made it and got--and then she was telling this story, so I--we thought that was very funny.  So those are the nice two memories that I have of being young back then.
Speaker 1: So you were very--you're very concerned about being--?
Speaker 2: Of being--my appearance, yes, exactly, exactly.  That was, that she was saying, cleanliness, you know, so yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a school uniform you have--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, blue and, blue and white, white shirt, blue pants.  Oh, yeah Catholic school?
Speaker 1: Was it shorts and a--?
Speaker 2: No, long, long and a tie, and a blue tie.  Oh, yeah we had to go to school dressed every day, yeah so then I had to learn to iron too, everybody would iron their own clothes, mama taught us to iron so we would, you know, get the crease in the pants and, yeah, yeah so, it was a fashion statement I guess back then but you had to look, look the part so.  Yeah, so all my life growing up I was sort of dressing and presentation became important.  Got here, got to Dance Theatre of Harlem, it was the same thing for [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell so--
Speaker 1: Now did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know.
Speaker 1: Was there a--who was the first black dancer that you ever focused on basically in the (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: The first black dancer that I really focused on would have to be [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the director of the Dance Theatre of Harlem.
Speaker 1: So nobody on TV or anything?
Speaker 2: No, well, you know, I love Sammy Davis, Jr. of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course I was into Sammy Davis, Jr. back them too, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson], that, that's another thing, when I saw Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, or Gene Kelly, Bojangles, I mean, the tap dancing that was, that was powerful for me, that was very powerful for me as a kid growing up.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember anybody referencing [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham in the old movies?  I know they're some movies that she's with the whole dance crew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I've seen a lot of Katherine Dunham stuff, her old films.
Speaker 1: But when you were growing up did you know that that was Katherine Dunham's dance (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Not only did I knew it was Katherine Dunham when I was growing up and then I got to the states and I got to Dance Theatre of Harlem where I met Katherine Dunham.  I also met Josephine Baker.  I have a picture in the London [England] dressing room with Josephine Baker.  It's in my, in my portfolio.
Speaker 1: Okay, well (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so we were aware of all these people, I mean, yeah, these great divas of dance and stage and, you know, theater.
Story_ID: 642401
Speaker 1: Now did the story--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that we were referencing about you pee- peeking in the window of the dance studio--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say I was about ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, there's this, going from Catholic school [Saints Peter and Paul Catholic School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands], after school to the basketball court, there would be a dance studio on the way so we would just stop, a Hispanic friend and I and look at the girls in the window.  "Oh, that one's pretty, that one's pretty."  But as I was looking, and they were tapping or doing jazz, you know, or African I was like, "I can do that, I can do that.  That's easy.  I can do that."  So my mind was telling me, although I was girl watching, the dance interest was really powerful and was really there.  And one afternoon a teacher came and she said, "You know, what?  You guys been doing this too long, I'm gonna call the police." And I said, "But I really wanna dance."  She said, "Have your mom [Elesta Steele] fill these papers out."  She gave one to me, gave one to my friend.  I got home, my momma says, "You must be crazy.  We can't afford it."  That was the first time I heard we couldn't afford anything 'cause it wasn't that real.  I'm not gonna pay for dance lessons, you know.  So my Hispanic friend called and he said, "My mommy signed my papers.  I'm gonna be dancing on the inside with the girls."  I'm like, "Okay, well, my mommy didn't sign mine," and he told his mom.  And his mom came and she said, "Put your mother on the phone."  And she told my mother that she would pay for my first six months, so I was there dancing the next day with the girls as well.  So we, that's how we started, that's how we started.  And after that six months, the teacher realized I did have a talent and I got a scholarship to that school.  So after a year and a half my friend quit, but I was, I was where I wanted to be, I was doing tap and jazz and loving it, I was absolutely loving.  Now that I got to be ten, twelve, thirteen she started to say, "You know what?  If you're going to be really good at this, you have to study classical ballet," and I'm like, "I don't see any other boys in here studying ballet, that must be for girls" (laughter).  She said, "But you're good and you're talented, you have to study classical ballet," so I kind of refused her for a couple of years.  And then she passed away, must have been 1967, I got--
Speaker 1: Now her name is--?
Speaker 2: Jane Miles, this was Jane Miles (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jane Miles.
Speaker 2: And it was Studio Five [St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands], was the name of the dance school.
Speaker 1: Now she an African American?
Speaker 2: No, this is a white lady--
Speaker 1: White--
Speaker 2: --from Albany, New York, white lady from--and was a sweetheart, was a sweetheart and she gave me that opportunity, and I mean, she saw the dancer in me.
Speaker 1: Now what was her background do you know?
Speaker 2: You know what?  She was from a, from the states, she was from the mainland and she was a beautiful feet and legs, high extension.  This woman was like a goddess to us kids, you know 'cause they, you know, that's what I'm saying, you don't get to see a blonde, blue eyed or green eyed lady from the--when you're young, I said, you know, being an African American in the islands, you know, like this lady's up--and then that could really dance and split and hold her leg in the air and, you know, beautiful feet, and it's like, it's like this woman is something special.
Speaker 1: So she had been a dancer?
Speaker 2: She had been a dancer from the mainland that moved down with her husband and her husband was from England actually, English guy, you know, so they got married and moved down there to open up a dance school.  So that was the, my, I mean, it wasn't because, because of her, I'm doing all this today, you know, so because of her I got on that path.
Speaker 1: So she passed away in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: But you were already here--
Speaker 2: Or sixty--huh?
Speaker 1: Were you already here--you--
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't come up here 'til sixty--'til '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm thinking, I'm thinking.  Yes, well, she may be passed away in '66 [1966].  Anyway, she had arranged for me to come up to Lee, Massachusetts to Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts], that was run by Ted Shawn.  This is in the Berkshire Hills [Massachusetts].  It's called Jacob's Pillow.  It's a dance today, a big dance festival thing there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this was--?  Had you started to take ballet at this point?
Speaker 2: When I got to Jacob's Pillow (laughter), that's what I'm saying, I--
Speaker 1: So up to this point you took tap and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Up to this point it was tap and jazz and modern.  Ballet was like (makes noise), you know.  If I started it, I started it a year before I came, but when I did come up to Jacob's Pillow, the shocker was that all these guys were dancing and jumping and leaping and all that.  It was like mind boggling, it was your Edward Villellas and all these people that was really incredible dancers.  You know, I'm like, "Okay, she was right, I have to catch up now, I have to catch up now."
Story_ID: 642402
Speaker 1: Now in high school, did, I mean--
Speaker 2: No.  I'm glad you said that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Back in high school, in Catholic school [Saints Peter and Paul Catholic School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] I started choreographing for the Christmas pageants because we need a little movement here and I would, I can do that, I--I'll tell the nuns I can do stuff so they had me choreographing.  And, now here's what happened, I was in the eighth grade--And the teacher wrote a note on the board, there will be no more classes at Studio Five [St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands] until further notice, and I said to the nun, "What are you talking about?  I go there every day on my scholarship, I have to go."  She said, "Mrs. Miles [Jane Miles] died last night," she said, "she hung herself."  I went into convulsions.  They had to take me to the hospital, simply because the night before that I had just finished sweeping the floor, cleaning the mirrors and I said, "Goodnight Mrs. Miles, I'll see you tomorrow."  She said, "Well, take care, Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], get home safely," and the next day she was dead, this was when I was in the eighth grade, I'll never forget this.  So, of course, but she had arranged for me to come up on the scholarship, so I didn't come up 'til maybe the next summer.  Or, yeah, 'cause I stayed there eighth grade.  I went to ninth grade.  I came up here for the tenth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see so it was, it was, but I was choreographing for Christmas shows and stuff in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].  So I had this niche now to choreograph as well as I could dance, so I would get other kids and do all this movement and stuff so--
Speaker 1: So this is a terrible thing that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god!
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea as to--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Should I tell you this?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I--this a--years later, years later, years later, I'm with Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York].  We go to England to perform.  There's a note, a gentleman waiting to see me back stage after the show with two kids and a wife, this is this ladies' husband from St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: So this is Mr. Miles, then?
Speaker 2: Mr. Miles with a young girl that I used to dance with, she maybe was like four years older than me.  She's now his wife and they have two kids.  Well, it didn't take me long to put two and two together, you understand what I'm saying?  It did not take me long to put two and two together and I had called, I called my mom [Elesta Steele] that night from England, from the hotel in England.  I said, "Oh, my god, you know--I saw Mr. Miles and Dawn [ph.] was with him and I--." And my mom said, "Okay, now you know."  I'm talking fifteen, twenty years later, or maybe at least fif- yeah, it's gotta be at least fifteen years later, you know, so (makes noise), yeah, that wa- that, that was powerful for me.
Story_ID: 642403
Speaker 1: I'll tell you another story.  There was one time I'm doing 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt on Broadway and the stage manager said, "Mr. Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], Mr. Bryant there's some people downstairs to see you."  Well, I went downstairs, there's these two Caucasian lady in tee shirts.  It was two of the nuns that used to teach me in Catholic school [Saints Peter and Paul Catholic School, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands]. They had left the convent, you know what I'm saying (laughter)?  Over the years, people have come to see me.  It's been the most mind boggling, I mean, yeah, I could, those stories are the ones I remember, you see?  Not, not the little things growing up there, you know, but these are powerful things for me like, "Oh, my god," I realize like, life happens, people change, you know, whatever path you're gonna take is gonna, you know, it is what it is.  So (makes noise) I mean, learning lessons along the way, you know, it's like doing "Timbuktu!" with Eartha Kitt, she would stand in the wings and watch, you know?  She'd, sometimes she'll have a notepad, other people would get excused from the show, she didn't like what they were doing.  Well, one afternoon, again, "Mr. Bryant to Ms. Eartha, Ms. Kitts' room," I went, she was very sweet, "I like you, you're doing great," and she started coaching me and then--and we became best of friends.  When we ended up at the Pantages Theatre in California [Hollywood Pantages Theatre, Los Angeles, California], I lived in Eartha Kitts' house for like six months with my wife [Rhonda Samson Bryant].  She took off to do her nightclub act in Europe.  Eartha Kitt had a fresh vegetable garden, she had a chicken coop, she had pheasant, doves and geese in there.  We were eating fresh eggs every morning, and spinach and da, da, da, da, da.  So I sort of became a health nut.  That's the way I used to be with my favorite food.  I drink a lot of green stuff, spirulina, wheat grass, you know, all the antioxidant stuff so I'm just, it's, that's been my--So people along my path, my dance path have been really influential where there was good influence like my first teacher, her situation or the Eartha Kitt, you know, or my second grade teacher, or the nuns, it's like wow, people do change and life goes on, so you just, you have to--there's a rules for being human, you will inherit a body, you may like it or not, what you do with it is up to you (laughter).  It's as simple as that.
Story_ID: 642404
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, I'm going to ask you some more about that towards the end I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --on how to stay fit and things.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: You, you managed to do this.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My body is truly my instrument.  And I try to insist and tell the kids you only get one and it's how you live it, not how you die it, you know, so, I tell the kids that every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, okay.  So when--so you had the scholarship to come up to Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a summer program (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Summer program--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But I did not go back to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: Now did--
Speaker 2: I, yeah?
Speaker 1: Was there any trepidation about you leaving?  Was your mother [Elesta Steele] upset that you were leaving?
Speaker 2: No, no.  She was, she said, "Well, this is what you wanna do?"  I came up, I stayed with my family in Brooklyn, New York, my [maternal] grandfather's [Edgar Steele] brother, and then they drove me up to Massachusetts.  Well, after that was over, I realized I enjoyed that so much and I really wanted to be a dancer.  When I said to my momma I didn't wanna come back to St. Thomas, she arranged for me to live with my family in Brooklyn.  I went to Erasmus Hall High School [Brooklyn, New York] for eleventh and twelfth grade.  Now Doctor King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968], right?  Yes.  I was in the eleventh grade at Erasmus Hall High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came out in '69 [1969], then right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly 'cause that's when Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] started the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] (makes noise).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I met them a year later (laughter), it's amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's amazing.
Story_ID: 642405
Speaker 1: Tell us about this summer you spent at Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts].  You said that you could already tell that the, that you needed to get into ballet 'cause (unclear) so far (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew that I needed to get that ballet discipline--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because all the other guys, they were strong and they could jump and they could turn and they were really incredible dancers, I'm like, "Okay, this is what this ballet stuff does for you."  I had the finesse and the energy and, you know, I had the presentation, but the ballet technique, I didn't have.  So then I had to buckle down and really started getting it together which I did.  After that was over, and I went back to my cousins in Brooklyn [New York], I got a scholarship at a school in Manhattan [New York, New York], it was called Odanlel Sure at the time, okay?
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Odanlel?  O-D-A-N-L-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, Odanlel Sh--?
Speaker 2: Slash, it was two different names, Sure, S-H-A-W.  Shaw?  Sure?
Speaker 1: Shaw?
Speaker 2: Shaw, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Odanlel Shaw Dance Studio [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in Manhattan and I was a scholarship base, I was studying ballet.  And I remember there's a red headed white lady, Celene Keller.  I'll never forget her.  Celene Keller was my teacher and she really pushed me and got me to the, to where I needed be, C-E-L-E-N-E, Keller, Keller.
Speaker 1: So this is all during, during those last two years of high school [Erasmus Hall High School, Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly, exactly, 'cause Mr. Mitchell then started, you know, he was on a trip about to go to Brazil to do something for the government after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and he changed his mind.  He said he needs to do something in Harlem [New York, New York], so 1969 he started that whole Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] idea.
Speaker 1: Now had you?  When did you meet [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell?
Speaker 2: Celene Keller told me, "Mr. Mitchell is starting something in Harlem.  You need to go see him 'cause he's a black man.  He used to dance in New York City Ballet.  I think he'll be a good fit for you."  I did not, I went back up to Jacob's Pillow in 1970, and Mr. Mitchell showed up there with like ten dancers.  He was just trying to get the reputation that he was starting a company around and they, you know, they did the little workshop and maybe did one of, he had choreographed two ballets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now like--well, for those who don't know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --watching this, tell us who is Arthur?
Speaker 2: Arthur Mitchell is the founder of the Dance Theatre of Harlem, Arthur Mitchell is the only African American back in the day to dance with the New York City Ballet.  He was a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet.  George Balanchine choreographed lots of different numbers for him like 'Agon' [George Balanchine] pas de deux and 'Midsummer Night's Dream' ['A Midsummer Night's Dream,' George Balanchine] and various other ballets.  But Mr. Mitchell in 1968, when Doctor King was killed, decided instead of going off to Brazil to work for the government there why not do something in Harlem for his own people and he started the Dance Theatre of Harlem.  So they came to Jacob's Pillow in 1970, and I'm sweeping the floor.  These beautiful black women get off the bus, these ballerina types and he's looking at me.  And I'm looking at them and I asked somebody, "Who is that?"  And they said, "That's the Dance Theatre of Harlem.  Arthur Mitchell just started a new company." And I said, "That's where I wanna be."
Speaker 1: And prior to this point, now when you had, when you were going to Jacob's Pillow, were there any other black students?
Speaker 2: Modern dancers, African dancers, not classical ballet dancers.
Speaker 1: So you were going--
Speaker 2: That is why Dance Theatre of Harlem to this day is so powerful, 'cause he made African Americans believe that they can dance classical ballet just as good of any- anybody else.  Because the fallacy was that we couldn't.  They would push us into modern or tap or jazz, you know.  But he came along and he just started, what--the genius about Arthur Mitchell is what he would teach the techniques of the body, it's the same technique but different ways of getting that individual body to apply to the technique, and I think that's the one thing I have replicated from him as far as teaching these kids that I have here.  I teach the technique to the body, it's a different route to the same destination, and, and being a massage therapist also helps, you know.
Story_ID: 642406
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about that and what, what exactly do you mean?  'Cause I'm a little confused, there's a--so he's, he's teaching the same thing that any classical ballet teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teacher would--
Speaker 1: --teach but--
Speaker 2: But it's not traditional.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You have hyperextended legs, you have to do this, you cannot close in a perfect fifth, you have to do this, you see what I'm saying?  Here's what you need to work on to get to this destination, here's what you need to work on to get to this destination, you see what I'm saying?  So you're a little bit more bow legged, you're stance are gonna be more, you're gonna be further over to the right when you're working with your left leg, over to the left if you're working with right leg, or over to the right if you're working your left leg, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Take your body a little bit more forward for a better place, for a higher jump, get into your plie to get more lengthening, you know, it's just, it's all that, this is the science of movement, he was really good at that where other teachers just teach tradition, you know, tendu close, tendu close, not tendu deep in your plie, do you understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Well tell--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --tell us.  Well, what I was saying--now this is--here's the thing, since I don't know anything about dance--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --really except whether I like it or not.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As a layman looking at--is there in traditional classical ballet training--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Is there a certain body type you have to have--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or they--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Long necks, feet that point, beautiful arms, you have to look the part unfortunately.
Speaker 1: First, before you--?
Speaker 2: You have to look the part first before people start saying, "Okay, that's a ballerina, that's a dancer."
Speaker 1: So if you didn't look like that they--?
Speaker 2: Then you're not a, then you're not a classical ballet dancer.  So here comes [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell taking all these African American looking, Hispanic, European bodies and then just look, all different shapes and sizes and molding them into a classical shape, you see?  Bringing out the athleticism and everything the grace and the poise, the lengthening, it's just time and time management and how you approach kids and make them work.  So I think opening the space between their ears and making them first believe in themself, not looking at their body, okay that's the wrong body type, wrong body type, you know, it's more inclusive, and it's proven that anybody can dance classical ballet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: So in some ways he was breaking down barriers for--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yes!  And it's funny for you to say that because right now there's a program that they have at Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] called Dancing through Barriers going around to different states, big in Washington [D.C.] and they do that, it's really powerful.  Dancing through Barriers, that's the whole idea, no matter, no matter what body type you have, you can still adapt to a classical looking ballet.  Not that you're going to be a classical ballet dancer, but then the end result, it helps you with everything in life, the discipline of dance will take you furthest.
Speaker 1: So would you say that Arthur Mitchell by cracking through these barriers on behalf of black folks on that level--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --also helped people that had other body types and even white people that didn't fit the mold (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely 'cause now Dance Theatre of Harlem, people come from all over the world, black, white, Hispanic, you know, Brazilian, whatever you are, they're at the mul- they're a multicultural place now, oh, yes, oh, yeah.  And because they're some white people that are there that don't fit the classical ballet mode, of course, so they got rejected as well at schools, you know?  So they come to Dance Theatre of Harlem and they learn to work with what you have, you work with your body type, you work to lengthen your legs and get your feet stronger and more flexible to get your legs higher.  So just, it's a process, you know, and some teachers just teach, you know, and good teachers nurture the whole body the whole human, you know, not just okay, do this step, do that, you know, so it's gotten more, which is a wonderful thing.
Story_ID: 642407
Speaker 1: Tell that story.  We, we were talking during the break, tell, tell that story.
Speaker 2: I recall one day Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] had called me into the, to the office and I, I got a check for fifteen hundred dollars and I said, "What's this for?"  He says, "You are now a master teacher."  I used to go out and be a demonstrator at the point before with him and one time I went down and I taught several master classes by myself.  And it's so in--powerful when the master can tell a student, "You can go do this on your own now.  You are becoming a master teacher which is wonderful."  This past summer I went back to Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] and there's a program called masters to mentors.  I went back as a master and I mentored the younger dancers.  So it's really powerful to know that in my career I've learned so many things as far as dancing, as far as being nurturing to students, to young students and to be able to go out and teach like Mr. Mitchell used to teach us so, I've come full circle.
Story_ID: 642408
Speaker 1: Back to that other thing though that, that [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, would you say that he democratized dance, I mean classical dance for, for people, in a sense?
Speaker 2: I think he made it simple in this sense.  He taught different bodies and he taught them how to be classical, you know what I'm saying?  This is how you do the step, this is how you do the step.  Now your body type is different.  You have to go about it this way to get to the end result.  And you notice with talented kids, or kids anyway some kids learn faster than others.  His specialty and his gift was to be able to tell this kid, "You need to do this," and this kid, "You need to do this," but they got to the same place with their own time without getting injured, you see?  With their own time, with focus and concentration and determination to get there, they got there, we got there, I got there.
Speaker 1: Now, or speaking of the injury part of it, I mean, you're an athletic person.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you said you ran some track in high school?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And did--participated in--you were on your way to play basketball (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, play basket- right (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your actions--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did--were--I- I've heard so many stories especially of older dancers that have these horrible injuries and stuff, they can't walk anymore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, hip replacements and stuff--
Speaker 1: Is that, you know, is it--?
Speaker 2: But, you know, I think that's got to do with abuse, abuse when you're in your youth.  I- I'll give you an example, Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov], he wanted knee replacement or hip replacements.  I mean, this--here's a guy that used to do performance after performance after performance after performance every night, but he would pull in a hundred thousand dollars a performance.  I have yet to do in my career pulled in a hundred thousand dollars in anything, you know?  But sometimes when you're that talented, you abuse the body.  You forget that the body is your instrument, and you only have one.  So I honor this house, and I take care of it.  What I have done over the past twenty years or fifteen years is do a floor--what we call a floor barre, floor ballet, where the students are in the back or on their stomach or are on their, on their, on their side so that's prone supine or lateral doing various ballet exercise for strengthening and alignment and placement.  So my kids usually injury free, it, 'cause it's the science of how you put the body together in movement.
Story_ID: 642409
Speaker 1: Back in 1969 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight [1968]- nine [1969], nine [1969], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].  You heard about you, you meet Arthur--
Speaker 2: I met [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell 'cause they came up to Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you see him and you say, "Oh, I wanna be in that."
Speaker 2: I said, "I wanna be in that," right, right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Actually, maybe it was '70 [1970].  I think I graduated in '68 [1968], and he started the company, '69 [1969].  I went back to Jacob's Pillow in '70 [1970], and then they showed up to perform 'cause he had just started getting the company together a year before that.  And I asked to take a class and I did.  And he said, "Whenever you're in New York [New York] come visit us."  Now I knew I was living in Brooklyn [New York] with my family.  I went up to Harlem [New York, New York] couple months later, Church of the Master's [Church of the Master, New York, New York], 122nd Street.  That's where Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] was, in the basement of a church.  It was called Church of the Master's at 122nd Street and Morningside Avenue.  I'll never forget it.
Speaker 1: 122nd and Morningside?
Speaker 2: Morningside Avenue, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now is this when you stayed with the lady that--
Speaker 2: That--oops, I keep kicking this thing.
Speaker 1: That Sidney Poitier used to stay with?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, I moved up there, um-hm, I moved up there and I stayed there for a while 'til I found an apartment.
Speaker 1: What was her name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I cannot remember her name, oh this is puzzling me I've been trying to remember this name for years too--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --because I tell this story a lot.  I cannot remember her name.  Of course, she's since passed away so I don't know, you know.  But yeah, it was right up there, it was right up there.
Speaker 1: All right, so--all right.  So you were at dance, Dance Theatre of Harlem--
Speaker 2: I was there and I was making seventy-five bucks [dollars] a week and sweeping the floor on scholarship.  I could take company class.  About 1971, they were on their way to Jamaica, the company was and there was a gentleman in the company called Derek Williams, he was from Jamaica.  But he could not go back to Jamaica because of his green card situation, else he wouldn't get back into the states.  So Mr. Mitchell came into the studio and said, "I need two of you guys to come back and learn what we call the pas de trois."  It was a dance for three, one girl and two guys, it was a choreography from Mr. Mitchell.  I was smart enough when they went to lunch to ask two of the girls to teach me the movements.  One of the girls later became my wife [Rhonda Samson Bryant] actually, and when they came back from lunch, I had that dance movement, those moves down.  It was like a five minute ballet number, you know?  And so the other two guys performed it first 'cause I asked.  Well, of course, when he went, I said, "Well, can I come back too after lunch and show you?"  He said, "Yeah, Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant] come on back," but when he, this number guy, number one performed not, guy number two performed, I performed, Mr. Mitchell said, "Homer, go home and pack." I got to go to Jamaica that next day with the company.  And I tell the kids this story all the time, I said to, I haven't looked back since 'cause I was determined to get the part, I knew I wanted to dance with this company, and I was gonna show him that I could be a good performer, I did all of that and he said, "Homer, go home and pack."  So I went home and I packed and I got to go to Jamaica.  That was 1971, 1972--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was the tour, and I've been--and then I started dancing with the company.
Story_ID: 642410
Speaker 1: Now, prior to this time when you were taking courses from [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you, were you performing otherwise, I mean, were you just living off that seventy-five dollars?
Speaker 2: I was living off that seventy-five dollars, I was sweeping the floor, I was, I mean what--you know, they were going to their little parties and stuff so I get to take, eat, you know, the dancers would go to these little thing and do their little performances.  And it was a company of maybe fifteen.  He didn't have a lot of people back then, you see what I'm saying?  It was just growing, it was just growing it was just growing, I think, you know what?  When we made our debut, 1972 or '3 [sic. 1971] or something, at the Guggenheim Museum  [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum] that was like a big coming out for Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]. I got a picture of that someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay, debut at the Guggenheim.
Speaker 2: Guggenheim in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's that circular--?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And here's this man smart enough, he had us dancing on the circular, you ever--I mean, this was the genius of Mr. Mitchell.  He could see something and put movement and I can, I can remember the minute you said circular, we were doing dan- movement on that circular, you know?  It was a great--amazing, amazing.
Story_ID: 642411
Speaker 1: I think he was a genius, you know, for doing what he was doing, and then back then he had Cicely Tyson who was one of the core founders of Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] and Karel Shook, you know.  This was his mentor, a white man that used to teach a lot of--
Speaker 2: Karel--?
Speaker 1: Karel, K-A-R--K--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, K-A-R-E-L, S-H-O-O-K, Karel Shook.
Speaker 2: Karel Shook?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that was Mr. Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] teacher and he was teaching a lot of African American that were really serious about ballet back in the, in New York [New York], back in those days, yeah.  So he and Cicely and Mr. Mitchell co-founded the Dance Theatre of Harlem.  You know, Cicely has an acting school [Tyson Community School of Performing and Fine Arts Secondary, East Orange, New Jersey] now in New Jersey some place.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Mr. Mitchell just told me that when I saw him in New York, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I didn't realize that.
Speaker 2: Okay, was Cicely Tyson around 'em?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was one of--yeah, she was around a lot, she was around a lot, oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: She had--
Speaker 1: It was great too 'cause--
Speaker 2: I didn't realize that she--was she a dancer as well or--?
Speaker 1: She took classes, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, she took some classes.
Speaker 2: I know most actors do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was mostly into her acting but, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know what?  They used to teach acting from movement and stuff, or movement for actors, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah which was great, which was great 'cause you know, sometimes, I mean today, it's much better but back then most actors couldn't move, you know.
Speaker 2: She was I guess approaching her, the height of her career?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: She was, she really was.
Speaker 2: 'Sounder' came out in--
Speaker 1: Soun--
Speaker 2: --seventy-four [1974]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --seventy-five '75 [sic. 1972]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, (laughter), yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: She got the Academy Award for--
Speaker 1: Yes, she did.
Speaker 2: --best supporting actress [sic. Academy Award for Best Actress].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  She's about to, she's gotta be seventy something now right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause Mr. Mitchell I think is seventy-eight or something.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Seventy-five, seventy-five, seventy-six, yeah.  But then I mean we, but see we met Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder]--I mean all these wonderful people start coming into the picture, that was Mr. Mitchell's talent, to bring in the right people to do different things, you know, so--oh, yeah, it you could feel that energy though of Dance Theatre of Harlem back then, you, but we knew that something big was happening.  He kept us so focused though, you know?  He would bring us into the studio, show us how to dress, I mean, it was like, it really was like Motown [Motown Records], it really was like Motown.  He would really coach us and take care of us, sometimes he would take us shopping, you know, "You need to get that, you not gonna look like that, you get your--," you know what his favorite words were?  You're representing something bigger than yourself.  That's what he would always tell us, so you'd see old members of Dance Theatre of Harlem, like me, you know, where who and walking well dressed and we don't stutter when we talk and you're striving to be as positive and as focused as possible.  So we got all that from being at Dance Theatre of Harlem.
Speaker 2: So 'cause it's more than just dance training?
Speaker 1: More than just dance training, absolutely, absolutely.  You know, it's, it's life skills, it's how to get along in the world, stay positive, keep, keep your focus and that's what I do with these kids right now.
Story_ID: 642412
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that tour of Jamaica like?  What was--were you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, it was great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had you ever been in Jamaica before?
Speaker 2: I had never been to Jamaica before, (unclear) and then we went back since too.  But no matter where we go we were so well taken care of in the states, you know, on, like the islands or so--stuff like that.  I can tell you we went to Florida something back then in the '70s [1970s], and they wanted us to go through the back of a hotel, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] put us back on the bus.  So the prejudice there existed still oh, big time.  Classical ballet company [Dance Theatre of Harlem]?  Are you kidding, a group of black ballet dancers?  Are you kidding?  Yeah, so we've had, we- we've seen both sides, get on the plane flight to England, amazing, get on the plane flight to Italy, absolutely amazing.  I remember one time I'm performing in Italy, I did 'Agon' pas de deux, which was Mr. Mitchell's role that George Balanchine created for him and when I finished the crowd stand up and it was like (claps) "Mitchell, Mitchell, Mitchell."  But it was me, but we kind of looked alike back in the day, we had this little cropped afro with the sideburns.  And I--he used to call me his son, that's how much we resembled each other.  And by the way we're both Aries and our birthdays are two days apart and we're both left handed, his name is Arthur Adam Mitchell, A.A.M. and my name is Homer Hans Bryant, H.H.B. [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], so there was a lot of connection and parallels there, you know, to this day I call him pops.  So, but in Jamaica, in the Caribbean, when we did tours like that, we used to have the best times.  Whoever the liaison was, they would come out and treat us nice and take us, you know, we would go to the beach, go sightseeing, go--and Mr. Mitchell, the wonderful thing about Mr. Mitchell would all always make it educational whether we were in the islands or in England or in Italy we would have a tour.  We would get there two or three days early so we can get to know that place, get a sight-seeing tour, learn about some history of the different places, you know, and then, and then focus on our dancing, you know.  So that was, that was, that was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it sounds like it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 642413
Speaker 1: Now did you, did you ever consider when you were having this great education with [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --go- going to college to get a degree in dance or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, you, before they (laughter), well let's back up a little bit.  I went, after I graduated from Erasmus Hall High School [Brooklyn, New York], I spend like nine months at Adelphi University, Long Island, New York [Garden City, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  So this was before, before I got--that's why I said I think I went up to Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts] in 1970 because after I graduated in '68 [1968], '69 [1969], I started, I was gonna go to college and I went to Adelphi University, I stayed six to eight months and then I left.  I left and I joined the Manhattan Festival Ballet of Youngstown, Ohio, just for a short while.
Speaker 1: So you lived in Manhattan--in Youngstown for a while (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then the most interesting thing happened.  Huh?  Yeah I was, yeah, Youngstown, Ohio, Manhattan Festival Ballet, I'll never forget, I'll never forget, but that was a--that was a, that was a short stay.  But here's the reason why I left Adelphi University too.  At that time I knew more than my teachers teaching me dance, so to me it was a waste of my time, you know.  And then Celene Keller, the lady that used to teach me, she says, "You know what?  You don't need to be going to a Adelphi.  The Manhattan Festival needs a dancer."  So I went and I did like probably was a Christmas thing, you know, Christmas, the holiday performance with them and I, and I stayed there for maybe four or five months and it's funny, when was this Patty Hearst thing coming down?
Speaker 1: That was about that--
Speaker 2: It was around that time 'cause I remember, I remember distinctly around that time, um-hm.  And then after that I went up for Jacob's Pillow and this whole Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] thing came into my life.  So, yeah, college was on my mine, college was on my mind.  But then I realized wow, I could, you know, go to college when I'm a hundred (laughter).  Dancing for me was then and now and, you know, I was hungry for it.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you knew you were gonna be a dancer, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I knew I was gonna be a dancer.
Speaker 1: All right (unclear).
Speaker 2: I just knew I was gonna be a dancer, I didn't know where it would lead me, which path I would take but I knew I would be dancing, I knew I would be dancing.
Story_ID: 642414
Speaker 1: I left D.T.H. in sixty--no, in '78 [1978].  I did 'The Wiz' movie with Michael Jackson, and then I did 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] on Broadway with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt.  After that was over and I lived in Eartha Kitt house, I, I, I picked up on a show called 'Evolution of the Blues', [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle was the choreographer.  Ended up here in Chicago [Illinois], at the Arie Crown [Arie Crown Theater], the Water Tower [Drury Lane Theatre Water Tower Place; Broadway Playhouse at Water Tower Place, Chicago, Illinois], that theater that used to be in the round (laughter).  Then my daughter [Alexandra Bryant] was born here and then I went back to Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York].  So what I'm saying, it's always been dance though, it's been always dance, always dance no matter what I segue to, dance would always, would always be in the forefront.
Speaker 2: These are, these are basically, these other things are segues not--you were a member of Dance Theatre of Harlem in the end (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: But you did--
Speaker 1: I took a brook, break to do 'The Wiz' movie then I took another break to do 'Timbuktu!,' but, you know, the 'Timbuktu!' choreographer was [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder (laughter).  So it was always that family thing going on, yeah, yeah, yeah, he wanted me to be the Bird of Paradise [sic. Bird in Paradise] so I did audition for that, got the part, you know, stayed on Broadway for a long time, then traveled.  National tour ended up in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 642415
Speaker 1: Tell us about the, 'The Wiz' now, how did--well, before I leave dance, the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite part?
Speaker 2: Dance Theatre of Harlem?  Well, I ended up doing Balanchine [George Balanchine] ballets like 'Agon', Jerome Robbins ballet like 'Fancy Free,' Mr. Mitchell ballets like 'Holberg Suite' and 'Manifestations' so to me I don't have a favorite dance part, every, every piece of choreography that I take on is like a challenge because you want to have a lot of stuff in your repertoire, it's like asking Aretha [Aretha Franklin] what's her favorite song?  And she say, "Chain, chain, chain" ['Chain of Fools'], I think it's all the, it's all those songs that made, you know, a person who they are so it's all those bits and pieces of choreography for me that I really love to dance and I like the challenge of being able to dance different disciplines or different choreography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you really enjoy dancing--
Speaker 2: I really do.
Speaker 1: --parts that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, because he, we connected a lot, you know?  I felt like I was a part of him as could--showing off his technique and stuff like that.  But usually Balanchine pieces are hard because it's Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] music like 'Agon' and you know, they had fives and sevens instead of a waltz or a two four, you know, it's very hard to count, you know, Stravinsky's music--but that was challenging as well, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I guess--now did you do any other kinds of dance what, when you were with (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know what?  Going back to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], tap and jazz was my first love, but when I came up here my focus was ballet but there were also jazz ballets, you know.  So there was jazz dancing and, and modern dancing, that modern dance pieces to like Mr. Mitchell's 'Manifestations,' got a modern dance movement so, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't like--?
Speaker 2: No, it's just--no straight classical ballet--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just a wonderful thing about studying straight classical ballet, as you see these guys in 'So You Think You Can Dance?'  The strict classical ballets gonna take you to the next levels because it's the most disciplined of all the dance forms.  You know, it's like studying to be an opera singer--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You get that voice control and you're, under your system then you can go out and do the pop and da-da-dah, but you have the control and you have the breath, that's the nice thing about training a classical ballet body.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good one (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then you can go off and do other dance forms easy.
Story_ID: 642416
Speaker 1: Let's, let's go to I guess 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now how did you find out about 'The Wiz' (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, now (laughter), back to D.T.H [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] again.  [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, that used to choreograph for Dance Theatre of Harlem was a choreographer for the 'The Wiz,' so he asked some of us to come on board, you know, be the skeleton true, crew for dancing.
Speaker 1: Now this is for the movie, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, this was for 'The Wiz' movie.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it already--it already was on Broadway, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Different set of dancers.
Speaker 2: Exactly, 'The Wiz' was a movie.  It was on Broadway with Stephanie Mills and, you know, then the movie came along with Diana Ross and, you know, Nipsey [Nipsey Russell] and Michael Jackson and, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did some of the same dancers from the Broadway show (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of the same dancers from the Broadway show were in the movie, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But why didn't they just take all the same ones and put 'em in the movie?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't, if they bring some of them were doing other Broadway shows at the time, you know?  Or some of them didn't want to leave the Broadway show to do the movie so it just depends.  And Lois Johnson, I, sent several people to do if they wanted to, it was a choice though.  You know, and the other people had to audition though, you know, not everybody got to be in it so, yeah.  But that was a wild time though, we really had a great time, you know, on the set of 'The Wiz,' you know?
Speaker 1: Was it shot in New York [New York] or--?
Speaker 2: It was shot totally in New York, Bronx [New York] to Brooklyn [New York] to Manhattan [New York, New York], yeah, yeah, yeah, it was shot in New York, yeah.  And, and then, then Michael Jackson was always there, when he would have his part knew, always shy and I mean he would hang out in his dressing room just very quiet, you know, so like.  It was really cool, it was really cool, Diana Ross, everybody was good, was good.
Speaker 1: Now did you, can--well, what was your assessment of Michael Jackson's dancing ability?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought the man's a genius, the man--we would fool around and do pirouettes and stuff on the set, you know, do all these spins and stuff, yeah, he was very friendly, I love him, but really quiet.  But, you know, always looking at people movement, you know, you were dancing, he's looking at us dancing but--well, he came into his own, you know, he couldn't dance, I mean that great by 'The Wiz,' but, by the time he came into--because that's just when that 'Off the Wall'--the man was just coming into his geniusness, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --dancing he used to do to 'Off the Wall'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) that was unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Had he had any training as a dancer?
Speaker 2: No.  No, but I may, maybe some private lessons, to my knowledge or he'd bring people in and they would, but I, you know, talk about discipline and focusing and working 'til you get something right, that was Michael Jackson, you know.  I'm sure those people that work with him better than I did would tell you he had that focus and that concentration and perfectionist, you know that you don't see a lot (laughter), absolutely.
Speaker 1: The role he played is a traditional played by, traditionally played by a dancer, Ray, Ray Bolger played the Scarecrow in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the movie, 'The Wizard of Oz.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he did a great job, but it's like a cult thing now, you know, since he's passed away it's playing over and over and over and over, you know.  So some, a lot of kids are now getting into it so, I know some of my kids here when they read that I was in 'The Wiz' now they go out and rent it or try to find it.  Oh, I saw you, I saw you with the--you really do see me at one point where we peel off the funny faces, the ugly faces in a brand new day, just before the movie ends I, Diana Ross is dancing on the table and I'm one of the ones that's lift her, so the camera just follow me for like three seconds, so you could really see that it's me so.  They always find me, the kids are really funny (laughter), so my claim to fame, you're in 'The Wiz' movie?  I say, "Yeah, yeah" (laughter).
Speaker 1: And just for the record, you were saying that this movie is still paying residuals.
Speaker 2: I just got a check, residual check about two weeks ago and they've been coming like crazy since he's passed away, you know.  So, yeah, oh, yeah, twenty years later, that was '78 [1978], (laughter), you know, whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Twenty something years later.
Story_ID: 642417
Speaker 1: There any good stories of, about the filming [of 'The Wiz'] that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh, we would always have some much fun on the set though, you know?  We really did, it was like a big, big family, it really, it was--and Mabel King, you know the big fat, no, no bad news, she was wonderful, she was, and Lena Horne was so sweet, she'd come around and hug everybody, she was very friendly, I mean it was, it was, that was good times, that was good--and they need to--oh, god, I wish they had done 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] as a movie, you know, that was sweet with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt on Broadway, 'Timbuktu!.'  They maybe need more African American musicals, nobody wants to do those things anymore, you know, which is sad.  But that's me, I'm into musical theater and you know, I love stuff like that, I like happy ending stories where kids can see a resemblance of themself and end up with a positive.  Freddie Krueger and Jason [Jason Voorhees] don't appeal to me at all (laughter), not at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what about Diana Ross in this?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a sweetheart too, she was a sweetheart too, very shy, very, I mean, very open and friendly and she was--and it's funny 'cause I show you those pictures I was taking at the time, they were--and they bought some from me.  I gotten a check from Diana Ross for like eighty five bucks [dollars] for some, I took like maybe five or six pictures and I, in those days I used to go back to the dark room and I'd work some stuff and I have a check from him and her, Michael Jackson and Diana Ross, for like three or four months, I would have refused to cash it, I should have kept it to this day, but you know, eventually I was running out of money so--
Speaker 1: I, okay.  Now I, now I was looking through the pictures--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --when we first came in.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I noticed they say the Homer Bryant Collection.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that you were the one--
Speaker 2: Oh, I took those--
Speaker 1: --with the camera?
Speaker 2: I took those, yeah, yeah.  I used to go, Martha Swope, now this a white lady in New York, was one of the original photographers for New York City Ballet.  As a matter of fact, they just auctioned off some of her stuff.  I saw some picture with Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov] or somebody, got four thousand bucks, but she was a fantastic lady.  And I would go to her dark room and, you know, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] had us down there, you know, taking pictures.  And I said to her, you know, I wanted to learn to do this thing, that's my curiosity.  She said, "Oh, come back this afternoon, I ain't got nothing to do," and she started showing me how to shoot pictures and then get the whatever you call it, you know, and then go in the dark room and develop my own stuff.  So when 'The Wiz,' came along I could do this like crazy.  I started taking head shots for young dancers or that people needed head shots and making a little money on the side.  Yeah, I took those pictures on 'The Wiz,' the set of the 'The Wiz,' so yeah, that's my collection.
Speaker 1: Now what did you shoot with?  I'm not a--
Speaker 2: I had a Nike, a Nikon, a Nike?  What do you call it?
Speaker 1: Nikon?
Speaker 2: A Nikon, right, right, right.  I don't remember the model, but yeah, I shot it with that, yeah.  I love to do that again though now that I have more time, I'd love to come in and shoot some of these kids that I teach, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting, I didn't know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't realize that you--
Speaker 2: Homer Bryant Collection.
Story_ID: 642418
Speaker 1: Now you went right from 'The Wiz' to 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis]?
Speaker 2: I went from 'The Wiz' to 'Timbuktu!'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After 'The Wiz' movie was over, Geoffrey, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder called me and said, "You know what?  The, the, the guy that was doing the Bird of Paradise [sic. Bird in Paradise] is leaving."  He said, "You need to come audition for the part."  So of course, I went and auditioned or he, can you sing?  Yeah, I can carry a tune, you know, it was a singer, dancing and acting part and I got the job.  So there I was on Broadway doing 'Timbuktu!' with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt, who was a sweetheart, you know.
Speaker 1: Now okay.  So a lot of people don't realize that people in the performing arts often have to learn something--if you're an actor you learn how to dance and sing.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: If you're a singer you learn how to dance and act.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So did you take any singing lessons?
Speaker 2: Oh, had to, had to, oh, yes, had to.  And then we had, yeah, we had to--the chorus, the singing, the whole cast had to take some vocal training, but then I was taking voice lessons on the side.
Speaker 1: Can you sing a bit of the part that you sung on Broadway, just a bar for us?
Speaker 2: The part that I sang on Broadway?
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you sing a little bit for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, on 'Timbuktu!'?  (Singing) "Imagine me in one."  I can't remember (laughter), I really can't, I can't, well, I can't remember the music.  I know it was that song from 'Kismet' too and 'This Is My Beloved.'
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But I don't know who it goes.  (Singing) "Petals on a pool sifting imagine me."  I can't remember it.  That was way too far, for too (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's okay, I'm not trying to put you on the spot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.  Trying to put me on the spot there (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's--that was good even you trying to remember it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's cool so--
Speaker 2: It's funny I think what I do though is take some memories and just shelf them so new memories can come and, you know.
Speaker 1: It was a lot stuff that--
Speaker 2: Oh my god, my--
Speaker 1: --your whole career (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but okay so, you worked with--so you became real good friends with Eartha Kitt?
Speaker 2: Became real good friends with Eartha Kitt.
Speaker 1: This is what--?
Speaker 2: She became like a mentor to me.  I won't say real good friends.  She was a, this woman that you looked up to and, you know, it's the--I can't believe I know this lady, I can't believe I'm living in her house, you know?  But she used to have nice stories to tell to when she was growing up, you know, and Eartha Kitt could cook by the way.  This lady would cook you some greens from her garden oh, spinach and collard greens and mustard greens and (makes noise), I think that's why I started my health nut kick, you know.  And then Mr. Mitchell used to say, "You're body's your instrument.  You only get one," you know, so I really got on this road to try to be as healthy as possible, you know, eating fresh--I shop at Whole Foods or, you know.
Speaker 1: Did [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell himself like, have a particular diet that he recommended then?
Speaker 2: No, no, I thought Mr. Mitchell liked--well, when I went to New York [New York], Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Mitchell loves coconut shrimp, I saw that.  But eats, he eats as healthy as possible.  He looks good for seventy five, he really does, he really, really does, you know, so--When your body is your instrument you, you know, you think differently.
Speaker 1: Now Eartha Kitt I think the--her original biography says that, I mean her, the ones I read said--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --she's from South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I should have pulled out my picture with her that I took, I took, well actually I took a picture she's got a bottle of--for Christmas Eve, a Christmas show we did, she's holding a bottle of champagne and a microphone.  (Laughter) 'Timbuktu!,' I got it in the room there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I'll show it to you.
Speaker 1: Now you joined the show when it was in New York on Broadway?
Speaker 2: I joined the show when it was in New York on Broadway, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you tour with the show?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah we toured, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, um-hm.  The last performance was at Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles [Hollywood Pantages Theatre, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when she went away and I, I stayed with her, at her house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You said you, you were here when it was at the Arie Crown Theater [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, (laughter), oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, Arie Crown.  I--it's funny you said that 'cause it was this young lady that used to be the massage therapist, she used to come by and give us massage.  Well, her son is now twenty-one or so and I've known her all these years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and she's still a massage therapist.  Yeah, but she was a little, you know, young lady just, getting really into massage therapy back in the day when we were here with 'Timbuktu!' and Eartha Kitt.
Story_ID: 642419
Speaker 1: You were talk- talking about a massage therapist before we broke last time and, now you, you became a massage therapist (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know--My daughter [Alexandra Bryant] was born with cerebral palsy in 1991 [sic. 1981], so in order to help her I went back to school and I went into Chicago School of Massage Therapy [Chicago, Illinois].  By doing that though, I realize the purpose was to try to really help my daughter, you know, massage her muscles and stuff like that.  But it really helped me to become a better dance teacher because I started to body read people, I started to notice these kids with their higher or lower shoulder and their little side twist in their torque and their ribs cage or their hips and now as a dance instructor that has been one of the blessings of going to school and learning about massage therapy and kinesiology.  Now I know the science of movement and I can see, I body read people, you know, so it's a blessing in disguise.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Just thought I'd--because you mentioned it--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And I didn't--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: At the time that so much was going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't have the chance to focus on it.
Story_ID: 642420
Speaker 1: Now you were in 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] until about what year is this, '79 [1979] or so or--?
Speaker 2: (Makes noise).
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980]?
Speaker 2: Nine- nine- '81 [1981], '80 [1980] probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '80 [1980], um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right and then you, you returned to the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I didn't go back to Dance Theatre of Harlem.  My daughter [Alexandra Bryant] was born in Chicago [Illinois] in '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: September 9th actually and then we went back to--yeah, about '81 [1981], '82 [1982], I went back to Dance Theatre of Harlem, I would say '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in, what were you in 'Evolution of the Blues' [Donald McKayle], here before you went back?
Speaker 2: I was in 'Evolution of the Blues' here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And not only 'Evolution of the Blues,' I was dancing with Maria Tallchief and the Chicago City Ballet company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  So I was--
Speaker 1: Tell us about that and how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh, but you know what happened I went, I be--being in the 'Evolution of the Blues,' at night I needed to keep myself in shape, and I knew Maria Tallchief had a school [Chicago School of Ballet, Chicago, Illinois] and a company here so I would take class with the school, in the school in the morning, Maria Tallchief would teach or one of the other teachers.  And she said, "Where you from?"  I like told her I was originally from [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell and the Dance Theatre of Harlem, so she invited me to dance with the company.  So when I wasn't working with 'Timbuktu!' and that then, that was, that job was about to close, I was taking class with Maria Tallchief and then when 'Timbuktu!' finally closed, not 'Timbuktu!' sorry, 'Evolution of the Blues,' when it finally closed here, 'cause they were, didn't continue the tour, I went and I joined Chicago City Ballet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I stayed with them for a year and then we went back to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But Maria Tallchief, you know, Maria Tallchief was once married to George Balanchine.  She's from the New York City Ballet, Arthur Mitchell era so, yeah.  They knew each other so she--I thought it was a perfect fit 'cause she was teaching us that classical ballet discipline was the same thing we had here, and she just loved the way I moved, my energy and all the stuff that Mr. Mitchell taught me as a ballet dancer, you know what I'm saying?  Maria Tallchief like, 'cause she was American Indian [Native American] so she really got into how this African American could move and do stuff like that so, it was great, it was great.
Speaker 1: All right now, what group is she from the American Indians, do you know?
Speaker 2: Osage.  She's an Osage Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I never knew that, I've met her before (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Oh, you have, you have?  Yeah, she's an Osage and her sister Marjorie [Marjorie Tallchief] also.
Story_ID: 642421
Speaker 1: So you said your daughter was born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Alexandra [Alexandra Bryant] was born here in 1981 with cerebral palsy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we decided well, you know, we could stay here for a while or go back to New York [New York] where we had help.  Remember my family was still there, my cousins and stuff like that so, and then go, wanting to go back to D.T.H. [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] anyway.  We went back to D.T.H. and what happened was Alexandra, we were patterning her, you know the Doman Delacato pattern where you hold the head and the arms and you shift from side to side, just a brain organization for a kid with cerebral--really to try to help her to crawl and move which she did do a little.  We did that in the basement of Dance Theatre of Harlem so when she passed away a couple of months ago, April 1st actually, I got emails from people all around the world, especially some of the young people that was back at D.T.H. helping pattern her.  Now these guys got two and three kids, and one girl in particular she said, "I remember how you would always tell us to look in her eyes."  She said, "To this day I look into my kids' eyes," she said, "that was the most powerful thing you've ever said to somebody.  When you're speaking to a kid, look in their eyes," you know.  So I realize that now, even when I speak to these little kids, I get down on my knee or I get to their level and I really try to communicate with the them 'cause, you know, some of these kids come from bad situations and they don't like to look at you in their face, you know?  So that's what I really insist, I'm like, I'm talking to a kid, I'm like look in my eyes, talk to me, look in my eyes, you know, so it's like that whole nurturing and discipline and that surrounds the word dance, I try to keep here, you know.  So you're trying to make the kids better--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --human beings.
Speaker 1: --that's something that--
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: Yes, interesting that you raise that 'cause that's something that seems to be, it's a pattern that is noticed in African American culture--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that if you've ever done a lot of job interviews of people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and they come--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for the interview, a lot of people won't--
Speaker 2: Won't, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: The African American people won't look at you.
Speaker 2: They won't look at you, right, right.
Speaker 1: You know, white people and African American--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: There's--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --a lot of African Americans (unclear), if the poorer the circumstances, the less likely they are--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly, exactly.  I think so too, I'm walking down the street and somebody--I make eye contact, I'm the first one to say, "Good morning, hello."  And they're always surprised, you know, they're always surprised, he said something to me but that's why I do it, that's who I am.
Speaker 1: Is that, is that true in the islands [U.S. Virgin Islands] or is it something that?
Speaker 2: No, in the islands we all--always so friendly though, you know?  Really we couldn't walk down the street and not say hello to somebody in the islands.  Everybody knew each other, I couldn't walk down the hill from my [maternal] grandmother's [Alberta Donovan Steele] house and one of them old ladies or old men or somebody sitting out their window and I don't say good afternoon, that would be the worst thing.  I would hear it when I got back up the hill, "You pass by Miss So and So and you didn't say hello?"  You know (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think we eluded to it before, but is that hard to adjust to coming here and you see (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No because, well you know what?  Coming here I was so open I would say, hello to everybody and then you, then after a while you didn't get nobody, people looking at you like.  So, you get hesitant to say to like I said now, if I'm walking down the street and we make eye contact, I'm the first one to say, "Hi sir, how you doing?"  Or, "Hello," and I do that all the time, I do it, I did it three times this morning and people are, you know, they trying to pull back but I get a kick out of it anyway, you know, I really do.  I really, really do.
Story_ID: 642422
Speaker 1: I know you met your, your wife in the--?
Speaker 2: At Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Dance Theatre of Harlem?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: How--is there a story about how you met and--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  Is there a story?  Here I am, I'll say fresh off the boat from St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] and I have this thicker accent at the time, you know, so all the girls at D.T.H. was like "Hm, he fine," you know (laughter).  So I was so oblivious, but here comes this one and, but they were all gorgeous, it's just like my attraction was to her.  She was from Los--Atlanta, Georgia, and she was there with her sister, you know, and we just made this connection, you know, so there's no stories as I--it could have been anyone of the pretty girls at D.T.H., just--ended up having to be Rhonda Samson [Rhonda Samson Bryant].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so--
Speaker 1: What year did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Right after 'The Wiz' and before 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] (laughter), there was a lot going on and Rhonda was really a very accomplished model too, you know, she did a lot of stuff, Versace [Gianni Versace S.p.A], you know, all the old designers back then and just, Vogue magazine and, you know, Essence magazine and stuff like that back then so she had a good career as a dancer and as a model.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Her name was Rhonda Samson before you got married, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rhonda Samson, right.
Story_ID: 642423
Speaker 1: Nine- nineteen eighty one [1981], you came back to--?
Speaker 2: Back to D.T.H. [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] and I stayed there until probably '85 [1985], '86 [1986], and I was in charge of the second company, Dance Theatre of Harlem Workshop Ensemble, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of--what did the second company do?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything the first company did, my job was preparing dancers for the first company.  So they would look, they would go out and do, you know, like a second, like Alvin Ailey II [Ailey II] or something, performances that the first company would do and every once a month mister--we would do an open house, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] would come in and then he would see them perform and he would like okay this one's ready for the first company and we'd take 'em.  So I would always have to like produce new dancers which was good.  You know, that there are various pieces of choreography for them.
Speaker 1: Okay so it fed the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --first company?
Speaker 2: First, fed the first company.
Speaker 1: So did you do performances on--?
Speaker 2: Oh, we did performances in New Jersey, Long Island [New York], wherever, yeah, they had, yeah--book performances in different places, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you, were you performing with the, with the--?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't performing, I was just teaching class, rehearsal and choreographing, right.
Story_ID: 642424
Speaker 1: Do you get to a certain where you say, "Okay, now I'm too old to be dancing on, you know, in the main shows," or, and you hadn't reached that stage by this point?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Actually, but no, 'cause I was still taking class and keeping myself together but I knew I was in charge of this second company [Dance Theatre of Harlem Workshop Ensemble] so I really wasn't performing and that wasn't the last, that was the last thing from my mind, you know, I think my success was with the first company.  But then after I left, and I got here, I started dancing again, you know, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay.  Now in the, '85 [1985], you retired from performing and it says here and you moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I moved to Chicago in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Now what happened that, to make you retire from performing and--?
Speaker 2: Here's what happened, when I was there in '85 [1985], I started traveling back and forth to Canada, there was a place called Victoria Arts Collaborative in Victoria, British Columbia, they asked me to come and teach and I did and I loved it so much I think I went back for the next three summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a school and they would bring other teachers and myself in, but then see, that's when I started to develop a relationship with Cirque du Soleil 'cause one of the choreographers from Cirque du Soleil would come to Canada to teach.  And I'm now, (unclear) I retired from dancing with Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] in '85 [1985], but when I went to Canada I would perform, you know, so really I didn't stop dancing--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I would perform in Canada, but I was meeting all these new people.  Now that develop, that relationship with Cirque du Soleil I still have to this day, I have kids across the country and I keep saying kids, dancers across the country in different Cirque du Soleil productions.  When my daughter [Alexandra Bryant] passed away, April 1st, I got an email from an African American guy that's now forty-four, eighteen years ago I got him the first Cirque du Soleil job of any of my dancers.  He lives in Argentina, his name is Mark Ward, he speaks five languages and he's still with Cirque du Soleil.  Couple of weeks ago I just got back from Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], I have three of my girls in 'Viva Elvis,' you know, so that relationship, and right now, Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center is one of Cirque du Soleil's outreach.  So every time they're in Chicago, we get to sell three hundred tickets and keep the money, we do a fundraiser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so that relationship has been a blessing so, yeah, so I went to Canada '85, [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], and then I was working from out of here, and then I was also teaching for [HistoryMaker] Joel Hall, guest teacher for Joseph Holmes or where ever, you know, around the city.  And then in '88 [1988], '89 [1989], I said, "You know what?  I, I'm gonna do this for myself," you know, running around teaching for everybody else.
Speaker 1: Right and, and--well, now what--
Speaker 2: What '88 [1988], '89 [1989], or maybe nine- maybe '90 [1990], '89 [1989], yeah, '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--you founded the Bryant School of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dance school, Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, yeah, Bryant Ballet [Bryant Ballet School; Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], right.
Speaker 1: In 1990?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990].  But it really was like, more like 1988, you know what I'm saying?  But officially 1990, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, but officially in 1990?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, officially 1990.
Story_ID: 642425
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you, that you were involved with Gallery 37 [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So now between '85 [1985], and going back and forth to Canada and being here, I taught for Gall--you remember it used to be across from Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a big--
Speaker 2: That big empty lot (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (Unclear) lot.
Speaker 2: That's what, when you--you ever pass by there and saw this black man teaching?  It would have been me (laughter).  Oh yeah, yeah 'cause I had met with Commissioner Weisberg, Lois Weisberg, and she said, "We're starting this Gallery 37 program, it's gonna be hot."  I said, "It's fine, I'm from the islands," she said, "It's gonna be outside," I said, "It's fine, I'm from the islands," so, yes, I did that program, did that program for years yeah for the summer times, yep, '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], what have you, I was doing Gallery 37.
Speaker 1: Yeah that was a program that, it really excited the cultural community--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause the fear was, when Richard Daley [Richard M. Daley] was elected--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that he was gonna spend most of the money on sports--
Speaker 2: On sports, right.
Speaker 1: --not on the arts.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but see that was Mrs. Daley's [Maggie Daley] baby though (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Miss--And Mrs. Daley, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah, that was a good thing, that was good, it really was.
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you got a--you taught the dance classes?
Speaker 2: I taught dance classes right then.
Speaker 1: Were you the only dance teacher?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  We had, I had one of my tap, my tap teacher was teaching tap, my Latin teacher was teaching Latin, oh yeah, I had Jimmy Payne, Jr. teaching for me and, yeah, Jimmy Payne, Sr.'s son.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was teaching, I got, I hired him down there and I, and a lady named Rebecca Aleman was teaching our Latin, oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  That was good, that was really good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did that for a few, for a few--
Speaker 2: I did that for a few summers, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a few summers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and then was teaching in the school [Chicago Public Schools Advanced Arts Program at Gallery 37, Chicago, Illinois], once they opened the Gallery 37 school, I did that for a while too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was trying to do my own thing too, see that's what I was saying officially 1990, we opened Chicago Multi-Cul- Bryant Ballet [Bryant Ballet School; Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois] at the time.
Story_ID: 642426
Speaker 1: So you were also a choreographer for Cirque du Soleil I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's wrong (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how did you, I mean was it just providing--
Speaker 2: I provide dancers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) recruits and dancers.
Speaker 2: And, but then I would go, okay, not choreographer, I was a teacher.  I would go to Canada and teach or I would go to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and teach, you know, do master classes for the cast whether it was 'Mystere' or 'Saltimbanco' or one of the different Cirque du Soleil shows, I would, yeah.  And actually when they came here a couple times I would, I would go and guest teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Cirque du Soleil, I mean they do so many--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, they have so many show out there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fantastic things with the body.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They got like maybe five different Cirque du Soleil shows on the Vegas Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] right now, you know?  It's amazing, amazing what they do.
Speaker 1: Five different shows?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's more--I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They got right now on the Vegas Strip they got, at the Treasure Island Hotel [Treasure Island Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] they got 'Mystere', they got 'Viva Elvis,' they got 'Zumanity,' they got that water show, 'O' and they got one more, they got like five shows in Vegas, oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  And you ever seen a Cirque du Soleil show?  Okay, amazing isn't it?  Absolutely amazing.
Story_ID: 642427
Speaker 1: Have you ever worked with Universal Soul Circus [sic.]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean in terms--I don't know--It know it's a silly thing but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I'm laughing 'cause I have, I have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, god, couple years ago when they--I don't know if you saw them when they were here, they had an African American girl doing hip hop en pointe, and they told her to--that's that same girl out there, Tovah [Tovah Collins], that's--with 'Viva Elvis' now, yeah, yeah, I choreographed that for her and actually Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] came and they did a big thing.  Oh, yes, I've worked with UniverSoul Circus (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that would be in the mid-'90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the mid-'90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  No, this is 2010?  No, it couldn't have been the mid-'90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Was it recent--more recently?
Speaker 2: Maybe not, this is 2010 right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Maybe it was 2002 or '03 [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it had to--must, yeah, it was in 2000, it was after--when was--okay, it was way after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], maybe it was 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003], 2004.  Oh yeah, they did, they had this girl doing hiplet, hip hop en pointe.  You know that's what I do now with the kids [at Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], we do hip hop en pointe.  We just performed--
Speaker 1: Is that hard to do?
Speaker 2: That's hard 'cause, you know, hip hop is down, ballet's up, so you gotta mix the two and kind of be in the middle but I, you know, the girls performed just the other night for the Dwyane Wade 'Chicago's Got Talent' [sic.] and they brought the house down, they did the tango, now to see ten African American girls with flowers in their hair doing the tango, you see what I'm saying?  That's with, and really, people were screaming.  So one of the ladies that works for Dwyane Wade foundation [Wade's World Foundation] she wants us to really keep performing, she's, you know, she's thinking maybe sooner or later he's gonna recognize what we're doing and--
Speaker 1: So this is Dwyane Wade the basketball superstar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  He's got, this is, was his second year, it's called 'Chicago Has Talent', so whether you're rapping or you can sing or you can do a monologue, kids between the ages of twelve and twenty-one can join.  So we were just at (unclear) the other day, and two Sundays before that he had auditions.  Oh, yeah, it was all over TV and stuff and I think his organization gave like a hundred thousand dollars to the Lighthouse of Chicago [sic. The Chicago Lighthouse, Chicago, Illinois] or something like that, yeah.  So he's trying to do some other positive things, you know?  It's not, not just about basketball for him with these kids, it's, you know there's talent out there but this was the second annual and another one's gonna be next year.
Speaker 1: And as we speak, I think he's got basketball covered now with--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).  For sure, isn't it amazing?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in the--okay so you, you worked with Cirque Sol--Cirque du Soleil and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And (pronunciation) UniverSoul Circus (laughter).
Speaker 1: --UniverSoul Circus.
Story_ID: 642428
Speaker 1: So through the '90s [1990s], you're starting your--your class [Bryant Ballet School; Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois] is starting to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to build.  You--when did you serve as ballet master with [HistoryMaker] Joel Hall?
Speaker 2: That was '88 [1988], '89 [1989], '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988], '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see all that stuff, I was running back and forth to Canada and staying here and doing--all that stuff--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --was coming in to play then, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So the, so once you get in the dance community, is it--it's easy to meet all these--
Speaker 2: Absolutely and then everybody, my phones ringing every day, some people wants me to come out to Naperville [Illinois] and teach and, you know.  Yeah, different dance companies and different dance schools 'cause then your reputation starts getting around.
Speaker 1: Is--how important is the Chicago Dance Coalition [Chicago, Illinois] to making all these connections with (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, it, it's important for some people but I really don't use it 'cause my reputation precedes me which is wonderful, which is positive 'cause you know, that's how I teach and my thing is, I mean back to, back in the '80s [1980s], I can go into a room with fifty kids, ask them their name in a row and then go around and, and give 'em correction and call their names.  And parents used to be freaked out, it's just a game I would play by myself, without realizing when you talk, tell her, now I'd hear you, James, Jenny, you know, Beth, call them by their name they, and parents--and you get the phone call and you remembered her name, you don't realize what that does to a kid when you call a kid by their name.  Because I go around and do master classes, I see other teachers teach.  "Hey you," not, "Excuse me, what's your name?"  And then remember it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, I'm smart enough to have a pencil and paper, if I ask your kid a name, I write it down so when I go back to correct them, I call them by their name, you know, so my reputation goes out there and that's the positivity that I have.  So I, you know, I don't usually use a dance coalition or something that, you know, I won the Illinois Arts Alliance award last year, you know, I got the Chicagoan of the Year for dance last year.  But I think it's because I step out and I, everything, my presentation is good, so when I'm teaching a class or at doing a seminar, or talking at someplace, I'll just try to give me best, I go from the heart and, and people remember that so.  And people talk about me, you know, see my name on Facebook and I, you know, I had the eyes on one reading my Facebook thing on night and I befriend all my little kids because I give them positive images to stand by.  "I had the best class ever today with Mr. Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant]," that's rewarding for me, so it tells me I'm doing the right thing.  I'll give you a little example, a couple years ago when they did the fountain [Crown Fountain] in Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois], well, they called and asked me to bring some of the kids down, and so some of them--about fifteen of us went down with the kids and the different teachers.  So I got my face on the fountain, well this summer the kids on, sometimes on Wednesdays or Fridays get to go to Millennium Park or the African American--to one of the museums, Jewish American museum [Spertus Institute for Jewish Learning and Leadership, Chicago, Illinois], they went to Millennium Park and I told the teacher when they were leaving here, I said, "I hope my face shows up on the fountain," my phone rang, it was a text picture, my face was on the fountain and then she said, "Listen to this," and all the kids are going yeah, and they were screaming and applauding (laughter).  But you know to me that was God telling me I'm doing the right thing, you see, so the message was you're doing right--
Speaker 1: You're one of a whole lot of faces (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're doing right by these kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: How many faces are in the--?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of them.
Speaker 2: And my kids show, that's what I'm saying, you see?  So that was divine saying, keep doing what you're doing, so, yeah.
Story_ID: 642429
Speaker 1: I just try to do the best presentation I have when I go out to speak or, you know, and because my daughter was cerebral palsy born, I went out to Lincolnwood [Illinois] the other day, a group of teachers, psychologists, doctors, nurses, physical therapists, occupational therapists and social workers, it was their first day of school and every year before the school opens they have a three hour meeting and they have a professional come in and talk.  Well, one lady saw my documentary on Channel 11 who is half deaf in the right side and she thought it'd be good to have a person of a handicapped child come and speak to all these folks that work with special need kids.  Well, I had them crying, they told me to be myself and I just started telling them about me, about Alexandra [Alexandra Bryant] and how she changed my life and, at three hours later it was amazing, I think we got like a lot of kids and we've been sending emails all week just because of that show.  So like I said, I just try to present my best, what you see is what you get, that's me.
Speaker 2: Tell us about the documentary, 'cause I didn't get--
Speaker 1: The documentary, they did in--Well, Terry Hesser [Terry Spencer Hesser], Spencer Hesser is the documentarian, was paid for by Melissa Sage [Melissa Sage Fadim] and it's called 'Raising the Barre,' B-A double R-E, 'The Homer Bryant Story' ['Raising The Barre: The Homer Bryant Story']  So it talks about my approach to teaching children and discipline, it talks about my daughter who has cerebral palsy and, and how that really helped me to become a better person, tells you that my [maternal] grandfather [Edgar Steele] was a carpenter, you know, he was firm hand and, it just talk, it just shows how you treat kids and in that, in that documentary I tell some people to drop me twenty or twenty-five several times.  So, it's, it's all about tough love, it's all about dance, discipline and determination.  So, say I'll give you a copy actually, it's something to see.
Speaker 2: It aired on local--?
Speaker 1: Channel 11 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Channel 11--
Speaker 1: Yeah, WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: WTTW.
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Is it--has it had any national exposure?
Speaker 1: You know, she, I think she's, she turned it in for maybe some festivals, for some awards--
Speaker 2: Film (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it's independent film (unclear) here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: It's independent film.  Right, right.  And, you know what?  We had it shown at the Siskel theater.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Siskel Film Center [Gene Siskel Film Center, Chicago, Illinois] last November, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is that, during the Chicago International Film Festival?
Speaker 1: No, it was a one night we did a fundraiser--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so.  But Terry's trying to enter it in some different festivals right now.
Story_ID: 642430
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about some of your more famous students here [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], you--and then I'll ask you about some of your students who have achieved the most.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But you, you taught Sasha [Sasha Obama] and Malia Obama?
Speaker 2: We had Sasha, Malia and First Lady Michelle Obama here for seven years.  Before that we had Jasmine Jordan, Michael Jordan's daughter, we had Sierra Pippen, Scottie Pippen's daughter, we had Alexis Rice [sic. Alexa Rice], [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice from Ebony and Jet, daughter so, this is the place to come 'cause I think parents really realizes that it's positive, it's nurturing and you're learning a discipline.  Mrs. Obama took trampoline rebounding, the kids took ballet and African and jazz and tap, you know, so this, it's--all the children and all the parents I think realize the power of positive reinforcement through the discipline of dance.  And whether it's a girl child or a guy 'cause the little guys come in and they take tap, jazz, they take hip--they take hip hop and when they start to get more serious, they go home and they seen all these powerful male dancers on 'So You Think You Can Dance' or, you know, or the Latin channel, it really does change your life, it really does so.  So for our famous kids and our normal kids or our typical kids, you know, it's a, it's a great experience to gra- and we have some Down syndrome kids once in a while and it's like I said, it's a learning experience for everybody which is a powerful thing.  And kids need more positive reinforcement, if I could go into the juvenile delinquent centers of the world and teach what I'm teaching now?  I think you'd--like I always say, you create better human beings through the discipline of dance 'cause not everybody's gonna be into basketball but everybody can move their arms and their legs, you know, and that's self satisfying right there.  When you can meet a difficult challenge as a dance move, you know, it builds your confidence, it builds your confidence, taking a bat, a ball or hitting, I mean that's what builds it too but I'm talking about the total confidence of the human body mind 'cause dance is a body mind connection and the more you study dance and movement, you're working on both hemispheres of the brain, you know what I'm saying?  So it's a give and take, it's that yin yang and it, it's a very powerful thing.  So it's changed me, so it's gonna change everybody else (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't wanna get you in trouble but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who have been some of your favorite students or do you have students that have accomplished any, I mean--
Speaker 2: But you know--
Speaker 1: --extraordinary things in the--
Speaker 2: Here's the thing, I mean, we have the first daughters in the White House, all right?  We have, we have doctors, we have lawyers, I, I've heard from a lady the other day that used to study with me when she was a lawyer, she's been a judge for fifteen years.  We have the gamut of society out there because of the discipline of dance or because they came into our lives or I came into theirs they're all out there doing positive things.  And I think that's what dance does, it opens up your peripheral and it pulls your focus and it makes you a--I keep telling the--this is what I tell the kids, this is the road to life, and then something happens (laughter) and you have this decision, here you are, which way am I gonna turn?  Oh, my god, well, no direction is a wrong direction, you just gotta make up your mind, whatever the challenge is on this road, that's what you're gonna, you're gonna have to put up with, they're gonna be barriers and hurdles you're gonna have to overcome them.  And let's say you choose this one, and it happens again, you see?  And it continues to happen.  But that's what life is all about, that's what experience in life is all about, they're gonna be ups and downs, you know?  And you're gonna have to have breakthrough, but how you gonna get a break--you gotta knock down some walls to breakthrough.  So I think they're all out there, whether they're first daughter, Sasha, Malia, or the doctors or the lawyers or the, or the parent that has it's--that used to study with me that used to be a kid that has three wonderful kids right now, and she is the perfect parent, she's a good parent, she work hard, he's a good parent, he work hard and they just teaching the kids positive values.  Yeah, I think they're all successful stories, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your philosophy or theory of dance instruction is at a--does it--it does more than just teach you dance.
Speaker 2: It does more than just teach you dance, that's the surface.  It changes your life, it makes you a better human being.  That the kids come in here and they have to hold their arms in certain position and do certain steps, their peripheral opens, it's not just about them anymore, it's about all the people you see in your peripheral, having respect for self and having respect for all the other images you see in that mirror.  So it's a very powerful thing, you know, that's what it is.
Story_ID: 642431
Speaker 1: I want to talk a little bit about the business of dancing and how did, just kind of walk us through--now you've got a really nice space here, you have like, we're in a large dance room, we're in a practice room.  You, you know, what to me is really impressive, you know, it's basically--
Speaker 2: Well, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's in the old train--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Well, this is the old, the old Dearborn Street station [Dearborn Station, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dearborn Street station.
Speaker 2: But you gotta realize this is the basement, the ceilings are low, so we cannot be seen, that is a disadvantage and a blessing at the same time.  It's quiet, we can focus and I keep telling people that the best dancing comes out of here because we're at a disadvantage, you can't lift the girls up into the air 'cause the ceiling is low but they learn to turn, you see what I'm saying?  You can't lift a ballerina--
Speaker 1: I didn't think--you, you're absolutely right, this ceilings about eight feet--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You can't lift--
Speaker 2: Exactly--
Speaker 1: --somebody, they'd go through this ceiling.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so that's been a handicap for all the time we've been here, you know.  We need to find a new home, I need to find new people on the board with potential and possibilities of really helping and giving, you know, this, there's twenty years of doing this.  I would like to be the Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] of Chicago [Illinois], we are the Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center [Chicago, Illinois], we have about three hundred kids coming through here on a consistent basis, we have changed so many lives in the past twenty years, but we have always been poor and broke, we have about fifteen, twenty teachers on staff that are really dedicated to the kids, but we need to find a new home.  I would love a big, a building six, seven studios on the second and third floor, someplace where people can look up from the streets and see what's going on, that sees the magic, that see that how in life changing the study of dance can be.  So like I said, down here in the basement, we're hidden but the magic happens 'cause the kids are--what happens is the talent code is focus, it's total concentration, and you have a group of teachers that teach kids and are very nurturing, so you give it and you get it and the kids work hard on their discipline and you see that discipline when you see them dance.  And there's your talent code, repetition, repetition, repetition of steps and movement, you know, that's how it goes.  But we need help.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We need help.
Speaker 1: So well most of your funding comes from--?
Speaker 2: From, well we get funded from CityArts [Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events CityArts Program], Illinois council of the arts, Illinois Arts Council, sorry, various, you know, corporations, we need, we need big, we need major funders, that we're struggling like other dance schools, you know, like the Joel Halls [HistoryMaker Joel Hall] of the, you know, the African American dance school that, you know, but we need help, we really need help.  I mean we've had wonderful people and great people and people of all dimensions and, you know, categories of life, and, you know, but the possibility of having more.
Story_ID: 642432
Speaker 1: Tell me do you think that the, the plight of African American dance troupes are different from just this other small dance groups in the city [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, speaking for myself, because of, it is a classical ballet training school, although we do tap and jazz and African and everything else.  But the discipline and the concentration and the focus is classical ballet, to me that's what gets you to the next level, to me that is what you're gonna leave here and become a better human being with, not just dancing African, we're not an African school that we're just learning traditional African dances, we try to incorporate it all because these kids today, they're on Facebook, they're on the Twitter, they're doing all this stuff, you know what I'm saying?  So you gotta expose them to a discipline that's gonna keep them focused when everything else is getting mad, the study of classical ballet, the fact that you come in a room and hold your arms in certain positions over and over again which builds repetition and, and it works on both the hemispheres of the brain that's, that's what's needed.  So, yeah we're struggling as an African American institution.
Speaker 1: Do the African American dance institutions like, I guess--
Speaker 2: Like the Muntu [Muntu Dance Theatre of Chicago]?
Speaker 1: --communicate just like Muntu, or eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], pretty much--
Speaker 2: I'm sure they do of the, they sometimes--here's what happens too, we're all trying to get the same little bit amount of money from the different funding sources so, it becomes, do we give it to this person or do we give it to that person, you know, and then sometimes people looking at you like the funders that are funded well Muntu is traditional and da, da, da, da, da, let's give it to them, they've been here for a hundred years.  So it depends on who's out there writing the checks and serving up the money on the panels of these different organizations, you know?  So the fact that we've been doing it for twenty years, and maybe Muntu's been here doing it for thirty or NAJWA [NAJWA Dance Corps, Chicago, Illinois] for thirty-four, you know, it becomes whose been doing, but my thing is, and I maintain that we're working with the future, we're working with children, children are the future.  So I think you look at that, well, okay, you've got three hundred kids, wow, you, you're making three hundred better human beings and then you do it again next year and you do it again next year and then, and then for twenty years we've been doing it and now they're coming back with their kids, you know?  So that the, that's a continuum of positivity, you know, that cycle of, it's not a cycle of violence, it's not a cycle guns, drugs and gangs which is that cycle outside, but in here it's just a powerful positive cycle.  And I think when people look at that, especially people that have money to give, come and see what we're doing, come and see how we pull kids off the street and change their lives, you see, this is a nurturing environment, they're not sitting on the street corner and somebody drive by and shoot 'em and they're the wrong person, you know what I'm saying?  There's too much of that going on in the city, this is where it's positive, this is where it's safe.
Speaker 1: Now do you have any scholarship students or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, we have scholarship students and then we're trying to find scholarship money, you know, 'cause every time you put a kid on scholarship you have to find some way--you still gotta pay the teacher.
Speaker 1: Is, is there a pipeline, I guess of recruitment from the, you know, to the public schools or--?
Speaker 2: Yes and we do work with the Woodlawn Foundation [Woodlawn Foundation, Inc.] so they bring kids to us and, you know, and well sometimes we go out in schools to do the lecture demonstrations, I see a talented kid, I pull them in.  But we get phone calls every day about scholarships, which we don't have the money so, yeah and then we got--this summer we had like fifteen boys here and young men in class, those we would like to keep, they're all suddenly into dancing and, you know, but then you have to find fundings for them so, that, that's one major thing we need to do.  The more funding we can get for the kids here--I would like to be at a point where we don't have to worry about money, you know what I'm saying?  Why we struggle now is to pay the next month's rent, that becomes difficult as of, you know, as a black organization or any arts organization.  You know, you're okay my God and rent, rent and teachers, rent and teachers, rent, so the rent is late and the teachers, or you ask, or you ask the teachers to hold off a couple more days, you know, so it's--we need to get past that.
Speaker 1: Now you, are you hopeful what the new administration? I know the National Endowment for the Arts at one time made it possible for an emerging groups--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to get--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to get, you know, started and to, you know, reach a different level.  Are you hopeful with a new administration that there's--?
Speaker 2: Very, very hopeful, very, very hopeful.  I mean I, I've really, my dream is to now find a, a, a spot within the next two years, our own home.  You know, not down in the basement like I said, and where people can look up and say, "Oh, my god, look at that, that is the Chicago Multi-Cultural Center [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], that's where my kid is gonna go study."  You know, we need visibility, we need visibility.  And it's getting better, it's, it really is, you know?  Just one day at a time, one day at a time, but you know, I'm gonna keep doing what I'm doing 'til I'm 106.  Since my inspiration passed away at 105, I gotta top that, Mama Sasso [ph.] (laughter).
Story_ID: 642433
Speaker 1: It seems to me like, you know, with the emergence of all these TV shows about dancing, 'Dancing With the Stars' and 'So You Think You Can Dance' and all those, these different shows that people are more interested in dance.
Speaker 2: They are but, I've always said that they need to do a series called life at the ballet, or life at the dance school.  I've had kids here since they were three, they're now sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, follow their lives, come in here and pick two or three kids and see what they do every day, see how their parents struggles, if it's a single parent to try to make everything work, and follow that child so you have a positive story, you know what I'm saying?  Not so you--because when you see 'So You Think You Can Dance,' and 'Dancing with the Stars,' I mean, come on, these people are already accomplished, you know.  Get, I mean, there's no stuff on television going into a household and following African American kids that live in the hood and come down to the city and focus on it, but are good in school, you know what I'm saying?  But because they're doing all of that, because their body is the instrument and they're the parents are forcing them to use the space between their ears and learn how to visualize and balance, have the flexibility to do this and do this and do that.  And watch them grow for three or four years, to some producer out there that's not a good, that's not a money maker (laughter).  But that's our reality, that's our reality, then we have single parents out there that are struggling with two or three kids, but the kids are doing good in school, they're focused and they're dancing.  At least the person smart enough to let them to get into something they have a passion for, they're not sitting on the street corner.  You know, that's--I don't, that's not good TV to some people.
Speaker 1: Now what do you tell, when you, you go out in the public schools and town, I mean.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: How do you convey to students in school that there's a career path in dance?
Speaker 2: I'm glad you said that because people don't realize that, and I'll give you an example.  I judged a conference for Dwyane Wade, 'Chicago Has Talent,' most of the kids come up and they wanna rap, they wanna act like they're 50 Cents [50 Cent] or Jay-Z or one of the rappers and it's like this is what's happening to our kids, they all think they can get to that point, fast money, wealth and fame by rapping, grabbing their crotch and saying all these bad words.  So they didn't last long with me, you know, I gave them a, you're a little good at that, but then, you know.  The little girl that came in and sang 'Hero,' Mariah's Carey [Mariah Carey] 'Hero' at eleven and blew us away or the little guy that came in and sang 'The Star Spangled Banner' that's fifteen and blew us away, you know what I'm saying?  That's more powerful to me, but the kids don't understand that, everybody wants to be a rapper, you know what I'm saying?  Or everybody wants to play basketball, that's not gonna happen, the chances are you're not gonna get a contract rapping or playing basketball, when you're kids coming out the projects, you know.  But nobody is encouraging them, there needs to be more musical theater I think in the African American schools, you know what I'm saying?  They, there's got to be more to do whether it's dancing, acting, singing, but the, unfortunately these kids look for basketball or just rapping and then you should have seen some of the girls that came in rapping, grabbing their crotch and it's just so sad out there because somehow--and unfortunately, couple of them came and said, "Well, my mama told me to sing this song," you see what I'm saying?  So, we have a disconnect when your mama come tell you to sing this rap song, we haven't come very far, you see?  And these kids don't seem to understand, all right, may--maybe they're getting that good education but they're still into that mentality that I could be a 50 Cents or an Eminem or Jay-Z, you know, or Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], but very few of us are gonna get outta that.  If you take that child, put them in a--this kind of a positive environment, teaching the discipline of dance, and really take them the road through the arts, and they start thinking for themselves, because not every one of these kids that studied dance wants to be a dancer.  Like I said, we have doctors, lawyers, wonderful parents, you know, scientists or what have you, we have writers, you know, we have them all over the place in different states, I think that's the image you need to portray, that's the image and it's hard to tell them that because they're not listening to you, they got that rap in them and a lot of the kids that came to sing make up their own raps, and they got the N word and then we--thank you, next, you know, and they got the bad words, thank you next, and it is very hard to, it's very hard to change that mentality, I don't know how we're gonna do it, I really don't, I do it without with what I do, the discipline effect.  So that's been my success, I don't know how other people out there are gonna try to change that image, 'cause they're not, you know, not every kids gonna be able to play basketball like a Dwyane Wade (laughter), you know, and the, and those that try to emulate Jay-Z, well, they're just trying to be a Jay-Z, there's already only one Jay-Z, you know, so it's just, it's sad, it's sad.  We need to find another way to do what we're doing with, with these kids, 'cause this cycle will continue.
Story_ID: 642434
Speaker 1: Think you almost, you, you pretty much answered one of the questions--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that we normally ask which is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?  But that's pretty much--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it, I mean, really we need to find a different way to, to get to our kids, we really do, we really, really do, we really do.  I mean, it's funny, couple months ago I went out and I bought Darius Brooks [sic. Darius Rucker], country music, and Keith Urban, their CDs [compact discs], and for two weeks I, every time the kids came in here I was playing country music and I love it, and they were like, "Mr. Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], you listening to country music?"  I said, "Yeah I love it," you know, I'm just trying and, and then they start singing some of the songs, you see?
Speaker 1: Well, did they realize they were black performers that--
Speaker 2: Well, Darius Brooks is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They knew him from Hootie and the Blowfish.  But I, and then Keith Urban is not.  He's married to what's her name, Nicole Kidman.  But the fact that I was listening to, usually playing classical or sometimes, you know, Aretha [Aretha Franklin] or something, I play a lot of old school music.  But then they just heard me try, and I'm trying to get them to open up their peripheral so to speak, between the space between their ears and try to listen to all this stuff besides somebody rapping every twenty-four seconds.  You know, they, they know every Lupe Fiasco song, and all these other rappers and stuff like that, you should heard them screaming in the other, in the performance the other night, it was--that's what's so sad, that's what's so sad and I think it's this image of our African American kids that all they're into is rap and it's too many of 'em, you know what I'm saying?  It's too me, it's too many of them, they need to be exposed to other forms of music, other forms of music and it's gonna be very rare to have a little black kid coming up there and try to be a Sammy Davis, Jr., the new Sammy Davis, Jr., like Michael Buble, you know, the--Harry Connick [Harry Connick, Jr.], Frank Sinatra, all that, you know, but it, that's why I love this, there's this little African American woman with the little, what's her name, you know, big piece of hair here [Janelle Monae], she does all these James Brown kind of movement, I can't remember her name, she's young, she's young, she's, but she's cool, she really is, I should know her name but I don't.  But you know they're not all gonna end up being like I said a Jay-Z or Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], you know, there, there's gotta be somebody out there going into them and talking to them about being a police officer a fireman, a doctor, a lawyer, you know, but every time they, it's rap music.  How many times a day do you drive by and some African American kid in the car with the blasting rap music or some Hispanic kids in the car with the blasting Hispanic rap music, it's just, you know.  So it's kind of sad, it really is, we do, I don't know how to, how to change that otherwise from doing what I'm doing, the discipline of dance.  To me, that is the greatest thing because that's gonna change a kids life, that's gonna change their thinking and like I said, it's hard to come in here and do certain positions of your arms and your legs, day after day after day, but it really starts working on the space between your ears. It opens up your peripheral to all the possibilities of what you could potentially become.
Story_ID: 642435
Speaker 1: So ideally, if you had all the resources you, you wanted, what would you do with--?
Speaker 2: I would have dance, I would have musical theater, I would have where they can do arts and craft, I could, I would have a place they could do sewing and tailoring as far as costumes go, you know, I would have where they can, like I said, musical theater where they have can have voice training, you know, you have a lab room a computer room, I mean, they can work at home.  But they'll be exposed to positive things and they would have a lot of, okay life skills, you know, vocational stuff, this is the, look into the--here's what happens too.  A lot of parents call, "Okay So and So's going off to college, do you, can you recommend a dance college that have all the academic stuff as well," you know, so there's that harmony 'cause she really don't know what she wants to do yet, so that's the kind of stuff you recommend, try this, try this, there's the, there's the dance there, but there's the academics there too so--harmonize them, see what you wanna be, you know, I have a lot of young girls now want to do R.N. [registered nurse], nursing, you know, one of my other kids just went back to, she went to Chicago [Illinois]--massage therapy, Sonoma or something, Soma [The Soma Institute, Chicago, Illinois], over here on Wabash [Avenue], just because she know that I'm a massage therapist, you know what I'm saying?  So there's in, there's influences, I have a lot of African American guys going with Caucasian girls, cause we're the Multi-Cultural Dance Center [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois] so, there's a nice blending but, for the kids that we can't reach, what do we do, you know?  Because all the preaching of the Jesse Jacksons [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and the gun violence and all this stuff that they're talking about, well, they can't seem to help stop it either.  And my thing is, I've been called to ask to come to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and teach, no you bring those Englewood kids here to me, take them out of that environment and bring them in here 'cause if I go in there that's--they're at home.  You know what I'm saying?  No you wanna change at kid, you gotta take the kid out of the environment and bring them to something else, then they can have all the dance training and all that, you know what I'm saying?  Yeah, but if they keep staying there, that the same thing is gonna happen, you know, we become what we repeatedly do so, if you repeatedly sitting on your street corner (laughter), you repeatedly driving by in your car, that's what you're gon' do, you know.  So we repeatedly here do the classical ballet training, you know, the harmony, the creativity, all that goes on here, if we repeat it and we've been repeatedly successful, that's why we draw people like the Jordans and the Obamas and the, you know, Scottie Pippens and the Johnson-Rices and then all the wonderful parents that realize that this is discipline, that this a focused environment and this is a nurturing environment.  So my kids gonna come here and hang out on a Saturday and dance for three or four hours, or during the week, you know, 'cause it's a body, mind changing experience.
Story_ID: 642436
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything you'd do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Find out how to get more money for the school [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], otherwise nothing, nothing, I think I am who I am.  I think in the beginning days I was the (laughter), a little tougher and meaner, that's what some of the older dancers tell me now, "Oh, you've gotten soft, you used to be so mean, you would beat us up," but I'm mean, you know, it's a different, it's a different culture, it's a different time, you know.  So, but I wouldn't change anything, I would just maybe try to be smart enough to get millions of dollars, you know.  And, then it's funny 'cause, you know, you got people--I was telling this group of people, the teachers and the, and the doctors and physical therapists the other day that, you know, the people with the money, well what are you gonna do with it?  You can't buy your way into heaven, and you can't buy your way outta hell, so if you have any opportunity to give back, now is the time on this earth level to do it.  You know, if you gotta taken care of your--I mean, what are you gonna do with that hundred million or hundred billion dollars?  Come on, you know, you take care of your family, if So and So and So and So and So and So got a couple of million and you've got all this extra money, what you gonna do with it?  You know, I was telling the kids one day, and they, and one of my little girls wrote the story about this and got an A for her paper.  I said, "Well, if I had the money like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], well, once a year, or I'll go to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], or this park and only X amount of people from the neighborhood would be able to go into the park and I would just drop money down and then you'd have to go to a tent if you've got more than fifty thousand dollars, and give back, but you could walk out of the park with fifty thousand dollars.  And then I'll do it again the next year, but you can't do it again, nobody in your family could do, come into the--." I mean, that's what I would do if I had money, go into the poor sections and then enrich that neighborhood, you know, give everybody fifty thousand dollars, then you'd get the economy of that neighborhood and, that, you know, and I would do that if I had millions of dollars.  But then of course, I would build a school compared to none, that would be the Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] of Chicago [Illinois], you know, I would have a building with a theater in it, three or four hundred seats, continuous performances and there'll be a children's place, children's musical, children's dancing, children's this, children's that 'cause the children are the future and right now it's unfortunately in some neighborhoods, the future does not look to bright at all, you know?  It really does not look too bright so, and then some of the kids, I mean, all they got is their parents so the cycle continues.  You want the cycle to stop you gotta take that kid out of that environment.
Story_ID: 642437
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Elesta Steele] feel about your career?  Did she, I mean, did--was she surprised (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my, well my mom knew I was always dancing around the house so it wasn't, you know, we talk, in 1996, I think, Bryant Ballet [Bryant Ballet School; Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois] went back down to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] to perform and we brought my mom up on stage, so she was elated, she was elated, you know, she was always showing off my picture every time I had something in the newspaper, so she was really happy with whatever I decided to do.  She didn't have to worry about me, I think she had to worry about my brother [Henry Simmonds], but, no, no, I was the child that was gonna do well 'cause I was really focused.
Speaker 1: So she stayed in St. Thomas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she stayed in St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: She's still, she's still there.
Speaker 2: She died in 2006.
Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah she stayed in St. Thomas, I mean, she came up here a couple times, she came up and saw me perform, you know, yeah but, yeah, yeah, St. Thomas was her home.
Speaker 1: Are you still close to the relatives you stayed with (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: My sister, but my sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] just went back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They came up two Fridays ago, for our, the student show, Friday the 13th they were here that week, yeah, yeah, all my sisters and their husbands and, and they're kids, we had a good time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Like uncles, is your uncle still in the--
Speaker 2: I got an uncle--
Speaker 1: --in the east?
Speaker 2: I got an uncle in Brooklyn [New York] still.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  But everybody else is in St. Thomas, I've got some cousins in California, of course, you know, but yeah my uncle's still in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But my sisters and my one brother, they're down in St. Thomas.
Story_ID: 642438
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about your daughter, now she passed away last year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alexandra [Alexandra Byrant] passed away, now Alexandra of course like I said was born with cerebral palsy, when she was five they said she'd never walk, talk or crawl and I, it's funny 'cause I got it someplace with [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders, on a video talking about Alexandra.  He had come to the house and did a news thing talking about Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant] as a professional and Rhonda [Rhonda Samson Bryant] was a model and their careers, you know, they're both dancers and physical people but to have a child with cerebral palsy must be so hard and I'm like, I was saying it is what it is.  But they told us Alexandra would not live to be six years old, and in my mind I'm like, "Watch me, yeah, right," so, you know, massage therapy, kinesiology, going to all these physical things and Alexandra went into Misericordia Homes [Misericordia Home, Chicago, Illinois], 6300 North Ridge [Avenue], run by those Catholic nuns on April 1, 2009, Alexandra passed away, April 1, 2010, April Fool's Day she went in, April Fool's Day she died.  So I said to myself, God must have a sense of humor, it was April 1, 2010, was also Holy Thursday, so it was April Fool's day and Holy Thursday, and Alexandra passed away during the night, but at twenty-eight years old, you see?  So she lived a long healthy life, you know, kids with cerebral palsy after a while they start to getting scoliosis and then the body starts to curve and twist and that so I think that she had a little heart attack during the night 'cause, you know, her spine was really--but (makes noise) that kid taught us to laugh, we used to bring Alexandra here [Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois] in her wheelchair, Alexandra would just sit in her wheelchair and the kids would be dancing, you'll see her little fingers doing like this, and I would tell the kids, look at that, she's dancing now what do you have to complain about, you know?  So I mean, it was a really powerful lesson for all the kids that grew up with Alexandra, and for myself too I'm like, you know, because in the early days I was like why me Lord, why me, why me Lord?  And parents do that, why me?  Why me?  Why me?  And I heard a man saying why not?  Or the woman (laughter), you know, whoever the God is upstairs, why me?  Well, why not?  You know, you can handle it, but she taught me to be happy she taught me discipline, she taught me respect, you know, and I always--she would look up for yes and down for no.  But when Alexandra was born, I started putting stuff on flash cards, you know, and just teach, you see all this stuff with My Baby Can Read [sic Your Baby Can Read] now?  Well I was doing that twenty-eight years ago with Alexandra.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I would put L-I-G-H-T in front of her, she would look at the light, you know, W-I-N-D-O-W, she'd look at the window, so we realized there was a lot and unfortunately she had just started getting an eye gaze computer--you know when she was down at Misericordia.  So we were like, God we can't wait to see what's in this little brain, but it wasn't to be, you know so.  But yeah, she taught me a lot, she taught me a lot this is what I was telling the people when I went out to Lincolnwood [Illinois], you know, and you're hearing the sniffles but I meant that's your reality, you know.  It's like I said, you take the road and then you get what you get, what you do with it is up to you, you know, so you could either accept it and learn from it, you know, and grow from it, or don't accept it.  There's this lady on Facebook right now, I'm just trying to just, a white lady, some drunk driver in California or something killed her daughter, her son is in the hospital and her other daughter is a, is a mess too.  So this lady is--and I knew these kids 'cause I used to teach 'em, you know, so I told her, I said, asked her was it okay to check in with her from time to time?  And she said yes and then yesterday was like, I woke up this morning, I don't wanna be here anymore, you get, you know, so this lady is really in a bad place, you know?  And you're just trying to--so what can you say?  What can you say?  You know, what can you say?  So I just texted her back, you know, we have little angels up there watching over us right now and we have to continue for the rest of the people that are around us, you know, we have to stay.  So I'm just trying to feed her a little bits of positivity because, I mean, frankly I said, well--and, and she said why don't people understand it?  So I just had tell her that the people that don't understand don't need to be in your life right now, because somebody had to--wrote her and, oh come on, it's been six months, stop grieving, get over it.  How could you tell that to some--and I'm trying to tell her everybody's gonna grieve in their own time, their own way and it's you know, you might grieve for the rest of your life, but, you know, you've got to tell--take it one day at a time.  So, I'm really past, you know, 'cause I look at her, she's--but I mean, my kid had cerebral palsy for years, her daughter was beautiful, can dance her bum off, and got hit by a drunk driver.  So the situations are so different but we're both suffering a loss, you know, it's just like, you know, like, I mean, I'm embracing my loss, you know, 'cause I'm trying to learn the lessons from that, but it's hard for her and that's understandable.  I told her, the people that are, that don't, that tell you to get over it, they don't need to be in your life right now, get rid of 'em, if they can't be controlling and nurturing and helpful, okay just put 'em on the shelf, you know?  Really.
Story_ID: 642439
Speaker 1: When you look back at, over everything you've done--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --up to this point, and you're still a young man, look younger (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, just half way, was twenty--
Speaker 1: You're sixty, you don't even look like it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, that's what I get all the time.
Speaker 1: But when you look back at everything you've done so far, which has been a lot, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: The fact that I've been so nurturing, there's not a kid in this place that does not love what I've been doing, they just come up and they hug me, Mr. Homer [HistoryMaker Homer Bryant], Mr.--I think I've really opened up, you know, and the fact that I really get down to kids level and look in their eyes, you know, so I'm thinking like I'm a big father figure that's very nurturing and, you know demanding at the same time.  But they think, he really has--and I get this from a lot of white kids, "I used to hate ballet but because of you, I love ballet."  So I've left that traditional way of teaching, you see?  And as I make it comfortable for people, for kids to dance.  Well, we do a little think called the rap ballet too, you know, (rapping) "A-B-C-D-E-F-G, a little rap ballet for you and me for discipline, coordination, flexibility and motivation, ballet puts your body in touch with your mind, and the rap beat keeps you steppin' on time, H-I-J-K-L-M-N-O-P, we study ballet for positivity, for concentration, determination, brain stimulation, high expectations, it is the perfect harmony to help girls and boys, rap ballet will give you grace and poise, Q-R-S-T-U-V, a little rap ballet is very cool to me, W-X-Y and Z, the message is clear, be all that you can be, a little rap ballet."  So when I sing that to every kid that comes through these walls and they're like wow.
Speaker 1: Are you the poet?
Speaker 2: I am the poet, I wrote that myself (laughter), yeah, so the rap ballet is really--and every kid, every summer, every summer, every school year they learn the rap ballet.  So putting rap and ballet together has really opened up, I mean, trust me, a lot of kids come in here, especially our African American kids and they're like ballet, are you kidding?  So when I start singing the rap ballet, you know, I can rap it, I can sing it, you know, they're like wow, this guy's cool, so, yeah, that's my legacy.  You know, making ballet comfortable, especially, I mean, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] did it his way with Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], you--thirty something years ago and now I'm doing it differently right now so, yeah making African American kids comfortable, or all kids comfortable within their own skin too, through the discipline of dance.
Story_ID: 642440
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now is there anything I haven't asked, we need to cover before I ask--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --my last question?
Speaker 1: Nope, I think we did good.  I begged for money right?  (Laughter) Yes, I did, okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But it's phrased a little different, I guess, it is a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: As a funny chlorophyll drinking dude (laughter) who said that the body is the instrument and it's how you live it, your life that is, not how you die it.
Story_ID: 642441
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this first photograph.
Speaker 2: That would be my mom [Elesta Steele], my dad [Solomon Bryant] and myself, and I look to be (laughter) like a year old or two.
Speaker 1: In 1950, then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, maybe '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  One moment, still--okay, next one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You gonna put it straight?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, no, that's okay.
Speaker 1: It doesn't matter?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  They'll turn it later on.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: We always put it on here the longest way
Speaker 1: Oh I see, I see.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay good, good.
Speaker 1: That would be me in a piece called 'Swept Away' [ph.], that was the Bryant ballet company [Bryant Ballet School; Chicago Multi-Cultural Dance Center, Chicago, Illinois], and that's, you notice the cane and the hat?  And that's Barry White singing, (singing) "Telling me this and telling me that" (laughter), that was the good old days.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [sic. 1994].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 2: That's when that song came out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So this a real interesting picture, this is some of the kids and actually, the students in this picture are now fifteen, sixteen years old, and that's when they were like eight and nine years old, so that was like eight years ago.  And that's me in the tuxedo trying to look cool, but I think it's very nice, you know, to see that, that's a really classy picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: And that is some of the girls.  Now you would not believe it, this young lady here that I have my hands on her shoulder that is Gaynor Hall, Channel 9 news [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois], she graduated from Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] and went to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and got into broadcasting and she's now a reporter for Channel 9.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Absolutely amazing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that is one of the Christmas shots, we wanted the students, with several of the students, I just love that, this piece was a Carnival piece that we did, they had their nice shinny skirts on and calypso music, plus the, their little palm tree kind of thing on their, on the top of their heads.  You know, you can take the--there you go.
Speaker 2: Take the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is my family in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], that's my mother on the left, myself in the center, my two sisters [Sarah Simmonds and Coreen Bryant] and my brother [Henry Simmonds] is in the back.  He has since shaved that ugly thing off his face and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Actually he's quite handsome, he got mad at me 'cause I told him he looked like an old man, that's my younger brother, you know?  But look how much older he does look.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he shaved it off real quick (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And?
Speaker 1: When the girls started whistling at me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That is Alexandra [Alexandra Bryant], my daughter that passed away April 1st and that's Grandma Helen [ph.], my departed wife's mother.  Helen just recently moved back to Georgia, so she's eighty-two and feisty and that's myself right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: Now, oh this is back in the day, (laughter) this is me 1981, '82 [1982], and trust me I'm on lakeshore beach [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And the photographer asked me to jump up in the air and do a spread eagle 'cause she noticed those things in the back would, would be perfect if I could jump above them, that's the sand down below--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it took me three or four times, but once we started drawing a crowd (laughter) I got into performance mode.
Speaker 2: I'm surprised nobody's ever asked me to do that.  Maybe you just (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], I'm in that picture over here and these are some of the most beautiful girls in the world.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And my wife is smack dab in the middle.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That's me right there, and there's my wife right there, Rhonda [Rhonda Samson Bryant].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: And that is, as a matter of fact, the young lady that just left--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --is this girl right here.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Iola [ph.], yes, yes, yes.  And that's some of the students.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Iola.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So she just said she's twenty what?  Twenty-three, that's what she said.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: My god, see how old that picture is?  And these are some, that's some of my boys in ballet class, that's me jumping, crazy in the back.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is one little girl that I use--that, that was a private lesson one day and her mom took this class.  As you can see I had hair then, her name is Lauren Maples [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is where I'm showing off the beauty of the feet and the legs, you see dancers don't come with feet, you have to work the strengthen and the lengthen so--and this is a picture of myself there in the middle with some of the students over the years, it's a happy place.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was taken by Jennifer Girard actually, a very famous photographer.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is myself, Lydia Abarca and Paul Russell that was Dance Theatre of Harlem, 1970.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is myself again with some of the men at Dance Theatre of Harlem, that piece is called, 'Rhythmetron' that was one of Mr. Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] choreography, it's a powerful men's dance and the men's section actually.
Speaker 2: And that is myself right there kneeling down and Mr. Mitchell standing up with his hand up in the air, that's Virginia Johnson and Paul Russell that's holding her up and you can see the resemblance between myself and Mr. Mitchell what I was talking about that little Afro that we used to have back in the day.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is Susan Lovelle and myself, this is Mister Mitchell's choreography, this piece is called 'Manifestations,' actually that is Dr. Susan Lovelle, she's now a plastic surgeon.
Speaker 1: Is she?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So then see there's life after dance.
Speaker 1: We heard way over (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  Very flexible
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is Llanchie Stevenson, myself and Paul Russell, now this was George Balanchine's 'Agon.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That is myself on the floor, Derek Williams and Gayle McKinney [Gayle McKinney Griffith], that's [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson's 'Forces of Rhythm.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Ready for the next one?
Speaker 1: And this is the balcony scene from 'Romeo and Juliet,' that's Susan Lovelle and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: It looks like some kind of a pretzel here.
Speaker 2: And that's my--that's Mr. Mitchell's, I was Adam on this 'Manifestations,' I played the role of Adam.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) dance there.
Speaker 1: This was 'Evolution of the Blues,' [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle choreography, wow that was a while ago, Jesus, Eartha Robinson, Germaine [Germaine Edwards] and Daryl A- Richardson [Daryl Richardson]--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], in the '80s [1980s], right that was at the Drury Lane Theatre [Drury Lane Theatre Water Tower Place; Broadway Playhouse at Water Tower Place, Chicago, Illinois], yes, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's 'Manifestations' again, that's another Dr. Reverend Mel Tomlinson [Mel A. Tomlinson], a theologian now, Susan Lovelle, Dr. Susan Lovelle and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is Rhonda, my late wife and myself in the scene from 'Romeo and Juliet.'
Speaker 2: This is a men's section of a dance called 'Ancient Voices of Children' and that girl is China White on my lap there, and the men from Dance Theatre of Harlem.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is, these young dancers were with Joffrey Ballet at the time when we shot this, that is Alana Wallace [Alana Yvonne Wallace], she has a group called Dance>Detour here and it's visually impaired and wheel chair bound dancers.  And she does a great job with 'em.
Speaker 1: That is Iman, the model, the actress, the famous lady and myself, that's from 'The Wiz' movie--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --back in the '80s [1980s], wow.  That's myself, actually we were filming a movie called 'Buddhoe' [ph.] it's about an African slave that moved to the islands.  That's me in the tender days (laughter).  And that's me in the really, really, really tender days.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That is funny.
Speaker 2: And that's my late wife, Rhonda Samson, she did a lot of modeling and danced with Dance Theatre of Harlem.  And that's us on the cover of a magazine back in the day here in Chicago [Illinois], a magazine called Focus and Fashion!.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's me a couple years later, that's the--this when I'm coming into my own now, see that's how I look these days, that's from a Jennifer Girard shot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're back at Dance Theatre of Harlem, this is a men's dance called 'Fete Noir' [Arthur Mithcell], 'Fete Noir,' Mr. Mitchell choreography.  That's one of the pictures too of the men's dance with the ladies in the background.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 2: Oh, we've got this one, all right.
Speaker 1: Now here you go that--you know who that lady is?  That happens to be Miss Josephine Baker.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Yep, that was in her--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) she is.
Speaker 1: --dresser, yeah, dressing room in London [England].  When we went to do a performance, many, many years ago, wow.  She was a sweetheart, she really was.
Speaker 2: Now these I just pulled these out of a wheels cassette, you're not in 'em.
Speaker 1: No, no, you can, no, we don't have to do those there, that's perfect.
Speaker 2: I hope that you (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But Serena Irving [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Serena Irving (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We're still rolling.
Speaker 1: That is Tovah Collins in the red, she's one of my babies she was here since she was five, she's now with the 'Viva Elvis' show in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], Cirque de Soleil.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Those legs.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see.
Speaker 1: This is Tovah's sister Ivorie [Ivorie Jenkins] (laughter).  She's also with 'Viva Elvis,' Cirque de Soleil, these girls are extremely talented, so talk about a sister act.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: November 2009, I was given the honor of Chicagoan of the Year for dance so by the Chicago Tribune critics, Sid Smith, so that's the article there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And this is another one of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wait--
Speaker 2: --wonderful dancers, Makeda Crayton.
Speaker 1: We wanna focus on one at a time (unclear).
Speaker 2: You want me to go over there first?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, don't, no, don't worry about the light.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, I was trying to get the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Glare?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But if you go to the left, to the right first, then I'll move the light as come over to piece in the red unitard.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay?  So that's Makeda, the various stages of Makeda, she's really a beautiful performer and dancer, and she's been in Paris [France] doing shows and in Chicago and taught classes at The Ailey School [New York, New York], you can say she's international.
Speaker 1: And (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, so she dances en pointe as well as a--you know, when you train the dancers to, especially the female to be able to do anything, make them well rounded.
