Story_ID: 275318
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ronald Henry Brewington, Sr. [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], I'm known professionally as Ron Brewington.  Brewington is spelled: B-R-E-W-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born the 2nd of November 1946 in New York City, specifically in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.  I'm a producer.  I'm an educator.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 28th of April 2005.  One month ago my mother [Mosetta Smalls] passed away today.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are now in El Segundo [California], outside of Los Angeles in California.
Story_ID: 275319
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you by management.
Speaker 2: Go for it, sir.
Speaker 1: Only require short answers.
Speaker 2: I understand sir.
Speaker 1: The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is chitterlings on rye.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, green, the color of money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a couple, but one that really comes to my mind is, "Ain't nothing cooked but the peas in the pot and they wouldn't be cooked if the water wasn't hot."
Story_ID: 275320
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and I'm going to ask about your father's [William Brewington] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna cover them separately.  First, we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is--her name was Mosetta, M-O-S-E-T-T-A.  She didn't have a middle initial or name, Smalls, S-M-A-L-L-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born August the 15th, 1917, in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, before I ask you about her, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: To be honestly truthful with you, I don't know that much about her family.  The only family members that I ever met from my mother's side of the family was her Uncle Ed, Ed Smalls, who was a proprietor of Smalls Paradise in New York [New York].  She had an Aunt Marian [ph.].  I knew Aunt Marian, Aunt Marian in my younger days, but other than that I didn't, and of course, her brother.  My mother has a brother, Luther Smalls, aka Bubba.  He's ninety-two years old.  He's still living.  He lives in, in Harlem [New York, New York] in New York.  Other than that, I have not met too many of the family members from my mother's side.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  The name Smalls in South Carolina.  Have you heard of the great Robert Smalls (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was my great, he was my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my, well, (unclear) on my mother's side, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Robert, well in fact, I think they are trying to make some honors for him.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there stories passed down through the family about him?
Speaker 2: To be honestly true, not really.  Again, and that's why I compliment you and what your organization [The HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois] is doing, documenting history.  A lot of us don't document history.  A lot of history fell through the cracks.  It became rumors, it became so small--stories, urban legends, but a lot of it was not documented, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm glad you guys are doing what you're doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Robert Smalls, the hero of the [CSS] Planter.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Took that boat to the--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Union.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, any other stories passed down about your, your family?
Speaker 2: Not from that side, not from the Smalls side of the family, and even from the Brewington side of the family. Again, and I just had a guy call me the other day, said his name was Roger Brewington [ph.].  I met a guy at my mother's funeral who was a Brewington.  I met a lot of--I saw my half-brother who I haven't seen in thirty years at my mother's funeral, along with two sisters, two half-sisters that I haven't seen in thirty years, and also the lady who was their mother, who I haven't seen in almost thirty years.  We don't communicate with each other.  I'm out here on the West Coast.  They're, most of them are on the East Coast, don't get a chance, the only Brewington that I ever talk to consist basis is my twin brother [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington].  I talk to him at least two or three times a day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But are there stories about growing up in Charleston, what Charleston was like in your mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother never said that much about it.  She didn't have that much to say, because she came to New York City [New York, New York] when she was four years old.  So she really didn't remember that much about Charleston.  She spent most of her life in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She knew what it was like being in Harlem and in New York City, but that was basically all she had memories of.
Speaker 1: So I suppose--I'm, I'm going to ask this question.  I interviewed, we interviewed Frederick Douglass the IV [Frederick I. Douglas].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was born in a Pennsylvania mining town [Meadville, Pennsylvania].  His father, Frederick Douglas the III, you know, worked in a mine.
Speaker 2: Wow!
Speaker 1: They knew they were related to Frederick Douglass [sic.], but he said there was not any--not much cash value to that, you know.  (Laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (laughter)  That's right.
Speaker 1: --especially in those days it was the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: People didn't really care about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't care, right.
Speaker 1: --black history.  Is it, is it pretty much same thing with being related to Robert Smalls these days?
Speaker 2: In a small sense it is that way.  You know, you try to have family reunions.  You try to keep the spirit alive and keep the family legends going, but overall you, you talk to a lot of young kids today, African American kids, they know very little about their history.  And, and, and I have no problem with that.  What, what I get pissed off about is that a lot of them don't care.  They don't want to know about the history.  When you say to some kids--I laugh and say, "Chitterlings on rye" when you say chitterlings, "I don't eat that stuff.  I don't want to be bothered with that."  We scorn slavery.  I don't know why.  We shouldn't be proud of it, but we should always remember it.  What do the Jews say, "Lest we never forget."  We as African Americans we should never forget where we came from never, we should remember our history.  They only give us one month a year and it's the shortest month of the year, we shouldn't forget, that's a small personal opinion.  They really should, we should remember our history.  It is the foundation that we grew up on.  What did, what did [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell say, "I did what I did on the backs of the Buffalo Soldiers."  And this is one reason why I'm a member of the Tuskegee Airmen, because that's legacy, that's history.  And I'm just proud to be a part of it.  The twenty years that I served in the United States Navy, I can remember there was a  Dorie Millers [Doris Miller] and people before me who came in the [U.S.] military and served and opened the door for me to be able to come through and do what I did.  And when I was in the Navy I was the first African American to do a lot of things in the Navy.  But at the same time--there are now, we have more African Americans coming into, and I feel that we should remember our history.
Story_ID: 275321
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Mosetta Smalls] in New York [New York], now she came as a teenager (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She came when she was four years old.
Speaker 1: Four, oh she--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --oh, she, she was much younger, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, a child.
Speaker 1: So she, she grew up in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Grew up in Harlem, yes.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about growing up in Harlem (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, she talked about the days down on 125th Street and what we did on 7th Avenue and on Lenox Avenue, what, what African Americans did, and, and, and the parades they had and the festivities that they had, and how the families were together then.  There was discipline.  There was a different type of world.  Back in those days if you did something wrong, the neighbor would start busting you up side the head.  By the time you got home everybody was, had straightened you out a little bit.  So, it was a different kind of world back then.  It was the world I grew up in.  And it was a world that I'm very happy that I was very fortunate to be around at that time.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother go, go to high school in Harlem?
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately my mother, she dropped out of school in the seventh grade.  She only finished the seventh grade.  And she had to work.  She, unfortunately, her mother [Carrie Smalls] died when she was fourteen years old, so there she was with no mother, no father, just her and her brother, and she had to go to work at fourteen years of age.  And she cooked, and she cleaned floors.  She later went into the city's, New York City's school system, of which she called the Bd of Ed, the [New York City] Board of Education [New York City Department of Education], and worked as a cook and rose to the rank of cook manager.  And she worked for them for forty-two years, and then she retired.
Story_ID: 275322
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was William Henry Brewington.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born, let's see, December 24th, I believe 1918, in a place called Broadway, North Carolina.  It is outside of Raleigh-Durham [Raleigh, North Carolina and Durham, North Carolina].  He was born in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Broadway, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: One of thirteen children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: From what I'm told by my brother and some of my first cousins, his mother, my grandmother, Henrietta Smal- Brewington [Henrietta Brewington], she raised thirteen children.  She was a former slave.  She had hard times, but she struggled and her children had their children, and their children had their children.  So you are looking at about four or five generations of Brewingtons just hanging out there.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories passed down in that family about slavery, or what it was like and what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I couldn't really tell you.  Again, I didn't hear that, that many from what my family told me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about life down there, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Other than just, you know, you always hear, as a black person, you always hear about the bad times in the South.  As they say, you knew your place in the South.  So that's all you ever heard, was the horror stories.  I know in 1964 when I went to Memphis, Tennessee for the first time, growing up in the North I'd never been down south.  I'd heard the horror stories.  And on 125th Street and 7th Avenue, right next to a jewelry store called Herbert's Jewelers, there was a store that showed pictures of African Americans being hung, crucified, shot, burned, whatever.  And when I got down to the South for the first time in my life in 1964, I saw signs that said, "Men, Women and Colored."  And every thing that I had heard about I saw.  I saw burning crosses.  I saw the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] standing in an open field burning a cross.  That I witnessed with my own eyes.  And it, it took me back because I was, it shattered all the dreams and thoughts that I had of a lot of things, including this country.
Speaker 1: So, so in Harlem [New York, New York] you said growing up people did talk about (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did talk about it.
Speaker 1: --how bad it was?
Speaker 2: They, they did because they knew, they, most of them had escaped.  Their families had escaped.  They had come from the South to the North where they had visions of, in bettering their lives and living a better substantial life.  Whereas down South, there is, as we said earlier, they, they knew their place.  They could only do certain things.  They couldn't go nowhere, couldn't rise up, couldn't get an education.  They came up north and we can get an education.  You can go to high school.  You can go to college.  You can become something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father talk about growing up in Broadway?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, my mother [Mosetta Smalls] and father separated when, or actually divorced, when we were six months old.  So, my mother raised me by herself.  When I was eighteen years of age, well, no, actually twenty-one, I was in the [U.S.] Navy, the United States Navy, I was stationed in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and I made a decision.  I wanted to meet my father.  And I hired a detective and I found my father.  And for at least five years of his life, we were together for five years.  He didn't talk that much about down south.  He did take me down south one time.  He took me down to North Carolina and I met my aunt and I met a whole lot of Brewingtons down there.  And I, I, one of the things that impressed me is the meals that they have down there, especially for breakfast.  What they cook for breakfast is what we call a whole meal in a day.  I mean there was so much food to eat down there.  But they really didn't talk that much about, you know, what went on for African Americans or blacks in, at that that time, didn't really.  It was more of a social type environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was, was it socially different from the North (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, for me, yes, it was because I was down south. A- we were in, you're talking about in the '50s [1950s], I'm sorry, in the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s], and it was a, it was, it was different going down south.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like in the Iron Curtain.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a story that, didn't either your mother or your father or any other relative tell you how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: My mother said she met him; he was a tall, good-looking, handsome fella.  And she was a young girl.  They went to a dance one night and she met him and they started dating and they fell in love and they got married.  And that was basically, was, was how they got together.
Speaker 1: But it didn't last long after that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my father, you hear that song, 'Papa Was a Rolling Stone,' pop, his eyes use to wonder, he, because he knew he was good-looking guy.  He was a, he was a ladies man.  And he just couldn't settle down with one lady.  He needed a little bit more than that.  And unfortunately that didn't help my mother much.  Here she is with two young kids, two babies, and she needed a man to be there with her, and unfortunately he didn't do that.
Speaker 1: So, you and your brother were, you, you, you had, you have, you have a twin brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a twin brother, [HistoryMaker] Rudolph Brewington.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Rudolph William Brewington.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in, in your household growing up was it just (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just the two of us.
Speaker 1: Just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, your mother and the two of you.
Speaker 2: Just the two, just the three of us, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did any grandparents live with you ever?
Speaker 2: No, no grandparents, none at all, none at all.
Story_ID: 275323
Speaker 1: Can you describe your, well, I guess, you know, you didn't know your father [William Brewington] that much, but I guess, can, can you describe your parents' personalities for us?
Speaker 2: I found out my father later in life, he was a, like I said, he was a, he was a womanizer.  He loved them ladies, pops, was a, that song, 'Papa was a Rolling Stone,' he was that kind of guy.  He was a cook, a chauffeur, liked to drink a lot.  He, he, he'd drink what we called Justerini & Brooks, J&B.  He called it Jewish booze.  He'd put away a bottle of that in no time flat.  He was, pops could drink some liquor.  He was a Mason [Freemason].  I later became a Mason.  He was just a outgoing, crazy guy.  He was a ladies man.  He, he, he knew how to crack jokes.  He was a fun guy.  My mother [Mosetta Smalls] was to me the salt of my earth.  She was (pause) excuse me, excuse me for a second.
Speaker 1: Take your time.
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  (Pause)  Thank you. Excuse me.
Speaker 1: Take your time
Speaker 2: Excuse me a second.  My mother was my salt.  She was my rock.  In my life all the things that have ever happened to me, the good things, was because of my mother.  I always believed whatever I do till the day I die that my mother is standing next to me.  Even in death she's standing next to me.  She was a, a woman who didn't, she didn't, she didn't have much education, but she was a good woman.  She was a woman who had old values, strong values.  She, excuse me.  Boy, we're doing this interview a day and a month after her death.  Anyway, she, my mother was a woman who didn't, she, she, she gave my brother and I, excuse me, she gave us discipline.  She taught us life, strong life.  She taught us, she taught us the difference between right and wrong.  She, she worked for us.  She brought us home food.  She told us, [HistoryMaker] Ronald [H. Brewington] and [HistoryMaker] Rudolph [Brewington] do this, Ronald and Rudolph do that.  She was there for us as, in my life, as things have happened to me.  And my brother, we always know that moms was there for us.  When we didn't have a father, we had moms.  And moms gave us everything.  She taught us how to speak, how to behave, how to say yes sir, no sir, thank you, please.  The things you don't hear today.  You don't hear that today.  But moms did that for us.  She was a strong lady.  I would--she'd come home from work, I knew she--working in a, working in a man's place all day long, and the best thing I could do was rub her feet.  That was my thing, I'd rub her feet everyday, say, "Mom is there anything I can do for you?"  In our small way we got, we would do things for moms.  Years later, when I was in high school [Aviation High School; Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, Queens, New York, New York], and I was working for a lady who was an interior decorator, and she would pay me money.  And I'd run home and give that money to mama.  And then mama would give me whatever she thought I deserved.  And even with--my brother and I we loved our mother so much.  We, we just felt we couldn't do enough for her, to thank her for what she did for us.  She gave us life.  She gave us a lot of things.  Everything we are, that's my mother.
Story_ID: 275324
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after?  What qualities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Mosetta Smalls].
Speaker 1: --of your parents do you take after?
Speaker 2: My mother, always, my mother, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can remember when we were, my brother and I growing up, having a twin brother was, and growing up with a twin brother was a very unique experience.  He's, he gets--you think in your mind as a young child, he's getting half the love, half the food, you know, you start to despise and you hate him.  I mean, what is that creature next to me?  That's, that's, that's, that's a relative.  Who is he?  And you want to hurt him, get rid of him.  But, we, we at the, we're both, I'm ten minutes older than my twin, and I think the question that we always ask each other, all the time, is the uniqueness of twins, the relationship between twins, and that is: who's going to die first, and how the other one's going to take it?  And I talk to my brother at least two or three times a day, first thing in the morning and probably the last thing at night, we talk during the day.  He is my best friend.  We, we're both involved in basically the same things.  He's in the [U.S.] Navy.  I was in the Navy.  He had a different--lot of similar experiences in his life that I've had.  He's a journalist.  I'm a journalist.  So we can talk about the same subject matter and understand each other without having to go through a whole lot of explanation, "Well, what do you mean by that."  "What does that term mean," that kind of thing.  And we talk about a lot of things in general.  We, we say, "Well, what do you feel about this?"  "What's your position on that?" "What's your opinion on that?"  "What do you think about this?"  "What do you think about that?"  We are very solid.  Oh, we have some fights every now and then.  He will do some things that I don't like, and I always tell him, "Don't do that."  He'll tell me, "Don't you, don't you tell me what to do."  I'll say, "I'm your older brother."  I remember specifically as we were, years ago, I can remember always leading him around.  I would always say to him, "Come on Rudy [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington], come on Rudy."  And I remember when we attended my mother's funeral, as we were there at the casket, for some odd reason, I don't know why, why it happened, it just happened.  They, you know everybody was starting to walk away, and I just said, "Come on Rudy," and we just walked away.  He's my best friend.
Speaker 1: That's something growing up with a twin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, without a father
Speaker 1: With just two of you too, you know.
Speaker 2: Just the two of us, as Bill Withers says, 'Just The Two of Us.' Nobody else.  We shared a lot of times together.  We lived in the inner city.  We--there was a park right near where we went; we lived at, Saint Nicholas Park [New York, New York].  And we would go up in there and mama would give us a, a, a sandwich or two, and some soda or something and we'd put it in a little brown bag, and our adventure was to go up in the trees and climb in the tree and sit there and then just have fun.  We were in our little, created our own little world.  We were in this tree and we had fun.  We'd go in the park and we'd swing.  We'd play basketball.  We, we had a swimming pool, didn't know how to swim.  It's amazing, I spent twenty years in the Navy, and I can't swim a stroke.  It's interesting, I can't, can't swim a stroke.  I flunked swimming, but twenty years in the Navy.  When they asked, when I was in boot camp, "Why can't you swim?"  I said, "Well, when I was a kid growing up in Harlem [New York, New York], we didn't have too many swimming pools."  So, the only swimming pool we had was, during the summertime they'd crack open a hydrant and take a can and pop both ends out and spray water over the top, and that's basically our, that was our swimming pool.  That's how we cooled down during the summertime.  We grew up in Harlem, the summers in Harlem were hot.  I remember the fun we had in Harlem, going to different places, meeting friends, next-door neighbors.  We had good friends, people we grew up with.  And then later in life we moved from 100th, we lived at 306 West 138th Street, right in Harlem, right down the street from Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  I can remember Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], as a kid growing up.  I can remember his sons and his family and whatnot.  Later in life we moved to the Saint Nicholas Projects [Saint Nicholas Houses, New York, New York], down on 129th Street, but we spent all of our time in Harlem.  The fun for us was mama would give us money to take the subway, go to school on the subway.  We'd get a bus pass and we'd ride the buses all day long.  We'd go down to the old 42nd Street and walk up and down 42nd Street before they cleaned it up, like it was now, is now.  Back in those days it was, even though it was dirty, it was a lot of fun.  We could have a lot of fun running up and down 42nd Street.  We walked all over New York City.  We got a chance to see New York City.  We'd go to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].  We'd see all the live entertainment, Chuck Jackson, Jackie Moms Mabley, all those good people we grew up with those people and joined the so-called Harlem Renaissance.  We had a great time, really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 275325
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In New York City [New York, New York] the, it was the smells.  You could walk down the street and in an apartment there would be certain smells coming out of it, whatever they were cooking.  On every corner there was a liquor store, but on every block there was also a fish and chip joint in New York City.  They would sell fish and chips.  You could go in there and get that, or you could have, what is it, fried hog maw and French fries, put a little vinegar or a little hot sauce, and man you could party down with that.  The rhythm, the atmosphere was, this was people growing up, struggling people, people who lived uptown and worked downtown.  They worked for the white man downtown and they brought their money uptown.  And they lived in their own environment.  We had our parades.  We had our churches.  We had our fun.  We fought.  We didn't have gangs back in those days.  If you and I didn't like each other we'd duke it out, and that was the end of that.  We didn't go get a gun and shoot each other like they do today.  But it was fun.  We knew what it was all about.  We had fun.  Overall I will never forget the experience of being born and raised in Harlem [New York, New York] and the enjoyment that I had, I got out of that.
Story_ID: 275326
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how would you describe yourself as a, as a young man growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?  What, what, how, how would you describe yourself.  What did you like to do and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I wanted to do everything.  I was, I was trying to be unlimited.  Exactly what my mother [Mosetta Smalls] wanted me to do.  She said, "The sky is the limit, son.  You can do anything you want to do.  Don't let anybody hold you back."  She said, "The best thing you have is your attitude."  She always said that to me.  It was your attitude, how you approach people.  Always remember to approach people in the right way.  Don't offend people.  Don't make 'em mad at you.  Just get along with people.  Prime directive I've learned later in life, get along with people.  And it was fun.  I just had a lot of fun growing up.  I was always asking questions, trying to seek more knowledge, having fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your, you said your, you and your brother spent your time together most of the time you, you were together?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We would go out on little, little field, field trips.  We would, "Let's, let us go downtown tonight, Rudy [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington]."  One place we never got to, believe it or not, was the Statue of Liberty and the Empire State Building.  Because in our minds, I'd look out the window, oh, there's the Statue of Liberty or, I'd look at (unclear), there's the Empire State Building, it's not going anyplace.  And I would, and wasn't--I think I was about twenty-eight years when I finally got to see the Statue of Liberty.  I said, "So, this is the Statue of Liberty."  I touched it and felt it and said, "Hmm, this is the Statue of Liberty."  I'd never been there. Empire State Building, the same thing.  I, I expected when I got on, when I got up on, on the roof of the Empire State Building I said, "All right where is King Kong?"  Because we had, you know, the movies had always led you to believe this is where King Kong fell off the Empire State Building.  But New York City [New York, New York] was a dynamic place at that time.  People were always in a hurry.  It was a great bustle going on.  It was never a dull moment in New York City.  It just didn't have any--unlike being in other parts of the country, here in California they're laid back here.  They move in a slower pace.  In New York City they move, move, move and have a lot of fun.  Like I said, I can remember working for this interior decorator when I was in high school [Aviation High School; Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, New York, New York].  And she would have me going downtown and, and delivering samples and antiques and fabrics samples and whatnot.  And she paid me, and I'd be able to bring home fruit for my mother.  I'd bring home bananas and pears and peaches for my mother.  She couldn't afford to buy them.  And we'd bring it home to her as a gift.  "Here Ma, here's what you want, just to make, make life a little bit better for you, because you made life good for me."
Speaker 1: Now did they still have like a street corner orders in those days?  Did people, people stand on the corners (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Back in those days and even now.  You had, of course you had your hamburger and your hot dog stands on the corner.  But now they have a little bit more than that.  But yeah, people would stand on the corners and sell food.  Guys would sell crabs.  I can remember one guy was standing on the corner in Harlem one day selling crabs.  And I said, "My brother, can you tell me the difference between a male crab and a female crab?"   "Oh no, I can't tell you the difference."  I said, "Wait a minute, you selling crabs, you can't tell me the difference between a male and a female crab?"  That was the kind of fun we use to have in New York City, back in those days, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And of course the biggest fun was, and you might remember this, Surprise Rotisserie on 136th Street and 7th Avenue.  They had this big Italian guy and a black guy and they would, they would sell racks of barbeque ribs, and they'd cut it up for you and they would have spaghetti with sauce and it would be like an opera, the way the guy would, he would lay the container down, put the wax paper inside of it, scoop up a handful of spaghetti and drop it in there, then put the sauce on it and lay the ribs up on top, wrap it up for you and present it to you.  Those were the days.  When mama could afford to buy us ribs maybe once or twice a month, we could get that.  Well, that was like a special treat for us.  Times were rough, but we could--that was a special treat.  Say, "Mama what we having tonight?"  "We're having some ribs."  That was a special treat for us.
Speaker 1: Now, were, were, were you in to sports when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not that much.  Not that much, track and field more than anything else, loved track and field.  Always have.  Always loved track and field.  We use to go down to Randall's Island [Park], Macombs Dam Park [Bronx, New York, New York], different places around New York City and play track and get involved in track and field.  I ran track and field, my brother participated, he was a high jumper.  I was a distance runner.  I ran the 800 meters and the one mile.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  You would think your, your twin would be running the same kind of races, but (unclear).
Speaker 2: You would think, yes, yes.  He liked to do his high jump.  He loved his thing.  Back in those times we had a guy by the name of John Thomas who was breaking a lot of records.  My hero was a guy named Jim Beatty.  He was a class miler at that time, him and Jim Grilla that was the big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: We'd go to Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] and watch the track meets.
Speaker 1: Beatty was shorter and Grilla was tall.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  We joined, I joined an organization in New York City, in Brooklyn [New York, New York] actually, called the United Athletic Association.  A guy named Jim Borden, a black fellow, he had a group of us, Trevor Dyce, Byron Dyce, these were world-class runners that would participate.  You had two main clubs in New York City, United Athletic Association and you remember this one, the New York Pioneers Club.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, those were the two major black track clubs in New York City back in those days.
Story_ID: 277046
Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh God, yes.  That was what we lived for.  We had radio station WLIB, WWRL, those were the old stations in New York City [New York, New York].  I grew up on predominately what we called R&B music, soul music, loved it.  Could sing it.  Then of course when you listen to the radio station they had the other types of music on the pop, the top forty music.  And we got to know those songs very well.  The Beatles were coming of age; a lot of other young artists, then famous, young at that time, who became famous later in life.  We grew up on their music.  We knew them very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course.  He was a great he had influence.  You know he's still alive.  Hal Jackson, he was a man who'd come down there to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and he'd go--he lived right across the [Hudson] River there in New Jersey.  Everybody laughed about it.  He was right across the river there.  And he did a lot of things for a lot of people.  He was on the radio all the time.  He was a popular DJ.  And of course his shows that he, he'd always do his talent shows and his beauty contests and pageants and whatnot, well known gentlemen.  He did a great thing for us.
Speaker 1: Oksy.  Now, did you have a favorite disc jockey?
Speaker 2: Frankie Crocker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Frankie Crocker was my favorite and years ago I had a chance to meet Frankie Crocker.  We worked together on a project one day.  And I'm sitting on the air as a broadcaster and sitting next to me is Frankie Crocker.  I was awestruck.  I said, "Wow, Frankie Crocker, wow!"
Speaker 1: You came along during the, I guess, the birth of rock and roll, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, when rock and roll really started hitting.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We were very, very fortunate because we saw a change in music.  We saw a change in the way that music was being depicted, the style of writing, the rhythm.   But again, when we look at where the music came from, it came from our roots back in Africa.  It was that, the beat, that, a little blend of reggae would be thrown in there every now and then, calypso music, a, just a blend of music.  It was a, they use to call it a soulful stew.  It always cooked.  And we enjoyed the good music.  We had some good times.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite artist?  I mean is, is there a point and time that you remember when, when the music changed from the big band stuff to rock and roll?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can remember in the late '60s [1960s] an organization started producing movies, came out of Detroit [Michigan], called themselves Motown [Records].  And that's when the Motown sound hit.  You had the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] sound; you had the stack sound; all these different sounds.  They were all different types of music.  The way it was generated.  The way it sounded.  The way we enjoyed it.  [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Berry] Gordy at that time, when he started Motown Records, it was a fabulous experience.  People like Marvin Gaye, the Four Tops, The Temptations, [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves and the Vandellas.  We were hearing these people for the first time and enjoying their music.
Story_ID: 277047
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to school, initially at, grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to grade school at P.S. 5 in New York City [New York, New York].  I then went to--the grades above that, at St. Thomas the Apostle School [New York, New York].  I went to Aviation High School [Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, Queens, New York, New York], which was a unique high school where I was taught to be a mechanic.  I was trained to be an aviation mechanic.  I wore a uniform everyday.  It was a very unique experience.  While I was in--when I graduated from high school, one of my shop instructors said to me, he took me and a bunch of guys over to a [U.S.] Navy base in, outside New York City in Brooklyn [New York, New York] called Floyd Bennett Field.  It was a cold day.  I never will forget it.  He took us out there and he showed us the Navy and what the Navy did and naval aviation, and he said, "You guys can join the reserves and do this."  About that time as you know, we're in Vietnam.  And so I said, "Well, what do I have to do?" He said, "Sign your name on a piece of paper."  And I did.  And I asked one question.  What really did it for me was--and my mother [Mosetta Smalls] was a cook, I loved her cooking--but we had lunch that day.  He invited us to lunch at the chow hall, and the food was great.  And I said to him, I said, "Do we eat like this everyday?"  He said, "Yes, three times a day."  I said, "Where do I sign at?"  And that's how, that led me to joining the [U.S.] Navy Reserve.
Speaker 1: Now, now before I get you in the Navy, I want to go back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Just to, now you went to P, P.S. 5 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P.S. 5, yes.
Speaker 1: --first, then?
Speaker 2: That was on 140th Street and Saint Nicholas Avenue [sic. Edgecombe Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I was trying to make it through.  I wasn't what you call an A student.  I was just trying to, I was more or less like a, between a B and a C student, just trying to make it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh God, I can't remember back that far, getting old.  I'm only fifty-eight years old, can't remember back that far.
Speaker 1: None of them made a big impression apparently then?
Speaker 2: None of them made a big impression.  No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about--how did you, what, what, what was the transition like for, to Saint Thomas the Apostle?  Was that a decision your mother made to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, unfortunately and tragically we were Baptists when we were kids.  Not, not tragically we were Baptists, but I'm saying, in that we were--let me start again.  We were Baptists when we were kids.  Tragically, my mother almost passed away and she was given the last rites as a Catholic and she survived.  And so she put us in Catholic school.  It was a tremendous burden to her and her pocketbook, but she felt that the Catholic church and schools could give us a good, a better education than the public schools.  Because in the public schools the teachers would come to class, they would sit there, young white students, teachers, they would sit there and they'd say, "Well, read pages one to ten and don't ask any questions."  You couldn't ask anything.  They didn't want to hear anything.  They didn't want to, they didn't want to really be there.  They were just there.  Whereas, when we went to the Catholic schools, those brothers and those sisters, they got your attention.  They would ask you a question; if you didn't know anything you put you hand down.  And of course you'd get a little whip across the, with a pointer.  You'd get it right across the, the tips of your finger.  They'd beat it into you.  You learned you really learned your job and your education.  You really got a good education back in those days.  So I remember that quite well.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you made a transition?
Speaker 2: I was approximately nine or ten years old.  I remember going to, I'm sorry, I jumped from P.S. 5, I forgot one other school I went to.  I went to Saint Charles Borromeo School [New York, New York] and then I went to Saint Thomas the Apostle School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Saint Charles (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Borromeo, B-O-R-R--
Speaker 1: B-O-R-R--
Speaker 2: --O-N-E-O [sic.].
Speaker 1: --O-N-E-O, Borroneo.
Speaker 2: M, M, M-E-O.
Speaker 1: Borromeo.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Borromeo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a Saint Charles Borromeo School here in Los Angeles [sic. North Hollywood, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Church.
Speaker 1: So, so you like (unclear), you like Catholic school better?
Speaker 2: I, Catholic school, not so didn't like it, but boy, you got a good education, and I found then as I'm finding out now, as a teacher now, education is the key position to be in.  When you get an education, nobody can't take that away from you, no matter who you are.  And we live in a world right now, where education, you've got to have an education just to survive, just to make it.  And those, again at those, at that age when we're trying to set a foundation in our lives, those brothers and sisters; they helped you get a good foundation.  When I left Saint Thomas the Apostle School and got into high school, I went to a public high school, whereas my brother [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington] went to a Catholic high school, Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx [New York, New York], and got a, he got a very strong academic education, where I got a combination of academics, but more of a vocational training.  I was in training to become an aviation mechanic--
Story_ID: 277048
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was the difference?  What happened where, that, that you split up like that?  And he went to--?
Speaker 2: For some odd reason we, my brother [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington] and I had been together in all classes in all schools together up until that point.  For some odd reason I was, a recruiter took us over to Aviation High School [Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, Queens, New York, New York].  He showed me all these real planes and these shops and guys in uniform.  I said, "That looks nice, I'd like, I'd like to give that a try."  And that's what made me go to Aviation High School.  My brother, he wore a uniform at his school [Cardinal Hayes High School, New York, New York], but it was all academics.  I said, "Well, I don't think I like that.  I want to get me something else, I'll try something else."
Speaker 1: So, so this was around 1960?
Speaker 2: This was around 1960.  Boy, your math is good.  Yes, 1960.
Speaker 1: We are close to the same age.  So I'm (laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 1960, sure was.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) is calculate it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, 1960, all right.  And so, in, so that's why you chose aviation.  It was, it was okay with your mother [Mosetta Smalls]?
Speaker 2: Oh it was fine with her, as long as we got an education.  She just, she made it very clear to us, "I'm going to be by your side until high school.  At the end of high school, you're on your own. You're on, when you finish, when you come out of high school you're on your own.  You have, I've given you, I've prepared you and allowed you to go, to make it this far, when you get that far, now it's up to you to, to live the rest of your life."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did you, when you were in high school, now, is this like a, is this a co-educational high school?
Speaker 2: You mean the high school I went to?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, aviation was boys only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just boys only.  Okay--
Speaker 2: -- all-boys school--
Speaker 1: --and so was his?
Speaker 2: --and so was his.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't have to be bothered with little girls in school.  Not that it was a bother, but it was, put it this way, a distraction.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no distractions.
Speaker 2: No, no, of course, you didn't need that.  We didn't have any distraction.  There was never a bother, we liked the ladies.
Speaker 1: Did they have like teams and clubs and stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh God, yes.
Speaker 1: --in high school that you?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school I was on the track team.  I was in the honors society.  I was in a number of different afterschool activities, as many as I could take, and had time to do, yes.  Really enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you a class officer?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a class officer, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh well, which office (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I was on the, what they called the G.O.  That was the government office.  I was a rep [representative] for the, for the, student rep.  So we had a student council and I was a rep from my class at the student council.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right.  So, aviation, where was it again?
Speaker 2: It was at 36th Street and, and, and Queens Boulevard in Long Island City [Queens, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that a long commute everyday?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a long commute.  I had to take the subway everyday.  It was at least a forty-five minute trip one way to, to school everyday on the subways.  We had no problem, no problem.  The only problem we had was if the subways broke down.  Other than that we got to school everyday, no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so you were in, in school from '60 [1960] to '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].  I came out June 1964.
Speaker 1: Now, just, are there any teachers that stand out as being outstanding teachers?
Speaker 2: There was one who I'll never forget, Mr. Sandsong [ph.].  He was the track coach.  I spent a lot of time with him.  He took a lot of time and he gave me a lot of his time.  He would work with us academically and of course, athletically.  He was a very good going guy, easy to get along with.  We had a lot of fun with him.  He was a solid, strong guy.  He let us know what he wanted us to do, especially in cross country.  When we ran cross country he was right there for us, our track coach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: As I looked in my yearbook, excuse, excuse me (coughing).  As I looked in my yearbook recently, excuse me, I happened to see a couple teachers that brought back some memories for me, certain English teachers, math teachers, people like that.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed the mechanics.  I really enjoyed what we were doing.  We were doing a, a lot of welding, sheet metal work, riveting.  We actually would go into the aircraft and actually repair the engine.  We'd break an engine down and put it back together again, and turn the key to see if it would work.  That was fun for me, get your hands dirty, I, I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: So you really learned how to do something?
Speaker 2: I learned how to do something, yes, something, because my mother always said, "Son, you have to have either an education, or a good trade in order to make it in the world."  That was, that's what she taught us.  And at that time it had to be that way.
Speaker 1: During this time, you all were going to Catholic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Excuse me (coughing), excuse me--
Speaker 1: --you, you, you were going to Catholic church?
Speaker 2: --going to Catholic church at the same time when we were in high school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost became a priest, in fact.  I was an altar boy, almost became a priest.  Until one day they told us you can't get married.  I said, "Okay, well I guess I don't want be a priest anymore."  But, they were--I thought very seriously about it.
Speaker 1: That's a wall that a lot of altar boys hit.
Speaker 2: Yes, you can't get married.  Oh, no, no, I, and in my lifetime, I've been married three times in my life.  I've had eight kids so I don't particularly, I like being married.  In fact, I'm looking for wife number four right now.  You know anybody (laughter), looking for wife number four right now, seriously.  I've got to get married again.
Story_ID: 277049
Speaker 1: In Harlem [New York, New York] in those days, now, did you ever--some of the figures, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --was a figure around Harlem.
Speaker 2: He was a stone; he was a remarkable man, this tall, light-skinned, arrogant, controversial man.  He was our leader at that time.  In fact, right here in Los Angeles [California] there is a gentleman who is almost very similar to him, his name is [HistoryMaker] Danny Bakewell [Sr.].  And every time I see Danny Bakewell--he's the president of the Brotherhood Crusade [Los Angeles, California].  Every time--I saw him the other day.  Every time I see Danny, I say, "Hey," to his face, I tell him always, "You remind me of Adam Clayton Powell."  Tall, light-skinned, good hair, flamboyant, controversial, and wore a big ring, thumb, a pinky ring, and that was Adam Clayton Powell.  He was going through a lot of changes at that time.  In fact, one of my dear friends was the producer on a biopic on Adam Clayton Powell.  And it was--his name is James Garfield [ph.], and it was a great piece of work that they did too; illustrate well how this man was, and the trials and tribulations that the [U.S.] Congress put him through and what he had to go through to do his job as a leader.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember Malcolm X (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Did, did you ever have a chance to hear him speak?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did have a chance to see, see Malcolm X speak on several occasions.  The, the Nation of Islam, the so-called Black Muslims, they would be standing on the corner preaching here, preaching there, and a lot of times people would, "I don't pay them no mind, I leave them guys alone."  They, they didn't really have--but one thing that always impressed me about them, and even to this day, is the discipline that they were able to impart upon their, their participants.  If you're in the Nation of Islam there are certain things you have to do.  First of all, you have to learn how to respect other people, something that we don't do too much of these days.
Speaker 1: New York, Harlem in those days was like a cultural center for black history education and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had the big bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] there at 120, 125th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Co.] on 25th Street--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) book store and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was a lot of activity around there.  Did you--and when you were there, I think people were just starting to really talk about black history and the media and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: Vaguely, it just--as I think back on it, I can remember being on 125th Street.  I'd, we'd go to the--there's a library on 136th Street and then called Lenox Avenue, called Countee Cullen Branch of the New York Public Library [New York, New York].  I spent a lot of my time, free time at that library.  I always loved to read.  My mother [Mosetta Smalls] taught us how to read.  She encouraged us to read.  She'd buy the newspaper, "Son, sit down, read the paper and then come back and tell me what you read."  That was her style, and we'd love, we loved to read.  I always enjoyed reading.  I'd go to the library and read, read, read, because when you read you learn, you get a chance to ingest other people's experiences and what they did and what they researched and how they did it.  Really, a lot of fun hobby for me was reading.  To this day it's a fun hobby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's a, that's a, the Countee Cullen is right next to the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] now where they (unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 277050
Speaker 1: You told us I guess, earlier that, how you made the transition from high school [Aviation High School; Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, Queens, New York, New York] into the [U.S.] Navy (laughter) based on the, the menu.
Speaker 2: Then the food was great, food was great.
Speaker 1: And the training I guess, at the--
Speaker 2: Awesome.
Speaker 1: --at the high school, you know, you knew you were prepared to do something in the Navy, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, yes.  I knew when I came in the Navy--because they had aircraft--I was trained as an aviation mechanic, reciprocating jet engines, that's what I wanted to be when I came in the Navy.  And I remember specifically, they give you a series of tests, battery tests, they call them.  I took the test, scored very well on the test, but when I went to see a classifier, who was the gentleman who directed you in the appropriate career path you would take, he said, "Well right now we don't, well, you wear glasses."  At the time, I wore glasses.  He said, "And one day you'll be on the flight line and a bolt is going to fall out of the sky, hit you in your glass, shatter and blind you, so therefore you can't be a mechanic."  Just that fast he said that to me, just that quick.  He said, "But what you could be is a yeoman."  I said, "Well, what's a yeoman?"  He said, "That's an administrative, like a secretary.  You can work in the offices and do certain personnel work."  I said, "Well"--I looked at all his stripes and all his hash marks, and I said, "Well, I guess he knows what he's talking about."  I said, "Okay."  So I went to boot camp and when I was in boot camp, one day a guy who was our, one of our drill instructors, his name was Tom Brodski [ph.], I never will forget him, TD2, second class training device man.  He walked in, into the little bay area we were standing in, everybody jumped up, "Attention on deck!"  Because we were--that was the way we were learning our, our little trade back in those days.  And he said to us, He said, "Who wants to be a TD?"  I looked around at everybody and I put my hand up.  He said, "You, come with me.  The rest of you knuckleheads get on those swabs.  Swab this deck down here."  He took me into an area that I will, that Larry [Crowe], I will never, ever forget.  I walked into this huge room and there was these flight simulators in this room, four of them.  And he showed me these, these pieces, these huge pieces of equipment that men would get inside of them and fly an airplane.  And I said, "Fly an airplane."  I said, "You mean to say the Navy would teach me how to do this?"  He said, "Yes, they will teach you how to operate, maintain and instruct these flight simulators and other training devices."  I said, "Well that's what I want to do."  And he said, "Well sign your paper right here."  And they sent me to school five months later.  I went to Memphis, Tennessee.  I got down there in the early 1965.  And that's when I became, was a training device man.  I was one of the few black Americans that they ever had in that rank in the Navy.  Whenever we have a reunion, we have a reunion of the TDs every year, or every other year in [Las] Vegas [Nevada].  And I'm usually the only black that's there, but I had a great time teaching guys how to fly airplanes, how to operate training devices.  A training device, by Navy definition was anything from a deck of cards, which you can use to train people with, up to a sophisticated flight simulator.  And our job--that included television, radio, stereos, (unclear) they taught me all the electronics.  I had over forty-eight weeks of training in electronics in Memphis, Tennessee.  And I was taught how to be an electronic technician.  So here at a young age I'm already making another career transition.  I'm going from student to aviation mechanics to electronics now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they elevate your status?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I was able, I was able to get rank as I, as I progressed through the, as time went on, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, you're an enlisted man still, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was an enlisted man, yes.
Story_ID: 277051
Speaker 1: They said at the same time your brother [HistoryMaker Rudolph Brewington], after coming out of, I guess he had ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or something?  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, when he came out of high--his, his path was different.  When he came out of the--out of high school [Cardinal Hayes High School, New York, New York] in 1964, the same year I graduated, he joined the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  He wanted to be a Marine.  And they sent him down to Parris Island, to the Marine Corps Recruiting Depot [Marine Corps Recruit Depot] at Parris Island, South Carolina.  And I remember my mother [Mosetta Smalls] allowed me to go down to, to South Carolina to meet my brother when he came out of boot camp.  And I took a train from New York City [New York, New York] to Yemassee, South Carolina.  They use to call it the Chicken Bone Special [sic. Chicken Bone Express].  It was a train that ran from the North to the South.  And the reason they called it the Chicken Bone Special was because the people, what they would do is, they would fry some chicken, put it in a brown bag and put some bread in there since they didn't, they couldn't afford to buy the food off the train there.  This way they didn't have to buy the food off the train.  They had their own food.  And I got off the train, it was about a twenty hour trip down to South Carolina and I, we pulled into Yemassee early in the morning.  And I can remember the sun was just coming up, the chickens was crowing, and as I stepped off the train, this big, tall, ugly, Marine standing there with a campaign hat looked at me and said, "Are you a recruit?" and I looked up at him and said, "No," because if I was, I was getting back on that train.  And I met (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your brother went in before you did?
Speaker 2: He went into the Marine Corps before I did, right.
Speaker 1: He went into the [U.S. military] service (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went in the service in, I believe, July of 1964--
Speaker 1: Okay. --right after, right after coming out of high school, right.
Speaker 2: And when did you go in there?
Speaker 1: I went in the service in November, November 28, 1964.
Speaker 2: Okay, so wasn't that much difference, but there was a little.
Speaker 1: There was a little, what I was doing at the time, even though I said my mother had said, "After you go to high school, get out of here," I was still living at home with mom.  I was working at a record store on Times Square [New York, New York] and I was literally paying my rent.  She said, "You want to live with me, you pay for it."  I said, "Okay."  "You want food, you pay for it."  That was the training she gave us.  And I had no problem paying my mother rent to live with her.  It was a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, the Chicken Bone Special, I hadn't heard that before, but so many residents of Harlem [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --are from South Carolina, you know.  So I can just imagine the, the, that name for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For the train--
Speaker 2: --for the train--
Speaker 1: --that takes us up (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that would take you back and forth--
Speaker 1: --up and down, yes.
Speaker 2: --the Chicken Bone Special.
Speaker 1: The Chicken Bone Special, that's what they called it.
Speaker 2: And what, what was the real name of the train, was it, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was Pennsylvania Railroad--
Speaker 2: Pennsylvania Railroad, okay (unclear).
Speaker 1: --and just a regular, there was no really, I don't know what the name was, like the Red Ball Express.  I don't know what the real name of the train, train was.
Speaker 2: Whatever the route was to South Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a route, southern route.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But blacks used to call it the Chicken Bone Special.
Story_ID: 277052
Speaker 1: You're in Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: I was in Memphis, Tennessee, yes.
Speaker 1: Being trained, all right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: That was an experience.  That was--I had a chance to go to the--as we just said at the time we didn't know it would later become famous, the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee].  The Lorraine Hotel, Beale Street.  We listened to a radio station, WDIA, a guy by the name of Rufus Thomas [Jr.], a young disc jockey; we use to hear him all the time.  It was a great experience for me to be in, in Memphis, Tennessee.  I was in the South for the first time in my life.  I'd never been down south.  I'd never experienced the southern way.  The food, the cuisine, the people, the attitude down there, the white attitude, the black attitude, it was a totally different experience for me.  I had a, one bad experience, I never will forget.  One night me and a bunch of guys, three black guys, we were on our way down, we were leaving the base [Naval Support Activity Mid-South] in Millington, Tennessee, going into Memphis.  And we took a car, and we were hungry.  We said, "Let's stop at a little small roadside cafe and get something to eat."  This was around 19--, early 1966, late 1965.  And we stopped at this roadside cafe, the four of us walked in there and there was a guy behind the counter, it was a white fella behind the counter.  And we said, "We'd like to get a sandwich."  Well, at first when we walked in the door he ignored us.  And then one of the brothers took a cigarette out and he packed it, you know how you use to take a cigarette and pack it?  He packed it on the counter.  And he walked over to us, and he say, "What you boys want?"  I never will forget this.  We said, "We'd like to get a, some sandwiches."  "I don't serve y'all niggers."  We said, "What did you say?"  And we walked up to him.  He very politely reached up under the counter and pulled out a shotgun and did this to us (pointing gesture).  And at that moment you see your whole life flash in front of you.  You don't know what this man is going to do.  There're four of us, all black guys standing there looking at this guy holding a shotgun at us.  "Y'all get out of here and don't ever come back from here no more.  I know you'll ain't from down here.  Get outta here!"  And we left.  We went back to the base and we told the base police, the people, the police there and the authorities of our experience.  They said there was nothing they could do for us.  We went back to town, went to the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] down there.  And we told them what our problem was.  Do you know they picketed that place and put that man out of business?  And that was an experience I never will forget, the local NAACP in Memphis, Tennessee back in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were pretty strong at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very strong, yes.
Speaker 1: --one time, they, they, you know.  We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Russell [B.] Sugarmon and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and some other people involved with (unclear) the NAACP down there.  Yeah, they--Memphis was a different place too, because blacks could vote in Memphis.  Which would--they couldn't do in other places in the South (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --so, it made a difference, I guess.  And so he was put out of business?
Speaker 2: Put out of business, yes.  And I made three trips back to Memphis during the course of my [U.S.] Navy career.  I can remember one time I was in Memphis, when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] got killed, and I remember specifically that we were all ordered back to the base.  We were not allowed to leave the base.  And we were locked down in that base.  We couldn't leave.  There was a rumor that people were going to come to the base and, and raid the base, and, and cause a riot and whatnot, and try to get some guns to go back to Memphis and kill people.  The Navy shut us all down.  We could not leave the base at all.  That was my experience.  I left the, the base, I think, about two weeks after the assassination, to leave, to come out and go, from the base to another destination, but not, I could not go through Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  Now, what, what, what was the rationale?
Speaker 2: Rationale was that you're, remember that you represent the United States Navy.  Rationale was that, you know, they didn't want you to get involved in any of, that was a civil matter.  We didn't, they didn't want the Navy people to get involved in that.  Even though you're an African American and you're in uniform, but you're in uniform.  That's what they're concerned about.
Story_ID: 277053
Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved in broadcasting?  I know you got involved in broadcasting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: --in the [U.S.] Navy, but how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well actually I got involved in broadcasting through my brother.  My twin brother, [HistoryMaker] Rudolph Brewington, after he had left--he served four years in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, including six months in Vietnam, and he came back, he was looking for different types of jobs.  He was a bus driver.  He sold encyclopedias.  He did all kind of crazy things to try to earn a living.  In Washington, D.C., he loved Washington D.C., he met a girl, they lived together.  She later became his wife.  He got involved through a series of events.  He went to school at the University at Maryland [College Park, Maryland], the University of Maryland, and took some broadcasting classes, and he liked broadcasting.  He got involved at, at a radio station in town called WOOK, W-O-O-K.  Then he left there and went to W- no, I'm sorry, yeah, no, he started at WUST.  That was his first radio station.  He started at WUST, then he went to WOOK.  Then he went to WOL, then he went to WHMM, the TV network.  He became very well known in the Washington, D.C. area.  He and another guy named Glen Ford started a, a television show called 'America's Black Forum,' which is still on the air these days.  It's still on the air to this day; different host, different co-host, but my brother and this guy started this TV show, Glen Ford was his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams is the host now.  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Juan Williams is the host now, yes, but they started that TV show.  They did a lot of syndicated, television and radio syndication.  He at the time--later my brother got a job with then, Sheridan Broadcasting Network [American Urban Radio Networks], and he became a correspondent for them.  They moved to Cocoa, Florida.  They were covering the space shuttle shots.  And all along I'm watching my brother's career and I'm saying to myself, "Gee that's a lot of fun.  I'd like to do that one day," but really it didn't interest me.  And then one day when I was in the Navy, stationed in Corpus Christi, Texas, a job application came, a job opened up.  They, it was because of affirmative action; they needed an African American as the host of, to be a jock on the show, on the station.  His job would be to show that, you know, you're--we do employ African Americans at that time.  I was in the Navy.  They asked me to come in and they said, "You know you have a good voice, come in do an audition."  And then they realized that I could do two jobs for them.  I had a good voice, I could be an announcer, but I also was in the Navy.  So that looked good all the way around.  Here you are a guy who's in the Navy, stationed in Corpus Christi, Texas, he's African American.   Hey, we've got a sure winner there, and they gave me a job.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This was 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked at a radio station [KEYS AM; 1440 KEYS] down in Corpus Christi, Texas.  I'm now thinking of the cost size of that.  Having a little mind block here.  (Unclear) give me a second, (pause) music radio--something my resume; I'm just having a little, I can't think (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll think of it in just a second.
Speaker 1: But before that time you had been stationed in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd been in the Navy traveling all--I was teaching people how to fly in various locations, naval air station in New York.  I was in Washington, D.C. for a long time.  The Navy allowed me to go to college under a certain program called ADCOP, Associate Degree Completion Program, where I took my uniform off and I was a full-time student at a community college in Northern Virginia.  And then I came, in 1977, I received orders to naval air station Corpus Christi, Texas.  And I drove from Washington, D.C. to Texas.  I arrived in Texas, checked in, checked in to my division, met my chief, met my co-workers and took my position in the organization there as a, a leading petty officer.  I was teaching guys how to fly in a [North American] T-28, and, let's see, an [Grumman] S-2 [Tracker], the old "Stoof" aircraft, a multi-engine aircraft, prop engine aircraft.
Story_ID: 277054
Speaker 1: So you're at KEYS AM [1440 KEYS] in Corpus Christi, Texas.  What kind of music were you playing?
Speaker 2: It was the top forty format.  It was the first time I'd ever been introduced to that type of music.  I had a program director, James Randall [ph.], who for me, he taught me a lesson.  He said, "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], you need to open up your mind.  You need to understand there's more to music than R&B music.  You need to look at other types of music, listen to other types of music, learn the expressions, what it means, and enjoy it", and I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So you played all the top forty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --hits of 1975?
Speaker 2: And especially in 1977 you had at that time, you had the Commodores, Barry White, 'Ecstasy When You Make Love To Me' [sic. 'It's Ecstasy When You Lay Down Next to Me'], Marvin Gaye, 'Got To Give It Up,' the 'Hotel California' by the Eagles, The Beatles.  You had a lot of, of, of white and black artists.  The Commodores had the, the, 'Brick House' that year, 1977.  So you had a lot of music coming out that year.  That was beautiful.  We had a great time back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, now, did you always do disc jockey duties?  Did you have other duties that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the station I was just an announcer only and I'd do commercial production type work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all.
Speaker 1: So how long did you do that before you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I stayed at the station a year, I was--about maybe six months after starting there a guy across town at a FM radio station, KEXX FM [KMXR FM, Corpus Christi, Texas], he heard me on the air and asked me would I like to do voice PSAs [public service announcements] for his station.  And I said, "Sure, how much you pay?"  And so he gave me a job as his public service director.  And my job was to acquire, produce, and write public service announcements for the stations.  And I remember one day my boss at Keys radio called me in and asked me, he said, "Ron, did I hear your voice on a radio station across town?"  We were on an AM station.  And he said, "I heard, I think I heard your voice on an FM station."  I said, "Yes, you did."  He said, "Now, you can't work for both them and us."  I said, "Well, I'm not saying my name."  He said, "I'm sorry, you can't work for them and me also."  He said, "You have to make a choice."  So I thought about it for a second.  It was another career decision I had to make.  Do I want to be a jock, or do I want to get into something different?  I said, "I'll try something different."  I said, "Thank you for--," his name was Eric Stern [ph.].  I said, "Mr. Stern, thank you very much for giving me an opportunity, but I'm going to move on to another station."  And I did.  And they--when I moved to the other station they expanded my role.  Beside producing the public service announcements, they also allowed me to produce a weekly half hour show called 'Perspectives' [ph.].  Which is nothing more than a community program where they would allow me to go out into the community and bring representatives of various community organizations in and talk about their mission, what they were doing, what kind of projects they had and how they impacted on the community.  I did that for about six months and they liked it.  They said, "Hey, we'll expand your role even more.  We'll give you another show you can do; another show, half hour show, and we call that one 'The Place.'"  And on 'The Place' what we did, we were able to interview a lot of newsmakers.  I remember, I never will forget, the, the great Douglas Edwards from CBS [Evening] News, came to Corpus Christi on assignment and I had an opportunity to bring him into the studio and sit down and do an interview with him about what it was like being Douglas Edwards on, for CBS News.  A number of famous people we had come through the town, I would sit down and interview them.  So I had a great, great time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: While I was doing that I was in the [U.S.] Navy, doing that, going to college and then another break came for me at that time.  I was given an opportunity to work on a television station, KRIS-TV, which was an NBC affiliate in Corpus Christi.  And they offered me a position as a weekend reporter.  And I said, "Yes, I'll take it."  And I had a chance to get exposure to television news.  And in a small market like that, as a television reporter, not only was I a reporter, but I was a photographer as well.  Say for example, you and I went out on an assignment, on one assignment you're the reporter and I'm the photographer, and on the other assignment, I'm the photographer and you're the reporter.  And then we would go back in the station, we'd write our copy, we'd go in the booth, we'd voice it, we'd put on our tapes, we edited all the tapes.  During the newscast we'd run the teleprompter.  We did everything.  It was a great learning experience.  I stayed there for about a year.  And then one day I said to one of my colleagues in the Navy, I said, "Is there a trade in the Navy that does this radio, television thing?"  He said, "Yes, they call themselves journalists."  I said, "Hmm, can I be a journalist?"  He said, "Well, you're a Chief [Petty Officer] E-7 at this time."  He said, "You can't be a journalist."  He said, "Because it's kind of hard for chiefs to change their rank."  I said, "Well, can we do this, can we put an application in through the Navy personnel department and see what happens," and we did.  And they said they'd approve my change of rank.  So I came, I became a, I went from a chief training device man to a chief journalist.  And I was transferred from Corpus Christi, Texas, to a base in the Aleutian Islands [Alaska] called Adak, A-D-A-K [Naval Air Facility Adak, Adak Island, Alaska].  Where I took over as the chief petty officer in charge of a Navy Broadcasting Service detachment up there in the islands.  This was a remote location that had over ten thousand military personnel and their dependents.  And our job was to operate two radio stations and a television station twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
Speaker 1: Now that's the islands off Japan, off of, of Alaska, going towards Asia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Towards the Soviet Union [Russia], towards Asia and the Soviet Union, yeah.
Speaker 1: The Aleutian Islands.
Speaker 2: Yes, as you, as you know, here's a, Alaska, there's a chain of little islands that do like this, Adak is right in the middle, right in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there's an [U.S.] Air Force base at the end of the islands, called Shemya [Alaska].  And we would have to take--there was only one way in and one way out, and an airline called Reeve Aleutian Airlines [Reeve Aleutian Airways].  And you'd have to fly in that way.  Had a great time.
Speaker 1: So what was your audience out there?
Speaker 2: An audience of ten thousand people, [U.S.] military personnel and their dependents.
Story_ID: 277055
Speaker 1: We [Navy Broadcasting Service] provided through [U.S.] Armed Forces Radio and Television Service [AFRT].  The industry would give us all these radio--hours and hours of radio programming and television programming and then we also were on the cutting edge at that time, we were getting satellite communications.  It was in its infancy at that time.  We were getting satellite signals from the continental United States.  We would receive newscasts every day.  We would record them, sanitize them, take all the commercials out, insert military public service announcements and we would show it to our audience.  And so I was the station manager.  I was in charge of about fifty people running this radio, this TV and radio station facility [at Naval Air Facility Adak, Adak Island, Alaska].
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Now, what year is this?
Speaker 1: You're talking 1977 through 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what happened at the end of '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: Midway through my tour at Adak, Alaska, I got in--had a little disagreement with my boss who was a young ensign there, a young female ensign.  We got into a little disagreement.  And they called me back to the Pentagon in Washington, D.C.  They, they flew me all the way from Adak, Alaska to the Pentagon.  And they instructed me and let me know there was a--at that time the Iranian hostage situation was taking place.  And there was a radio station and a [U.S.] military facility and a little small island in the middle of the Indian Ocean called Diego Garcia.  And they told me, they said, "We're ordering you to go to Diego Garcia."  We had, they had a, an enlisted man and an E6 who was running the station [Naval Communications Station, Diego Garcia] and he was disobeying all kind of orders and they wanted me to go down there, run the station and clean it up.  So I went down there.  And when I got down there I found that this guy, whose name I won't mention, he had a problem.  He was a Caucasian who disliked African Americans immensely.  And all he knew was that Chief Brewington [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington] was coming.  He didn't know that I was an African American.  And when I arrived on this little island and he saw me he had all kind of problems.  I found out later what his problem was.  The problem was that he had a wife and his wife was messing around with a brother and he hated all brothers after that.  And there was two young African Americans who worked at the station.  He gave them hell.  And when I came in I was like a savior to them.  And I kind of came in there and kind of cleaned--I made sure this man would never get promoted ever again.  And we didn't kick him out of the [U.S.] Navy.  He was the most discriminatory person I've ever seen in my Navy career.  There was a lot of prejudice in the Navy; it was then and even now.  But we were able to handle it.  A lot of guys were able to handle it.  But this guy--I'd never seen anybody like him before in my life.  He hated African Americans with a passion.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so you take over this station in Diego Garcia.
Speaker 1: In Diego Garcia.  And the first day I'm there, the first day I'm on the station, the first complete day I'm there I have an incident that I will never forget.  We were looking--I was in my office going over the records of the station and a board operator called--he screamed out, "Chief," and I came running.  And there was a telephone sitting there and there was someone on the telephone yelling and screaming about a program that was on television at that moment.  We were looking at '60 Minutes.'  And one of the episodes involved a group called the United Front [sic. National Front], which is a Neo-Nazi group in England.  And this gentlemen who I found out later was what they called the Brit Rep, the British Representative, he was a lieutenant commander in the Royal Navy, and he thought that that episode of '60 Minutes' would cause a race riot on the island of Diego Garcia.  And he ordered me to take it off the TV now!  "Take it off, or I'll take your license!"  And I had to make a decision.  First of all, who is this guy?  I don't know who this guy is.  And secondly, we don't have a license, so you can't take my license from me.  So, you know, who is this guy?  My first thought was forget him.  My second thought was, well go ahead and take it off.  Put up a little sign saying we have technical difficulties, take it off the air and we can deal with it later.  And I did the latter.  We took it off the air and we dealt with it later.  And we found that there was no local sensitivities on the island of Diego Garcia for certain subject matter that we were receiving through Armed Forces Radio and Television Service.  I sent a flash message back to the Pentagon letting them know what had happened.  They in turn dispatched some Navy lieutenant to come out and investigate what had happened.  The next day I had a chance to meet this lieutenant commander when I--from the Royal Navy.  When I walked in the door and he saw that I was an African American--here I was the first African American to run a radio facility like this--he had never met me before, he didn't know me, and he saw me, his eyes just popped out.  We later became the best of friends.  I told him, "You teach me British and I'll teach you American."  And we became very good friends.  We communicated with, with each other and we were able to share information with each other.  He had a mission.  I had a mission.  We understood each other's missions, and we worked it out that way.  And later he wrote a letter, which helped me get a promotion.  I will never thank him for that.  I haven't kept track of him all these years, but I won't forget him for that.
Speaker 2: Did he ever mellow his position on what people ought to see?
Speaker 1: Yes, the military, of course--and they have what they call a list of sensitivities in foreign countries.  In America its no problem if you--Armed Forces Radio and Television unfortunately, all their products are seen outside of the continental United States.  Because here in the continental United States you don't need to see AFRT, you've got ABC, NBC, CBS, CNN and all these other channels.  You don't need that.  But overseas, they don't have American television.  So this is the, the way that the American troops and their families get information from America, through Armed Forces Radio and Television Service.  But depending upon--because a signal is seen in other countries, you don't want to offend the, the host country.  So, they developed a list of sensitivities and if that means you have to edit a show, or don't say this, or don't say that, you do so accordingly.
Story_ID: 277056
Speaker 1: So how long were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the island [Diego Garcia] for about eight months, had a great time, left there and went to a [U.S.] Navy recruiting district in Seattle, Washington.  I spent a year there as a public affairs officer there, and was given a, an assignment following that which was considered a diamond assignment.  It was a choice assignment.  Everybody wanted it.  I was assigned here in Long Beach, California to the USS New Jersey, which was the first battleship that the American Navy had brought out of retirement.  My job was the assistant public affairs officer, station manager for--we had a TV and radio station onboard the, this huge vessel.  This was a dynamic vessel.  Imagine a ship that weighs 65,000 tons, 888 feet long, 110 feet wide.  It had nine sixteen inch guns.  These guns could shoot twenty-two miles easy.  They had five-inch guns.  They had what they called (unclear) close end weapons station, system rather.  It was a Gatling gun configuration that was tied to a radar unit, that when a missile came inbound on a ship, they would lock in on, with radar, lock in on the target and fire Gatling guns at this high speed rounds at this target coming inbound.  It was a great piece of weapon.
Speaker 1: Okay now, this is when, nineteen, 1980 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're talking about 1983, somewhere around, around 1982, 1983.
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983] all right. And, so you were stationed in Long Is- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Long Beach, California.
Speaker 1: Long, Long Beach (unclear).
Speaker 2: Naval, I was at the naval ship, first the naval shipyard, because the ship was going through reconstruction, and then we transferred over to naval station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Upon commission--commissioning was done by president, then President Ronald [Wilson] Reagan.  I was part of the pre-commissioning team.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is, so you were like public affairs officer?
Speaker 2: I was their assistant public affairs officer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --of the ship.
Speaker 1: --okay, all right.  Okay.  Did you miss being in charge of radio and TV?
Speaker 2: No, we, because we had a radio and television station onboard the ship.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that--what they did was when they brought the ship back they took this old World War II [WWII], Vietnam [War] vessel, completely gutted it out, and then rebuilt everything from outside in, or inside out, I should say, inside out.  The only problem they had was when we fired the sixteen inch guns they forgot to take into account that the reverb, the shock would damage equipment.  So they had to put shock absorbers on everything.
Speaker 1: And that is that the vessel that is still out in Long Beach now?
Speaker 2: No, it's sitting in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In south New Jersey.  I had an opportunity to see it about two years ago, the USS New Jersey BB-62.
Speaker 1: Because I know they have something out there in Long Beach, some Navy vessel (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's some Navy stuff out there, yes, there is.  From there I was able to--because of a situation, I was transferred from the USS New Jersey and my last duty station was the Naval Station Long Beach [Los Angeles County, California].  I was the public affairs officer there before--until I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, when did you retire?
Speaker 2: I retired in 1985.
Story_ID: 277057
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you do, do after you retired from the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to work.  My first job was, I went to work for the Bob Hope [Hollywood] USO Club in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], as an assistant director.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what, what was that like?
Speaker 2: That was a lot of fun; I mean we were a USO [United Service Organizations] organization, the only one in Hollywood.  You--these young military guys from [U.S.] military bases like Twentynine Palms Marines [Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms], out in Twentynine Palms, San Diego [California], from the surrounding area, would come to the Bob Hope USO Club for relaxation. And we would give them tickets to shows and we'd give them coffee and food and sandwiches and whatnot.  It was just a recreational type event for military people.  It was a nice transition for me from the military into the civilian sector.  And about that time I was doing all kind of little, different things at that time, trying to work in broadcasting, trying to keep my hand in it.  And my brother [HistoryMaker, Rudolph Brewington] invited me to come down to Cocoa, Florida.  At that time he was working for Sheridan Broadcasting Network [American Urban Radio Networks].  And I went down to see him and my mother [Mosetta Smalls].  We all rendezvoused in Cocoa, Florida.  And at that time I met a man named Jerry Lopes, who was then the news director for Sheridan Broadcasting Network.  I made a suggestion to him, I said, "Do you guys have a bureau, a news bureau in Los Angeles, California?"  He said, "No."  I said, "I would strongly recommend that you do that."  And he followed my advice and we opened up a bureau in Los Angeles--a news bureau--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which I headed for seventeen years.
Speaker 1: That, that was a good--a lucky conversation.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  Sheridan Broadcasting Network was a--the only then, the only, to my knowledge, black radio network at that time.  They were struggling, they were trying to find their way and find different directions that they were going in.  At the time they were covering space shuttle shots in Cocoa, Florida.  They had--they originally had started, if I remember, in Virginia, Northern Virginia, outside of [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from those days with early days of Sheridan Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a lot of fun.  We had--again, it was, it was new to me.  I was trying to represent this African American radio network.  I was the kind of guy that I got out there and met people.  I met people like that gentleman right there, [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  I met a lot of people who opened doors for me, made it possible for me to get new stories.  I would report at least one story a day, by-line "Los Angeles, Ron Brewington, 'SBN News,' Los Angeles."  That was my IQ for stories that we would tell about what was going on in the black community in Los Angeles.  I had an opportunity to cover the Watts riots, the O.J. Simpson trials, the [Summer] Olympics [Los Angeles, California] in 1984, a number of different things I had an opportunity to do.
Speaker 1: That's a lot, the Watts riots (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: The Watts riots--
Speaker 2: Not the Watts riots, the L.A. [Los Angeles] riots.
Speaker 1: L.A. riots.  That's like '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: Yes, around 1992.
Speaker 1: But before that, the Olympics in ninety, '84 [1984] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a (unclear).
Speaker 2: Great experience--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to have press credentials for that.  Met some great people.  And then I also had a chance in 1984, courtesy of a guy named Paul Brock to cover an event called the [1984] Democratic National Convention [San Francisco, California].  Paul introduced me to a number of people, including [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson.  A lot, we had a great, great, a lot of fun.  That was the year that America had their hopes with a guy named Jesse Jackson to be the president.
Speaker 1: Right, now, yeah, it was a big, there was actually a possibility that he could have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He could have became a presidential candidate.
Speaker 1: --nominated him--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in '80 [1980] to '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: He sure could have been.  And everybody was pulling for him.  But it was a great experience behind the scenes, going to meetings, meeting people, talking to people, finding out the real newsmakers.  Seeing what direction this man and other people were taking that would change the course of this country.
Story_ID: 277058
Speaker 1: Now, what about the riots in, in '92 [1992], '93 [1993], that, that, there was so much press involved in covering those riots and the aftermath and the violence.  And they, they started talking about, you know, gangs, the Crips and the Bloods and the all of that.  And then Rodney King decision came down; you know, the riots (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That really blew it open.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Los Angeles [California] was really in the center of national news.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  I remember that the night of the incident that sparked the riot, was a guy named--well of course, Rodney King, but then also Reginald Denny, at the corner of Florence [Avenue] and Normandie [Avenue], here in Los Angeles.  This white truck driver named Reginald Denny was pulled literally from his truck.
Speaker 1: That's during the riot?
Speaker 2: During the riots.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the riot was caused by Rodney King (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With Rodney King--
Speaker 1: --the outrage around him.
Speaker 2: --the outrage around him, but later Reginald Denny was another spark.
Speaker 1: Denny was a victim of the riot.
Speaker 2: Now, some do say it was the spark.  It depends on who you talk to.  Some people say that was the spark, some people say it was the Rodney King.  People were mad with Rodney they were upset.  They were really upset with that.
Speaker 1: Now, the Reginald Denny, well, tell me now, I thought that he was--they were already rioting when they pulled him out of his truck and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that, that's true.  It had happened.
Speaker 1: So--?
Speaker 2: But some people say the true spark, the real spark was Rodney King influence.  Everybody was very upset with that.  And I remember I was stringing for United Press International at the time.  And one of our reporters, a white guy, he was observing rioting going on and he got almost killed.  They stoned him and almost--I believe they shot him.  And they asked me, "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], would you step in and take over his position?"  And I said, "Well, yeah, how much you paying?"  And so I took the job and I remember the night of the beginning of the riots, we had all gathered at First A.M.E. Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church (FAME), Los Angeles, California] here in Los Angeles, then Pastor Chip Murray [HistoryMaker Reverend Cecil L. "Chip" Murray], the mayor at the time was Tom Bradley.  Okay, the mayor at that time was Tom Bradley.  And the mayor had gotten together with a lot of community leaders and he wanted to try to keep the peace. "Hold everybody down, don't be afraid of anything, we need to cool off right now."  And I remember leaving the, the church meeting and driving home and as I got to the intersection of Crenshaw [Boulevard] and Adams [Boulevard], right in the middle of the street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right down the street from the church, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right in the middle--I need to take a moment.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: I remember leaving the church following the meeting with the mayor and other church leaders, and as I was approaching the intersection of Adams and Crenshaw Boulevard, right in the middle of the street was a man standing there with a shotgun.  And he was shooting it up in the air.  And I said to myself, "I don't have a gun, all I have is a press pass and a microphone."  And I was able to get around him, but you could tell that the city was on fire.  They brought the National Guard in.  It was really a very sad time to be in Los Angeles, it really was.  I saw a lot of bad things happening.  I saw buildings burning up.  People, the one thing--can I tell you to stop for just a second?  (Coughing).  The one item that I never will forget from the riots of 1992 in Los Angeles was the fact that I saw a lot of mothers taking their children into stores and saying, "Steal this, take this, take that."  These were parents leading their own children into stores to steal.  I had never seen anything like that before in my life.  And of all the things that happened that--during that riot, that left the worse taste in my mouth.
Speaker 1: Now, those parents represented probably a--our first generation of riot veterans, I guess, in the sense that they had been through the riots of '65 [1965] probably, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of them probably had.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.  But to see them actually break the law and do it in front of their children, I mean, again, that's a bad example for your children.  You're putting--I feel you're putting the wrong seed in a child's mind by doing something like that.
Story_ID: 277059
Speaker 1: No question.  Yeah, but they--I just thought about that, this was the first generation of riot veterans in terms of this kind of a riot, this kind of, some people called it a rebellion, urban rebellion.
Speaker 2: I always like to call it opportunities.  I'll tell you why.  The riot of 1964 in New York City [New York, New York], I was in New York City, the Harlem riots of 1964, as they always say, "What starts a riot?"  You need, when you have a group of people, you take one man who lives in a rat infested, roach infested, slum dwelling, he goes to a nothing job all day long, takes a bunch of bull, all day long, and comes home at the end of the night.  On the way home he passes all the stores, he sees dresses and clothes, he knows he cannot afford to give them to his children and his wife.  He sees good cuts of meat, good quality food; he knows he can't afford to give it to his family.  He goes to a nothing job, comes home at the end of the day and walks past those same stores at the end of the day.  That's one person.  You multiply that by 100,000, you got a potential rioter on your hands.  All you need is one spark.  In 1964 the spark was a white cop [Thomas Gilligan], shot a black kid [James Powell] in the back of his head.  That sparked the riots in 1964.  And in this same town in 1992, when we had the L.A. riots [Los Angeles, California], you had people who were just waiting for a riot.  They were just waiting for an opportunity.  They see a television, "I'd like to have that television, but I can't afford to buy that television.  But let a riot breakout, I can get that television."  And we saw a lot of that.  Just (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they--people were just cold and calculating in the--
Speaker 2: When--.
Speaker 1: It wasn't so much erupting; they just took that as an opportunity to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I feel that because again, economically, the times were bad.  We didn't--people didn't have money in their pockets.  And to see a man named Rodney King get beat down like he did, and then go through that trial and those cops walk.  That hurt a lot of people.  They, they were pissed.  They were mad.  They said, "Hey, we going to fight back at the system."  Unfortunately, we have this bad habit that we have of whenever we fight, we always burn up our own neighborhoods.  We don't go any place else.  Here in L.A. you don't, you didn't see too many people go to Beverly Hills [California] and burn anything there.  The Beverly Hills Police Department would not let that happen.
Speaker 1: You think that these events were planned or, or by anybody, or would they just be spontaneous?
Speaker 2: I would say a combination of both.  I would say, my, my honest answer would be a combination of both.
Speaker 1: So you think there are there organizations, street organizations (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have people who are what I call stir the pot.  They keep people aware, on the cutting edge of certain social issues, certain feelings of the day, you know, "Look at where you at, brother, you down here in the mud, you could be up here, why you down here in the mud?"  And you keep saying that over and over, and over again.  And that sits in the back of people's minds, and let an incident like Rodney King happen, and then immediately the seed has already been planted, they just go ahead and act it out.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you ever in--well, other than the, well, the gun being pulled on, was it being pulled on your group, I mean the guy that had the shotgun.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what made him put it down?
Speaker 2: You mean in, in Memphis, Tennessee years earlier?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, in, in, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in Los Angeles [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 1: --in Los Angeles, when you were with Mayor [Tom] Bradley and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He just kept shooting.  He was--he didn't put the gun--
Speaker 1: He wasn't, he was just shooting (unclear).
Speaker 2: He was, he was mad that day.  That behavior, he had to express himself and let his steam off.  He just kept shooting that gun in the air.  We were just hoping he wouldn't shoot us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we got around him. We were able to get around him.
Speaker 1: Were you ever in any physical danger during the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One, just one other time.  After there was a small area where some shooting was going on and some burning and all I had was a press card and a microphone.  I told my boss, I said, "Please, don't think for a moment because I'm an African American that's going to stop me from getting shot."  I said, "A bullet has no conscience."  I said, "When, when a gun is fired, if I'm in the way I'm going to get hit.  It's a chance that I take.  I took the chance of doing this so I can cover the story."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so, so, that's like 1991, '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Which one is it?  I'm trying to think.
Speaker 2: The '92 [1992] riots.
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992].  Okay, '92 [1992].  Okay, all right.  That's good because I couldn't remember if it was '91 [1991] or '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], yeah.
Story_ID: 277060
Speaker 1: You continued as a reporter with Sheridan?
Speaker 2: I continued as a reporter for Sheridan Broadcasting Network and we changed the name to American Urban Radio Networks.  We, the bureau started to grow.  We started to get into more entertainment, Hollywood type stuff, films, television.  We started to grow.  The, we got a name for ourselves during this time.  Everybody knew American Urban Radio Networks.  There was no question about it.  We were invited to--I was one of the few African Americans, in fact, myself and Aldore Collier from Ebony, Jet magazines, for a number of years, he and I were the only two African American reporters at the Academy Awards [Oscars], for many, many years.  I think the last year when I, or this year when I attended the awards at which Jamie Foxx and Morgan Freeman got a, their award, Oscars, I think I saw a total of six African American reporters out of about three hundred.  But for many years myself and Aldore Collier--he'd be in the print section and I'd be in the radio section, "Aldore," "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington]," and we'd laugh with each other, "Another year."  But we covered--we were very fortunate that Hollywood opened up its doors to us.  I'd cover the Academy Awards, the Grammy Awards.
Speaker 1: What was your first Academy Awards that you covered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd say about maybe seventeen years ago.  It was fun.  We were at the Shrine Auditorium [Los Angeles, California].  I don't remember who won that year; I got to go look it up.  But to be at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awards, to feel the spirit that had been generated by their, their machine, to see, to be in touch with all the stars in Hollywood and the red carpet and the excitement, the limousines and the food and everything, it was a very nice experience.  I really enjoyed it, even to this, every year it gets better and better.
Story_ID: 277061
Speaker 1: Now we're going to backtrack a little bit to 1980, '85 [1985], I think that's when (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --to and it--where you reported the death of Marvin Gaye and how you got involved in the movement to remember Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I never will forget April 1st, 1984.  I was here in Los Angeles [California] working as a reporter for Sheridan Broadcasting Network [American Urban Radio Networks].  I was in town moving around with a gentleman by the name of [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock and a few other folks.  We were just in the company of, of [HistoryMaker] Congresswoman Maxine Waters.  We were just on a campaign.  She was not really a Congressperson then.  She was running for [U.S.] Congress.  And she was in a campaign.  And we were going around town pushing her name.  And when we heard--and she came and told us, "We got a report that Marvin Gaye had been shot."  And I was in this rally point, we were in a rally, and I walked up to the person and said, "Can I use the microphone for a second?"  And I got up in front of all these people and I said, "Ladies and gentlemen I've got some bad news for you.  We just got a report that legendary Motown singer Marvin Gaye has been shot by his father [Marvin Gay, Sr.] and he's dead."  And you just heard a, (sound) a swell in the entire room.  And of course, in the later days after that we were able to be--I was at the funeral itself.  Thanks to a guy named Bob Jones who was then the--a friend of Marvin and knew Motown.  They held a funeral for him.  It was a huge funeral.  I had never met Marvin Gaye.  That was the first time in my life I had ever seen Marvin Gaye.  He was lying in his casket, laid out very nicely.  It was a great funeral, a lot of people showed up.  Over ten thousand people showed up I understand, for just one day of viewing the body.  He was the prince of Motown.  He was loved.  His music was well known, well loved by a lot of people.  But to see him laying in that casket--I remember they brought Stevie Wonder up to the casket, and of course Stevie being blind, could not see what was happening.  And he took his hands and he dropped it over the--they said, "Stevie, you're standing in front of the casket."  He put his hands into the casket and coincidentally, he put his hands right over the first spot where Marvin Gaye was shot at.  And then he worked his hands up his face and he felt Marvin's face.  And he walked over to the keyboard and sat down and played a song that no one never took the time to record.  It was a tribute to Marvin Gaye, and the tears just rolled down his eyes.  I will never forget that.  [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson did the eulogy.  Richard--I'm sorry, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory gave the eulogy and spoke.  It was a lot of folks there.  The only people--everybody was looking for Michael Jackson and Diana Ross.  They didn't show up, but everybody else showed up.  They remembered Marvin Gaye.  Mr. Gordy [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was there.  I remember seeing Frankie Gaye coming into the event.  That was Marvin's brother, with his mother and his wife and their daughter, April [Gaye].  And now the only people who are, even at this time, are left alive, who even know--who were there when Marvin got shot is Irene Gaye and April Gaye, her daughter.  That was an event we will never ever forget.
Speaker 1: Now what did, at that time, what did Marvin Gaye mean to you, because you, you've been involved in an attempt to memorialize Marvin Gaye?
Speaker 2: What he meant to me was his music.  I mean, at that time when he was playing 'Got To Give It Up,' everybody was parting their feet.  As you would say, "Pat your feet to the beat."  And then, of course, he had his problems with IRS [Internal Revenue Service].  And he went overseas to Europe and Sweden and whatever.  And he came back, thanks to [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, he brought him back, and a song he produced called, 'Sexual Healing.'  And that's what made everybody--it went to number one on the charts, stayed there for a number of weeks.  It was Marvin Gaye.  People loved Marvin Gaye.  They missed him during all the time that he was out of the country, but when he came back, he came back with Marv- with 'Sexual Healing.'  And it was--it brought back a lot of memories.  Then he started a tour and people could get a chance to see him again.  And unfortunately he had an argument with his father on April 1st, 1984, and he got shot.
Story_ID: 277062
Speaker 1: Well, for a while you, you, you were involved in, as, as I said, an attempt, you know, the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How that happened was--how I got involved with Marvin Gaye, was again, I loved him as a singer.  But, in around 1988 thereabouts, a guy who I was working with at Stevie Wonder's radio station, here in Los Angeles [California], Carl Nelson, he was a member of the Marvin Gaye Foundation, Memorial Foundation [Marvin P. Gaye, Jr. Memorial Foundation].  And he invited me to a meeting.  He said, "Would you please come to a meeting?"  The meeting was held, coincidentally, in the home on Gramercy Place [Los Angeles, California] where Marvin Gaye was killed at.  And at that meeting I had a chance to meet Marvin Gaye's sister, Jeanne [Gaye], who was the executive director of the foundation.  She invited me to come and join their foundation.  And I made a suggestion to them.  I said, "Why don't we create a radio show as a documentary to Marvin Gaye?"  And the name of the radio show--I concocted it, was called, 'Marvin Gaye Pride and Joy.'  Now my idea was not only to just put his music in there, but to get, be able to, since I had a lot of contacts, get all the name people that I could get my hands on, like Stevie Wonder, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, Gladys Knight, Mary Wells.  So I had a chance to interview all these people, Dick Clark, a lot of people.  I had a chance to sit down and do an interview with them and talk to them and ask them a question.  I sat down with Smokey Robinson for two hours.  And I said one word to him, "Marvin Gaye."  He talked for two hours.  The only time he ever stopped was when I turned the tape over, but he was a good--he had a lot of things to say about Marvin Gaye; their friendship, the cocaine, the death, the reaction, all these things he talked about, how he first met Marvin, what Motown was like back in the old days, how Harvey Fuqua, all these guys, they were--had many things to say about Marvin Gaye.  I had took the program, we aired it nationwide on Sheridan Broadcasting Network [American Urban Radio Networks].  It was the first documentary on Marvin Gaye.  Later [HistoryMaker] Lee Bailey came back with another program called, 'Marvin Gaye We Miss You.'  But 'Marvin Gaye Pride and Joy' was the first radio documentary on Marvin Gaye.  Subsequently I've since produced a sequel to it, we call that, 'Marvin Gaye: The Prince of Motown.'  And right now we have a trequel on the, on the drawing board right now--as I got into Marvin Gaye (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are these programs the--they're basically, are just refinements of the first one.  Are they additional (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We just, we just do additional information, just done a different way.  On the sequel we just--like for example, I interviewed different people, but I--like Don King, Tyrese, Arsenio Hall, a number of different people who talked about Marvin Gaye, but we've just, presented it in a different way.  Now as a result of that, getting involved with Marvin Gaye, I just started to have fun with him and, and the, and the movement that he was involved in, the love of Marvin Gaye.  And I started to campaign for a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.  And after he had--their rule was that you have to be dead five years.  Now prior to him being shot, there were some people, who, who I understand had tried to get him a stamp, a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, but it just didn't happen.  Well, I started this campaign.  We put together a committee, a committee for a star for Marvin Gaye.  We waited the five years that you needed to wait because that's a rule that the, the committee has in place.  We started this campaign. We gathered almost 250,000 signatures.  I remember holding a press conference at the [Hollywood] Roosevelt Hotel [Los Angeles, California].  At that time I had acquired 25,000 signatures.  I held a press conference at the Roosevelt Hotel with Marvin Gaye's ex-wife, Jan Gaye and her two children, Nona [Gaye] and Bubby [Frankie Christian Gaye].  His brother Frankie [Gaye] was there.  [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks was there.  Holland-Dozier, the Holland Brothers, they were there, from the famous song where they (unclear) Holland-Dozier- Holland.  Bobby Womack was there.  We held this press conference.  We held up 25,000 signatures and we said to the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce, "We feel strongly that Marvin Gaye deserves a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.  And we went out and we got all of these signatures, worldwide, across--people came in and showed their support for Marvin Gaye."  And then maybe about a year later--I was standing at a ceremony for a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Janet Jackson.  And Johnny Grant who's the honorary mayor of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and is the chair of the Hollywood Walk of Fame committee, he stood up in front of the audience and said, "Ladies and gentlemen, we have an announcement we'd like to make."  He said, "The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce has decided to award a posthumous star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame to legendary Motown singer Marvin Gaye."  It was one of the happiest days of my life.  And about a couple of months later on September of 1989, they held a ceremony for Marvin Gaye.  I never will forget it.  It was the largest star ceremony they ever had.  KJLH [Los Angeles, California] was there, radio--K-EARTH 101 [KRTH, Los Angeles, California] was there, all these radio stations were there.  All these fans came out to say, "Hey Marvin, long overdue."  Stevie Wonder was there.  Lou Rawls was there.  Smokey Robinson, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy was there.  A lot of the Motown people came out for that star.  I must say that the star was sponsored by Gerald Busby, then president of Motown Records.  They put the money up.  It was five thousand dollars for a star at that time.  They put the money up.  I went to them early and asked them if they would support a star, which they did.  And we were able to get a star for Marvin Gaye.  It was a blessed event.  After the star ceremony, we had a party.  We had a great time.  We were--Hollywood was jamming that day.  Marvin Gaye, it was his day in Hollywood.  Now right now we're in the middle of a campaign to try to get him a postage stamp.  We've, we've been able to gather thousands of signatures and many letters of support worldwide.  I started a campaign to get him a stamp.  So we'll see how that works out.
Story_ID: 277063
Speaker 1: Why do you think Marvin Gaye is such a fascinating figure for people?  I mean he's, he was a great entertainer.  Even a lot of--there are a lot of entertainers that have postage stamps, so it's not that you have to be anything more than that.  But why do you think Marvin Gaye holds such fascination for people?
Speaker 2: I think it's his music, his style, the way he presented it.  He was Marvin Gaye.  I mean, this guy could write music.  Remember he was a historic person and some of the things he did with music, the phrasing, the double use of your voice on, on, on records.  He started all that.  He did all of that.  He was a great artist.  He was a visionary.  And when he did the album, 'What's Going On,' his music is just as topical today as it was twenty, twenty-five years ago.  He was a leader in music.  He knew what people enjoyed.  His music came from his heart, his mind and his skill.  And he presented it in a way that people loved Marvin Pentz Gaye, they loved him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything else you want to say about the Marvin Gaye (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right now, with Marvin Gaye, like I said, we're waiting on the approval of a stamp for Marvin Gaye.  I've got some other plans on the back burner that I'd like to do with Marvin Gaye, in the way of scholarships in his name, other things we'd like to do with Marvin Gaye.  We want to keep his name, his memory, his music alive.  I had the pleasure of knowing his brother, Frankie [Gaye].  Frankie, his brother, passed away two years ago.  I was at his funeral.  Frankie and I, we'd get together, we'd sit down, we'd talk about Marvin.  A story he told me, and I'd like to share that story with you, Marvin and Frankie growing up in Washington, D.C., their father [Marvin Gay, Sr.] was a preacher.  They lived in--under a very strict rule in his house.  And the mother one day, Mrs. [Alberta Cooper] Gay, she cooked a bunch of chicken and the smell just--Frankie, he told me this, he said, "The smell just permeated the entire house."  He said--and they knew that they had to cook the chicken on Saturday because the next day was a church day.  They couldn't cook on Sunday.  And as that smell came through the house, Marvin said, "I got to have a piece of that chicken.  I just got to have a piece of that chicken."  And Frankie reminded him, "You can't touch that chicken, because you know if you touch that chicken, you're going to get into some very serious trouble."  Well, later that night, with the smell still in the house, Marvin crept downstairs to the kitchen and stole two pieces of chicken and he ate one piece of chicken real fast.  Frankie was laying--they shared a bedroom together, Frankie was sleeping, he found this out later, but, right in the middle of eating this chicken, Marvin realized he's going to get into some serious trouble, so he said, "How am I going to get out of this trouble?"  Well, the best way he could get out was to take the chicken and while his brother was sleeping, he rubbed the chicken right across his brother's mouth, so that his mother would realize that the smell of chicken was on his brother--he's just as guilty.  And Marvin ate the rest of the chicken.  Well, the next day Mr. Gay woke up and found the chicken was missing.  And he came in the room and he smelled Frankie and could smell chicken on him.  And he beat Frankie and Frankie knew he didn't do it.  He told Marvin, "You're wrong, you know you did this."  And later Frankie went--Marvin went back and told his parents that it was he that took the chicken and not Frankie.  That's a story that Frankie Gaye told me.
Speaker 1: That's a--Frankie took a, (laughter) took a (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Took a, a butt butt beating for his brother.
Story_ID: 277064
Speaker 1: Okay, now we have you in the, in the early '90s [1990s], now.  You--we were just talking about covering the riots and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and, well, what happened after that.
Speaker 2: After the riots, we moved--we went to--we came through the riots, again, covering stories.  We had the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].  I covered both trials, both the--first, the murder trial that Johnnie Cochran was able to preside over and get him out of that one.  We also covered the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was ninety, ninety--
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993], '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '93 [1993], I guess, when it first goes down, '93 [1993], '94 [1994] [sic. 1995].
Speaker 2: And we--I covered the O.J. Simpson civil trial.  I had the chance to meet O.J. Simpson.  And I met him, coincidentally, because where I get my haircut at, his barber is my barber.  The lady, her name is (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was before?
Speaker 2: I met him after the trial, about--after he had gotten through both trials.  I went to--one day I was in the barbershop and he came in.  My barber, she seemed to have celebrities come to her.  She use to cut the hair of Ray Charles, O.J. Simpson, a number of prominent celebrities, she would cut their hair. Johnnie Cochran, yes, Johnnie Cochran was also one of her clients.  And I remember one day, O.J. came in and I walked up to him and identified myself.  I said, "Hi O.J."  I said, "My name is Ron Brewington [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], I'm a reporter."  And I said, "I covered both of your trials."  I said, "I just want to say something to you."  I said, "It's a thought that I have, and it's the way I feel.  I'm going to share it with you."  I said, "To me, if you did it, if you did it, three things come to my mind.  Number one, you have to live with yourself.  You've got to look yourself in the face everyday.  Number two, if you did it, you have to look at your children and you have to say--and they'll say to you, 'Dad, did you kill my mother?'  And number three, you're accountable to the Man upstairs."  And he just looked at me, because I, among other people, we don't think he did it, but only God knows who did it, and the people who were there, they know.
Speaker 1: So he, he didn't say anything?
Speaker 2: He didn't say anything.  He gave no response.  He just looked at me.  He said, "Okay."  That's all he said.
Speaker 1: Did--now, after covering the trial, what, what did you, what's your opinion?  (Unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think he did it.  I think he knows who might have done it.  I think there was a lot of some thought that perhaps she was involved in drugs and didn't pay her bill and they wanted--they killed her to set an example.  I, I kind of have a tendency to lean that way.  But I don't think he did it because again, to kill two people, as to move that fast, he had--his legs were in bad shape, his knees were in bad shape from football injuries.  He couldn't have possibly done it.  I mean, for me, it seems strange to me that one person would stand there and watch another person get killed and not scream, yell, or do anything.  I, it strike--and that's a scenario the police presented.  But they wanted to get him and they tried their best to get him.  And thanks to Johnnie Cochran and other legal people he was able to get pass that in his life.  He lost, he lost the civil trial.  He lost it for a reason.  He did it to himself, I believe.  When asked, "Mr. Simpson, did at any time did you ever hit, strike, or touch Nicole Brown Simpson", he said, "no."  He know he had done that.  It's on record; he knew it, why lie about it?  If I'm a juror and I'm hearing you lie about it, well, if you lied about that, you'll lie about everything else, you're guilty.  He did it to himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He since have been force-, I won't say f- I wouldn't use the word forced, but he doesn't live here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] anymore.  He lives in Florida.  He came here recently, we saw O.J.  The last time we saw O.J. here in Los Angeles, was for the Johnnie Cochran funeral.  He came in for that.  He's now back in Florida.
Story_ID: 277065
Speaker 1: As a black journalist covering the news in the black community and, and in these, and especially in these sensational cases like the, the urban unrest in Los Angeles [California], and the O.J. Simpson trial, do you--how, how do you, do you think that you have to go deeper than the regular media does to get the story for the black community, or is it a different way that, that you have to spin it for us?
Speaker 2: We try to put the same spin on it, if you will, as any other journalist.  We're just trying to get information.  Under the First Amendment we're trying to just get information we can give to our audience.  We use the same methods that anybody else uses.  We call, make, make phone calls, talk to people, investigate, research, again, that's the basic tenant of a journalist, is to research, the ability to research and extract information and be able to present it to your audience.  We understand that there are laws involved in various cities and states.  You might get information and you might be called into court.  And a judge may say, "Well, how did you get that information?"  You might have to, you know, sometimes there've been a number of journalists who have gone to jail for contempt of court because they wouldn't reveal their sources.  But, in the black community, here in Los Angeles, we've got a number of black publications.  I've worked for one, The LA Watts Time.  I use to-Times.  I use to do a Hollywood column for them.  Not necessarily gossip, but information that we got about various segments of what was going on in the community.  The community is a sponge.  They want to know what's going on.  They want the truth.  They don't want to be lied to.  They want the truth to the best of their knowledge.  And that's what I get paid for, is to get information.
Speaker 1: Are you ever surprised when you--about what you read in the major media.  I mean, does, does it ever not match up with what you know from the black community?
Speaker 2: Sometimes it does.  And I have gone through a situation where I've had to correct some white media because they didn't get--their information was incorrect.  They spelled someone's name wrong.  They gave wrong information about somebody.  And I've called many a white reporter and said, "Hey, where did you get that information from?"  "You got the wrong information."  "You need to go to this source."  "Go here, or go there."  And I will, I'll get in their case in a minute.  I remember one time they had Bobby Brown--they mentioned Bobby Brown and showed Ja Rule.  I said, "I know we all look alike, but that's not Bobby Brown.  That's Ja Rule."  You know, they will call Minister Tony Farrakhan, Reverend Farrakhan.  I say, "No, that's [HistoryMaker] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan," little things like that.  I correct them on things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But getting information to them, sometimes I will share information.  I've been able to have--negotiate and establish and maintain some very good contacts among journalists of all ethic backgrounds, Koreans, Hispanic, black, white.  We're all out there hitting, hitting the streets everyday, trying to do something.  It's competitive, very competitive.  Right now I'm in the period of my life right now, where I'm making a transition from being a journalist, to being an educator.  I teach broadcasting and journalism at two local community colleges here in Los Angeles.  That's what I want to do now, is, I, as my life starts to wind down, I want to share my knowledge and education with other people.
Story_ID: 277066
Speaker 1: So how long were you, are, are you still reporting? You're not still reporting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm still reporting.
Speaker 1: You're still reporting?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I report--I'm a Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] correspondent for Radio 1 XM.  I work on the Bernie McCain show.  I use to work on the Joe Madison show.  Now I'm with the Bernie McCain show.  And I report what's going on as far as news in Hollywood, black Hollywood, the awards shows.  We give commentary.  We talk about different issues, things that are happening.  What's going on behind the scenes, what's happening, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What's--is, is there any one story or, or an incident, that's, that's most memorable or the most important one you've ever (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gosh, that's a good question.  Had a lot of instances--stories that I reported on.  I would say the one that really stands out in my mind is the O.J. Simpson trial.  And those two trials and what happened there.  A lot of people became famous as a result of O.J. Simpson.  Star Jones--nobody had never heard of Star Jones until O.J. Simpson.  A lot of lawyers, you know, we never heard of them until the O.J. Simpson trial.  So it was a lot of fun.  It was--I can remember when Camp O.J. was downtown, when all the satellite trucks were all gathered in a circle, like wagons around the subject matter.  There's a door at the Santa Monica [California] courthouse, I, every time I pass that door I look at it and say, "You see that door over there, that's a famous door.  O.J. Simpson came out that door at the end of the trial everyday."  But it was--that was a lot of fun, the O.J. Simpson trial.  I've had an opportunity because of movie junkets to interview virtually hundreds of well-known persons.  I have a little, I have a little thing that I do, it's a little, it's a little trademark of mine.  What I, what I do is, I walk around with a silver dollar, a little silver dollar like this, an [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower silver dollar, and I give it to people.  I've given--last year I gave away about 7500 of these little guys.  I give it to people like Russell Crowe, Halle Barry.  This year I gave one to Morgan Freeman.  I told Morgan at the SAG Awards [Screen Actors Guild Awards], I said, "Morgan, turn this silver into gold, my brother."  And the night he won the Academy Award [Oscar], I was standing right there with a big old silver dollar and I gave it to him.  And he was standing up there in front of the world media holding this dollar and someone asked him about it, "Is that a lucky charm in your hand?"  He said, "No this guy I know, he always gives me silver dollars."  He said, "But, it's just what I call something to do."  It's a fun thing.  Jamie Foxx, I gave him one.  I've given Denzel Washington--I, I get to know people that way.  Some people--one person who I will never forget, is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Ossie Davis.  I had an opportunity to sit down with Ossie Davis and talk to Mr. Davis and unfortunately he passed away.  He was a memorable gentleman.  He was a--he and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, every time I'd see them, I'd always give them a silver dollar.  And one day we were in New York sitting with [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.], the renowned stage man and producer, director, and I walked up to Mr. Davis and he looked at me, because he sees people all the time, and he, "Hey, how you doing?"  And I handed him a silver dollar, "Oh, yes", they never forget you.  It's what I call STD, something to do.  It's just something--it's a trademark.
Speaker 1: Okay, keeps them in your memory (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, because again, as a journalist, you have to have--they have to know you.  And they see, celebrities sees a lot of journalists all the time.  Recently I gave one to Jane Fonda.  She's got a new movie coming out called, 'Monster-In-Law,' comes out next week.  And I had--and Jane Fonda of course, recently you know, she's on a book tour right now.  And a veteran walked up to her the other day and spit in her face, a Vietnam [War] veteran.  She didn't put any charges against him, but she's--a lot them, there's a lot of them hate a lot of people because of what she did with the North Vietnamese.  But, she's got this new movie coming out next week with Jennifer Lopez, called 'Monster-In-Law.'  But the real star of the movie is Wanda Sykes.  So go see the movie.  She really brings out the movie, yeah.
Story_ID: 277067
Speaker 1: I know you're involved in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prostate cancer.
Speaker 1: --yeah, prostate cancer--the, the events in the Sudan.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, with Joe Madison.
Speaker 1: --with quite, quite a few, yeah, quite (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joe Madison of the Black Eagle in Washington, D.C., he is a civil rights activist.  He was involved in the process where he's trying to help in the, the situation over there in Sudan.  And I suggested to him, I said, "Hollywood would like very much to--," they always look for causes.  I said, "I think you should get Hollywood involved in what, what you're doing here."  And so I was his man here in Hollywood, making contacts with people trying to get attention to the plight of the Sudan, Sudanese situation.  Unfortunately, another event happened that kind of overshadowed that, called Iraq.  And since, since then we kind of--things are happening in Sudan right now.  They're doing other things in Sudan right now.
Speaker 1: And Darfur [Sudan], the extermination of people.
Speaker 2: (Coughing) Excuse me.  Yes, it's a tragic situation over there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The story that we tell is that a young boy and his sister were walking down the road one day in Sudan and the Muslims captured them, they, they were Christians.  The Muslims captured them and they raped--they made the brother and sister rape each other.  And then they raped the sister.  And they killed both of them.  And this goes on, on a daily basis.  But when you hear Joe Madison, when he sits and tells you--he's been to Sudan.  I was supposed to go, but I didn't go, yet.  The situation in Sudan is terrible.  We in America, we live in a different world; we don't understand what that world is about.  But it's really tragic.  It's about oil, believe it or not, money, that's the major situation over there--oil.  Like we're fighting in Iraq for oil.
Story_ID: 277068
Speaker 1: Six years ago, I was diagnosed with prostate cancer.  I had a radical prostatectomy.  I had my prostate removed.  It changed my entire life.  As a result of that, I've been involved with a group here in Los Angeles [California] called the Real Men Cook Foundation.  [HistoryMaker] Dr. Fred Parrott, M.D. is our founder and president.  He, himself, is an obstetrician-gynecologist, but he's also a prostate cancer survivor.  And the two of us just met.  We both have a dream.  We'd like to spend as much time as it takes until I guess, the day we die, talking to men, especially African American men about prostate cancer.  Unfortunately, for me, a year and a half after I had my surgery to remove my prostate, the cancer came back again and I had to undergo radiation therapy.  So I'm a double prostate cancer survivor.  I go around town to churches and various places here in Los Angeles and I go any place, and I'll always ask a brother, "Hey, how's your prostate?"  If you're over forty years old, if I see a little gray in your beard or your hair, I'm going to ask you, "Hey brother, how's your prostate?"  I like to ask women that too, "How's your prostate?"  They give me one or two answers.  Some women tell me, "I ain't got one."  I say, "I ain't got one either."  Or men--or ladies will say, "I have one."  I say, "Well, if you have one, I can be your agent, and we can make some money together." Because of course, women don't have a prostate.  But seriously, prostate cancer is the number one killer of African American men.  Seven out of ten men will get prostate cancer.  Four of those seven men are African American men.  And its, it's a very sensitive subject.  There's a lot of urban legends, a lot of ignorance in the community about prostate cancer.  Most men have no clue: a) what a prostate is, or they call it prostrate; b) where is it at in your body; c) what's the function of the prostate.  We conduct an educational forum and screenings with the Real Men Cook here in town.  Last week we just had a screening, over five hundred men, black and brown came together to be screened for prostate cancer.  We urge men to be screened every year for prostate cancer.  It's nothing more than a small blood test called a PSA [prostate-specific antigen].  And yeah, there's a digital rectal examination.  Someone's going to insert their finger in your rectum.  A lot of guys have problems with that.  Well, what I tell them is, "Hey my brother look here, I'd rather have somebody put their finger in my behind, than somebody throw dirt in my face."  Prostate cancer is a very severe disease.  But it can be, there is a secret to success for prostate cancer.  It's called early detection.  If you catch it early you have a 97 percent chance of living.  And it's just a simple test.  Most African American men do not like to have physicals.  They don't want anybody touching them, "Don't touch me, leave me alone.  Don't put your hands on me."  Well, I'll tell you this brother, "When you're sitting in a morgue or a funeral home, they're going to put their hands on you, and ain't a damn thing you can do about it.  Stay ahead of the game.  See a doctor."
Story_ID: 277069
Speaker 1: Start with asking you about this show, 'Minute by Minute.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You have a, this, this is a radio show?
Speaker 2: This is a weekly, a bi-weekly TV show (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) TV show --
Speaker 2: --that I host here in Los Angeles [California] on Comcast called 'Minute by Minute.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We go into the community and bring people in and talk to them about events in the community, and we, its seen on Comcast in Los Angeles and it's bicycled around the entire city.  It's a fun program; I have a lot of fun doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I know you probably do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about, well, who, who's been on your show?
Speaker 2: Oh, we've had the Tuskegee Airmen.  I have had Michael Jockway, Jr. [ph.], who's a prominent playwright.  I've had a lot of normal people.  I don't get necessarily--I don't need to go for the celebrities, if I get a celebrity, good and fine, but I'd prefer not to put celebrities on.  I prefer to put on the little guy, let people see what other little guys are doing, because that's, it gives them guidance; it gives them something to reach for.  If you put celebrities, celebrities get enough publicity.  Sometimes I think they get too much.  To me a star is rats spelled backwards.  Sometimes I think they get a little bit too much publicity.  Give the little guy some publicity.  And that's what I look for, people who are just everyday, average people and give them an opportunity to get a little exposure.  That's what all we do.
Story_ID: 277070
Speaker 1: Of course who doesn't know about the Tuskegee Airmen?  One day I was at a meeting and I met a fella who was a member, he's an original Tuskegee Airmen, and he invited me to come to their meeting.  They meet the third Friday of every month here in Los Angeles [California], the chapter [of Tuskegee Airmen Inc.] does.  And I went to the meeting and I walked into this room of these fellas.  These what I call old geezers.  And I was just immediately taken back with the historical value of who these guys are.  What they went through to make it possible for their children and their children's children to do what they do.  They are the Tuskegee Airmen.  When you listen to the stories that they tell, and what they went through, it really chocks you up.  And so I joined the chapter, seventy-five dollars a year to join.  I said, "That's not so hard to do."  But you are also around some historical people, and you could hear their stories.  And they're doing right now, what you're doing right now.  They're documenting their history right now.  And, and, while they were doing this I had an opportunity to meet one gentlemen in particular, of all the members of our chapter who really catches my attention.  His name is [Lieutenant Roger] "Bill" Terry.  I believe in 1944 [sic. 1945] when the Tuskegee Airmen were here in America at, at Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Seymour, Indiana], an [U.S.] Army base, they were prevented from going into the officers club even though they were officers.  They were not recognized by the U.S. Army as officers and were not allowed to go into the officers club.  Well, a hundred of them put their Class A uniforms on and they walked to the officers club.  At that time the base commander surrounded them with armed guards and, and, and forced them to go back to their quarters.  They were confined to their quarters.  Three of them were court marshaled.  One of them was convicted.  That person is Bill Terry, who's a member of my chapter.  And everyday, every time I get a chance to see Bill Terry, I always look in his eyes and listen to what he has to say, as he recounts the stories that he had to go through, what he and a lot of other men went through.  As a result, we're now in the process of trying--we're waging a campaign and we're about to jump off on a campaign to give a United States commemorative postage stamp for those men.  They're up in their eighties, that why I call them the Old Geezers because they are up in their eighties, they are dying like flies.  Nationally, we normally will lose on the average of about four to five a month.  There are only about one hundred fifty original Tuskegee Airmen still alive.  They're all up in their eighties.  These men need to be recognized and given the glory that they deserve for what they did.
Speaker 2: Okay, and they, what did they do is two-fold, not just the military exploits, but also changing the, the, the culture in the, in the Army.
Speaker 1: In the Army, exactly, the integration (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The integration in the rest of the nation, the integration (unclear).
Speaker 1: --which President [Harry S.] Truman would change for them.  Also, as you know, their names were, they use to call them the Red Tails.  When they were over in Europe they never lost a bomber.  No other organization, military organization has ever done that.
Speaker 2: And they were bomber escorts.
Speaker 1: Bomber escorts, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bomber escorts over Italy.
Speaker 1: --over Italy.  They never lost one bomber.  But these men deserve recognition.  There's some, right now a couple of resolutions in process right now for them to get a Congressional Gold Medal.  We sure hope that happens.
Story_ID: 277071
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, now, what else do you do on the civic front, because you're, you're really busy?
Speaker 2: Go to church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a Mason [Freemason]--go to school.  I teach school.  I teach; I'm an adjunct professor at a couple of community colleges here in Los Angeles [California], Santa Monica College [Santa Monica, California] and West LA College [West Los Angeles College, Culver City, California].  I teach broadcasting and journalism, that's, that's, that's enough.  That keeps me busy.
Speaker 1: And of course you are a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].
Speaker 2: No, I'm not a member.
Speaker 1: You're not?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not a member.  I'll, I'll tell you off camera why I'm not a member (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right, but you're sure you don't want to tell me on camera, or no?
Speaker 2: You want to hear this?  You want to hear this, okay.  The reason I'm not a member of the NABJ, I was a member of the--we use to have a BJ [black journalists] organization here in Los Angeles, chapter, the L.A. chapter.  I just didn't like the attitude.  The attitude was--from the young people especially, especially when you've got people who are still in college, or some on their first job, they have an attitude.  Their attitude, they don't understand that a lot of us opened the doors for you to get your job.  They come out with a piece, my degree.  Where is my job?  Well, wait a minute, you need to pay your dues first, especially in a major market like L.A.  You can't just jump into this market and think you're going to get a job.  It doesn't happen that way.  You've got to stick around for a little bit, get a little experience.  It's just the overall attitude of some of the members that I just don't care to deal with.  I just leave them alone.  I know who they are; I recognize them, but I just kind of stay away from them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Just my own personal thing.
Speaker 1: Are, are you a member of any of the black journalists groups?
Speaker 2: I was a member of, of a group that [HistoryMaker] Paul [Brock] and I, he use to be our president of a group called Beepers.  I'm one of the charter members along with Paul, a group called Beepers, Black Public Relations Society of Southern California.  I remember when I was in the [U.S.] Navy and my last duty station, I was the public affairs officer at the Long Beach Naval Station [Naval Station Long Beach, Los Angeles County, California]; and a group of people, including Paul, got together and put this group together of black public relations practitioners.  And we would meet once a month at Golden State Mutual [Life Insurance Building, Los Angeles, California] and we would discuss events.  That was, it was a great networking opportunity.  It was a good educational opportunity for us, had a great time.  I met some great folks that had Pat Totum [ph.], Paul Brock, a number of people I met over the years, um-hm.
Story_ID: 277072
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope and concern for the African American community today is that we stop what we're doing and come together.  We need to come together, we really do.  I look at other ethic groups, Hispanics, Jews, they come together, they work together.  They don't fight each other.  A Jewish couple, two businessmen, they might not like each other, but when its business, business is business.  We put our personal feelings to the side, we progress.  For some odd reason we're not progressing in my opinion, the way we should be progressing.  I see too many educational opportunities wasted.  I see, when I go through Washington, D.C. and I see literally hundreds of young black men standing on the corner with nothing to do, whose fault is that?  It's their fault, some of it.  Yeah, the system is hard, so you, you learn the system and deal with the system.  But I feel we're not doing enough.  Some of these so-called leaders we got, we need to sit down and take a look at who are our leaders, and what are we doing?  Where are we going?  As Bobby Womack say, "Where do we go from here?"  Where are we going?  We know where we came from.  We got too much confusion, relationships between black men and black women; we don't talk to each other.  We got too many single families.  We got too much AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  We got too much of this, too much of that.  We need to come together, that's my feeling about that.
Story_ID: 277073
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done up to this point, is there a major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think, I just been, I owe, anything that I have and have done, I owe first of all God, my Lord and Savior.  He, he opened that he gave me life, and then I thank my mother [Mosetta Smalls].  And I thank a lot of good people who I--like [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock, and a whole lot of other folks who have opened doors for me, given me an opportunity, said, "Hey let's take a chance with [HistoryMaker Ronald H.] Brewington."  They had other people they could have went for, but they said, "Let's give Brewington a chance," and I appreciate that, and I owe them.  And I thank them from the bottom of my heart for what they have done for me, because without them I ain't nothing, I'm just one person.
Story_ID: 277074
Speaker 1: When you, also I guess, when you look back at everything you've done up to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Prostate cancer--I've, that, for that I want to be remembered for, helping brothers take a shot at prostate cancer and, and getting, getting an education about it, and learning about it, and living with your life, understanding that even if you do get prostate cancer, even if you do get it, and a lot of men will get it, there's a life after prostate cancer.  There's a sex life after prostate cancer.  When you look at Hollywood, Hollywood I feel has a lot to do with the ignorance of this country today.  Two words come out of Hollywood: sex and violence.  We buy into that, everything is sexy pants, sexy shirt, sexy clothes, sexy, sexy, sexy, sexy. God gave us sex for one reason; reproduction of species, pleasure was second. We've done a one-eighty on it.  And we don't need, we, we need to understand that there's more to life than sex.  When I talk to brothers who don't understand what erectile dysfunction is, I say, "My brothers, women have the change of life, men have erectile dysfunction.  One day 'Johnson' is not going to work no more, so what you going to do then?  For all you studs running around here, what are you going to do then?"  But unfortunately, it's a part of our culture.  You know, when we were kids coming up--nowadays I look at some of the role models--when we were kids coming up, it was a, if you were a ladies man, hey, you were, you were top dog.  But nowadays look at some of the, the, the, the images that we have, the hip-hoppers, the rappers, the street life, wrong.  We need to change that.  A lot of us feel very strongly that hip-hop music did a great disservice to our race of people.  Oh yeah, people making money off it.  They, you got these little brothers making a lot of money, but hey, look at the, look at the, look at the younger kids, they have no education; they don't want to go to school. They come to school with an attitude, you can't tell them nothing.  We have a lot of problems in our community.  We need to solve these problems.  And one of those problems we need to start with is learning how to communicate with each other.
Story_ID: 277075
Speaker 1: Now you were recently, I think it was back in November; you were at the Vibe Awards when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --the fight broke out--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and what, tell us about that.  I mean, this is, you're not of the hip-hop generation, but as somebody who covers entertainment, you're often in situations where now the entertainers are hip-hoppers and, and I've been told by people in the hip-hop generation, which I'm not in either, that there's a difference between hip-hop and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And rap.
Speaker 1: --gangster rap.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you appreciate those distinctions and, and what did you make of that event, that violence at the Vibe Awards.
Speaker 2: I thought it was terrible.  I was there as a member of the press.  The gentleman [David Darnell Brown; Young Buck] who did the stabbing, I can't think of his name at the moment, I remember interviewing him.  He came up to us and I remember as he was talking he threw his head back, and I could look up in his nose and I could see white particles in his nose.  And this is the gentleman who stabbed the victim [Jimmy James Johnson] at the Vibe Awards.  I felt so sorry that night for one man, if nobody else, for [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  That whole event was about Quincy Jones.  He has put his name, his good name, his reputation to make that award show.  All fellas had to do was come in there, sit down, have a little drink, have a little fun and walk home with an award show.  An individual, I think we all know, Suge Knight was there, should not have been there.  There was a law against him, said he shouldn't have been there.  They are investigating that right now.  This fight breaks out. We're back stage in, in the media, we didn't, we were not inside the actual venue.  We're looking at the monitor.  You could see chairs flying, people throwing fists.  It was, it was a terrible thing.  It was a, really made you very ashamed to be there.  And I remember specifically at the--later after everything cooled down, and they were bringing more celebrities back stage, I was standing next to [HistoryMaker] Lee Bailey and we were at and Lee asked a question of one of the celebrity voice persons that came back stage.  He asked him, he said, "Would you please tell us what happened?"  And a publicist immediately, "Oh, no, no, no, we can't talk about that."  And, and I spoke up, I said, "First Amendment, we know what happened.  He has the right to ask that question."  She wanted to take the microphone; in fact, she did take the microphone out of his hand.  And I said, "You're wrong, what you're doing."
Speaker 1: I think that was Common that you all were talking to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --I believe at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lee Bailey and I, I never will forget that.
Story_ID: 277076
Speaker 1: Another incident I remember was, I have a friend, a guy named Dick Clark, I call him Richard Clark, I like that guy.  He's helping me right now.  I've worked with him and I've worked with him for a long, long time.  And at this year's American Music Awards, a guy by the name of Kanye West came out there, I was sitting in the pressroom, press tent, which was a tent outside the Shrine Auditorium [Los Angeles, California], and I had to go to the bathroom, so I got up and went to the bathroom.  When I came back there's Kanye West with his entourage leaving, and a friend of mine, George Pennacchio, who's a television reporter on Channel 7 [ABC 7], I said, "What was he taking about?"  He said, "Oh, he's mad at Dick Clark, he's mad."  I said, "Mad about what?"  "He thought he should have won, and he didn't win."  And he said that, "I ain't coming back to this damn show no more."  I said, "Well he better be glad that I wasn't sitting here when he said that, because I would have quickly reminded him, Mr. Kanye West, let me explain something to you.  A year ago nobody never heard of you, but Dick Clark allowed you to perform, not once, but twice on his show.  He's giving you national publicity, and you're going to dog him and dog his show."  I said, "Do you know who Dick Clark is, how many doors he's opened up for black artists?"  He made a lot of money, but he opened up a lot of doors for black artists.  Do your homework friend, you won't say that about Dick Clark."  Unfortunately Dick Clark had a couple of strokes.  He's not doing well right now; the world's oldest teenager, we're going to miss him when his time comes.  But he's helping me right now.  We're trying to get a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Jackie Wilson, who Dick Clark is in the process of also doing a biopic, on Jackie Wilson, so.
Story_ID: 277077
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your family.  We haven't asked you about your family, but do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have, I've had eight children, yes.  I've been married three times.  I have had eight children.  Four of my children are dead and four living.  My oldest son is Ron Brewington, Jr., he's a disc jockey out, on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, goes under the name of--excuse me (coughing), he's a disc jockey on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, goes under the name of Ron Banks.  I said, "Oh, Ron Banks of the Dramatics, okay, you're going to take that name, great."  He's doing very well in that, that, that field right now.  I have a daughter [Sebrina Brewington Roberson], a twenty-eight year old daughter, she just came out of nursing school, I'm so proud of her.  She has three kids.  I said, "That's all right, go, go to school, get an education", and she did.  She said, "Well, my husband wants to have a fourth child."  I said, "Later with that, go get, get an education girl", she did.  She's a nurse now.  And then I have two kids [Tyler Brewington and Jordan Brewington] here in Los Angeles [Californai].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Man, you've asked me everything but the kitchen sink.  You're an excellent interviewer.
Story_ID: 277078
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One of his kids goes to school with the governor's--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, one of my children, Tyler [Brewington], use to go to school with Arnold Schwarzenegger's daughter and, at, at a private school here in Los Angeles [California].  Their mother, my third wife, is an obstetrician, a gynecologist here at Kaiser Permanente in Los Angeles.  So, we, we're we are able to put my children in a private school.  And governor (unclear), he wasn't a governor when I first met him.  He, it was always just Arnold, and I would see him and Maria Shriver.  And my daughters have been to his house and spent the night there and spent the weekend there and what not, nice folks.  I'm glad he's the governor of our state.  He's got a heck of a job.  Unfortunately, I was reading yesterday in the newspapers, ratings are going down because everybody thought he was the people's governor.  He made a statement last week that pissed off a lot of people.  Did you hear about that?
Speaker 1: No, no what did he say?
Speaker 2: He said, "Close the border."  He said, "Close the border."  And when he said that--what he said is what a lot of politicians want to say, but won't say because they know if they say it, they will lose their position.  We have a strong Hispanic population here in Los Angeles, which is good and fine, but we have a lot of illegals here.  And that's overrunning our medical system, our police department, everything, all of the services, county services, city services are totally overrun right now.  We need--right now we also have a bad situation in that we're having riots and, not riots, but fights among young black and brown students in high schools.  We've had two incidents already (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I've heard.
Speaker 2: --and incidents in, in the jail, black and brown fighting each other, not good, people are upset.  They are frustrated about it.  It's all about economics, money.  So, I hope that works out.
Story_ID: 277079
Speaker 1: Our, our last question (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes sir.
Speaker 1: --similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a guy who handed out these silver dollars, but had a lot of fun while he was doing it, met some nice people along the way, got some breaks and just gave some, tried to give some of it back.
Story_ID: 277080
Speaker 1: That's a mug shot of a knucklehead named Ron Brewington [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], seriously, that's a picture that we took.  I should have smiled on that picture.  I don't know why I wasn't smiling on that picture, but I should have, but it's just one of those handouts, shots, photos that I give to people.
Speaker 2: That was a picture taken about nineteen, oh, I'd say in the, in the '70s [1970s], '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s] by a dear friend of mine, Askia Muhammad, took that picture and wrote a, an accompanying article about a set of twins, black twins in broadcasting, we're both in broadcasting.  That's me on the left and that's [HistoryMaker] Rudolph Brewington on the right.  We were standing in a studio in Washington, D.C. and he--KABC there, or WABC, rather, and he took a picture of us and wrote a story about two guys trying to make it in broadcasting, a set of twins.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: What you're looking at is a program of the recent ceremony of my mother's funeral.  She passed away.  You see on the left hand side there a picture of my mother [Mosetta Smalls] taken probably when I, my brother and I were about six months old.  That's my father, William Brewington, on the right there.  The one, I'm the one, just so you know, I'm the one on the left and Rudy's the one on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me taken when I was in the United States Navy.  That picture is circa 1968.  I was in the Navy stationed at Andrews Air Force Base [Joint Base Andrews] in Washington, D.C.  And that was a picture that they took of me, and I gave that picture to my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my twin brother, my best friend, Rudolph Brewington, a commander in the United States Navy.  He's a public affairs officer.  He's been in the Navy now for over twenty-seven years.  He enjoys what he does.  He's currently based in Washington, D.C., at the Washington Navy Yard.  He's a public affairs officer on a website at the Navy he's got, called Navy Life, or Life Lines, is the name of the publication.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of me in my high school yearbook, 1964, Aviation High School [Aviation Career and Technical Education High School], New York City, New York [New York].
