Story_ID: 269534
Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins, playwright, educator, activist.  The interview is being conducted at his home, 37 Vine Street in Boston, Massachusetts, and it is April 21, 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Good morning, mister--Mr. HistoryMaker.  Would you--
Speaker 2: Good morning, Mr. Hayden.
Speaker 1: Would you--would you state your full name for me and would you spell your name?
Speaker 2: Edward Artie Bullins, E-D-W-A-R-D, A-R-T-I-E, B-U-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And, and what year were you born and where were you born, Mr. Bullins?
Speaker 2: July 2 in the Philadelphia General Hospital [West Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that no longer exists.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: Oh, 1935.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-five [1935]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your profession, your occupation?  How do you define yourself?
Speaker 2: Playwright.
Speaker 1: Playwright, okay.  You've been here in Boston how many years?  For the first--
Speaker 2: On a residential basis for ten years.
Speaker 1: Would you tell me the positions that you hold here in Boston and the affiliations, your positions and your affiliations, your titles currently?
Speaker 2: Well, currently I'm distinguished artist-in-residence at Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts].  Prior to that, I was a professor based in the theater department at Northeastern University.  Other titles, well, I'm a consortium member of the ACT Roxbury group [ACT Roxbury Consortium] in, in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], which is a section of Boston, the black section.  And ACT Roxbury stands for Arts, Culture, and Trade, and it's a--it's an arts organization grounded in economic development.
Story_ID: 269535
Speaker 1: Before we go on with the interview, we like to have a few warm-up questions, People magazine type questions that would give the people who look at your interview over the years a certain slant on your--on your personality.  And the first question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood, I guess.
Speaker 1: Seafood, okay.  And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. That's--I guess that's part of my peculiarity.  Being from Pennsylvania, which has seasons that--there's something about the winter as, as well as the other seasons that appeals to me, so I get tired of the cold and the snow, too, but still it's--that time of year there's a lot of pleasure, bringing a lot of pleasure.  I lived about a third of my life in California and the seasons hardly changed and I think that was why I had to finally leave California, one of the--one of the reasons, not the total one, significant reason, but I was happy to get back to the East Coast (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It used to be blue.  Now, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Why did it change?
Speaker 2: I guess I got tired of showing up in blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to use from time to time?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 269536
Speaker 1: We always start with a discussion of the HistoryMaker's family, family background, so that we have a foundation, we have a context in which to look at your socialization, growing up years and so on, in this case Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Would you give us your mother's name?
Speaker 2: I thought I did.
Speaker 1: No, but for the, the interview, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I have it on the--your questionnaire, but for the interview, yeah.
Speaker 2: Bertha Marie Queen Bullins.
Speaker 1: And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: I think she was born in eastern--now, I--I, I thought it was the Eastern Shore Maryland, but I think it was around Media, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And how do you remember your mother?  What was she like as a--as a person?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's--was always my best friend.
Speaker 1: Was she employed during the time you were growing up?  Did she--
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was a career worker at the [U.S.] Army Quartermaster Corps as a power machine operator in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She sewed--
Speaker 1: Did she--
Speaker 2: She sewed uniforms and duffle bags and parachutes, I think.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories or songs with you about her growing up years as you were a child?  Did she talk about her growing up years at all?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she talked about what her sisters and brother and her did growing up.
Speaker 1: And your father?
Speaker 2: I've seen him, but at least he was introduced as my father--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I didn't really know him.
Speaker 1: Your mother's parents, your grandparents, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, they were dead by the time I came along.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Story_ID: 269537
Speaker 1: What are your earliest, furthest back memories as a child in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  When you think back, what are the things that you remember as a young child?
Speaker 2: I think it was laying in my crib listening to someone sing the 'Saint Louis Blues.'
Speaker 1: Who was that--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: --singing?  Other far back memories in addition to that?
Speaker 2: Not that far back.
Story_ID: 269538
Speaker 1: Where did you begin your, your early schooling?  What school did you attend?  When did you start school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to kindergarten at--I guess it was [James R.] Ludlow [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And that was in your immediate neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was--what street did you live on in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  What was your neighborhood like as you remember it as a young child?
Speaker 2: Well, the first couple several years of my life, I lived on and off with my--with my aunt, my Aunt Bea [ph.], and her, her children, my, my cousins.  And my mother [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins] would have a place in town, Melon Street, Brown Street, other places, but it, it was sort of temporary; it, it was temporary.  But then finally we lived in, in--on 8th Street near Jefferson [Street] in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for a while; I don't know how long a while was, it must've been a couple a years.  And then we moved around the corner to a street called Darien Street between Jefferson and Master [Street], and there, we stayed for a dozen years or more.
Speaker 1: And what section of Philadelphia was that?
Speaker 2: North Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: North Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 269539
Speaker 1: So you went to the [James R.] Ludlow School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], elementary?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how many years were you there roughly?
Speaker 2: Three or four.
Speaker 1: What was elementary school like for you at, at Ludlow?  How do you remember those years?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--it was--it was okay.  It built a fondness for education in me.
Speaker 1: Say that again?
Speaker 2: It built a fondness for education in me.
Speaker 1: It did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers that were especially influential with you in those early years that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Woodward [ph.].  It was basically a white school, predominantly Jewish, and there was a couple blacks, I was one of them, a couple blacks, and there were one or two Latins; they called themselves Latins, I guess.
Speaker 1: Where were most black people living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at that time then?  We're talking about the late 1930s now, right, roughly?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, they lived in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They had moved--gotten over to that part of North Philadelphia in numbers.  They lived in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They were--there's a relatively large population of blacks in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: What was it like being one of several black students at Ludlow?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was--I was a star (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, that--I, I did well.  I had friends.  It was okay.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was--I was a high achiever on the things I liked.
Speaker 1: And your favorite subject at that time as a youngster was?
Speaker 2: Oh, I could always write something and, and--you know, I did pass a grade, you know?  But I, I didn't take writing seriously.  It was just something--
Speaker 1: You say you didn't take it seriously at that point?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were at Ludlow how long?  How many years roughly?
Speaker 2: I guess five or six.  Oh, they threw me out once, but maybe I stayed out when I--yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 269540
Speaker 1: In some of the background material that I received from The HistoryMakers headquarters, it referred to you spending some of your summers on a Maryland farm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about that, whose farm and how you happened to go there in the summer?
Speaker 2: My--I call him my stepfather--I don't know if I should call him my stepfather, but Bill Carrol, he had some--he's from Chester, Pennsylvania, which is out, out--outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] about fifteen miles or so, closer to the, the border, and they were sort of a river town, little river town.  And he had some friends or relatives or family connections down in Eastern Shore, Maryland.  And when I got to be about ten, I go and stay with a lady named Ann Jessie [ph.] and, and her husband, Clifford, Clifford Slaughter [ph.].  And I--must've been close to ten years, I would go down there summers and periodically.  In fact, I went to school for a year in Denton, Denton, Maryland, at a comprehensive school and I, I did a year down there.
Speaker 1: Was that the middle school years or early high school?  What year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was about the eighth grade, ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned your stepfather, his name--
Speaker 2: It was a black school.
Speaker 1: It was a black school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Denton, public school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You mentioned your stepfather, his name again for the record?
Speaker 2: William Carrol.
Speaker 1: And would you spell the last name?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-O-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was married to your mother [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins]?
Speaker 2: Common law.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 269541
Speaker 1: Okay, so you spent a year at the school in Denton [Maryland], and then you went where to school?  Where did you--when you returned to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then I went to [Joseph C.] Ferguson [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Ferguson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a middle school.
Speaker 1: That was a middle school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What were your middle school years like both in Denton and back at Ferguson?  How do you remember those years?
Speaker 2: Well, at Denton, it was pretty slow and they had their ways, you know?  It was--it was okay.  I didn't get into much trouble there, just minor kid trouble.  But, Ferguson was--that, that, that was just like--almost like the house of detention to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, where was that in Philly?  Was that back in the North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] neighborhood or?
Speaker 2: There was some, some ways--I could walk there.  I walked there but I would have to go, go north about six blocks or maybe more.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your--was it a year or two years at Ferguson?  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: Couple years.
Speaker 1: Did you get in any trouble there?
Speaker 2: Outside in the school yard and going home and coming to school, there was a lot of street gang activity, and that wasn't my territory, so sometimes I would have to fight my way to school and fight my way home (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what was the cultural ethnic racial makeup of that school?  You talked about the elementary, what, what about--
Speaker 2: There was--there was black, there was Jewish, there was Italian, there was Irish, but the, the--I think the--it was--predominantly, it was black ethnic.  Well, I take that back.  It was turning, changing, so I guess when I started there, it was kind of like a, a larger version of [James R.] Ludlow [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but by the time I, I got out, it had changed a lot.  They had four or five Latins by then and, and, and quite a body of, of blacks.  But the black gangs used to come over and, and prey on the students of, of Ferguson, so me being hard-headed and refusing to be preyed on, you know, I was--I was beat on, but I was able to beat back some (laughter).
Story_ID: 269542
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you like to do as an early teenager outside of school?  What were your interests?  How did you spend your time beyond the school day?  Weekends, summers, what did you like to do?  What were your--
Speaker 2: Swimming, bi- bicycling, skating.
Speaker 1: Were you much of a reader?  Did you like to read?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I read a lot.
Speaker 1: Did you?  What kind of things did you read?
Speaker 2: A little bit of everything.
Speaker 1: Were you writing as a youngster?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was about, I guess thirteen, fourteen, I wrote my autobiography (laughter).  It's since been lost.
Speaker 1: Did you do that on your own?  Or did you do it as part of a school assignment?  Or you just did it?
Speaker 2: Well, I just did it.
Speaker 1: What prompted you to write your autobiography at that young age?
Speaker 2: I guess it was the only thing I could write (laughter).
Speaker 1: You what?
Speaker 2: I said, it's about the only thing I could write.  I didn't know (laughter) anything else--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --at my experience.
Speaker 1: Did your autobiography, did you have a title for it?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you don't have it today unfortunately?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did you share it with your mother [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins]?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: What kind of--what kind of stuff did you have in the autobiography?  What--do you recall what, what you--
Speaker 2: I don't remember really.  We'll say everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who were your--who were your closest friends going through middle school [Joseph C. Ferguson School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and early high school [Benjamin Franklin High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  Who were the people who were--you spent most time with?
Speaker 2: Well, my next door neighbor was, was Henry, Henry Harrison [ph.], and his--he had two sisters.  One--they were from the South and one sister was named Magnolia [ph.] and the other one was, I think, Dorothy [ph.].  And Henry was real tough.  He was a couple years older than me.  He was real tough and I used to always--you know, be a tag along with him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you play any, any sports either in school or outside of school?  Athletics?
Speaker 2: Well, very little organized.  I soon found out I, I didn't have much of ability for softball or baseball or basketball.  But I played some sandlot football and I belonged to the PAL for a while, boxing.
Speaker 1: PAL?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Police Athletic League.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're a pretty good boxer?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You did some boxing later on in your career--life, too, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 269543
Speaker 1: What year did you enter high school and what high school did you enter?
Speaker 2: I went to Ben--[Benjamin] Franklin [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were how old?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: About fourteen?
Speaker 2: I, I guess so.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your experience there at Ben Franklin?
Speaker 2: Well, Ben Franklin was--it's--I think it's still there on Broad Street and I don't know how much it's changed, but it was like--almost like the house of detention to me.  And--
Speaker 1: Describe the life inside the school you--what was it like?  Restrictive?
Speaker 2: Restrictive, it was all-boys, mostly black, wasn't much going on, you know?  That's when I started sort of cutting a lot and, and--
Speaker 1: So you didn't find it challenging, is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I mean, the only challenges were the fights.
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: The only challenges were the fights (laughter).
Speaker 1: Were there any subjects that you were able to work at that you enjoyed or excelled at in those first couple years there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were you still writing for yourself or?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You dropped out of Ben Franklin High School.  How old were you and what year did you--did you leave?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, probably in like tenth, end of the tenth.
Speaker 1: End of the tenth.  It's somewhat obvious, but let me ask you, why did you leave?  Why did you drop out?
Speaker 2: Other things I wanted to check out, you know--you know?
Speaker 1: How'd your mother [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins] feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't making any headway there.
Speaker 1: Wasn't what?
Speaker 2: Making any, any headway and I wanted to get a job and, you know, I was dealing with girls and, you know, I wanted to grow up.
Story_ID: 269544
Speaker 1: So you dropped out [of Benjamin Franklin High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and what'd you do?  What, what was next?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked as a, a delivery boy.  I used to have--for a--for a printer in, in downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  They used to have like wheelbarrows--barrows, but it's not--it, it wasn't like wheelbarrows, but it's like a cart you push.  You put the, the printing stuff in there and run it across town or wherever, and so I did that for a while.  Then, did other things, so I tried to enlist in the [U.S.] Navy on my sixteenth birthday, but I was too young.  So they said if--when, when you get seventeen, you can have your parents sign for you and so I, I went down to enlist on my seventeenth birthday.
Speaker 1: Going back to your work with the printer, how much were you making?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five cent an hour.
Speaker 1: Seventy-five cents an hour.  And that was full-time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you had finished, when you had dropped out of school and you were working, were you doing any writing on your own at that point or?
Speaker 2: No, but I was reading.
Speaker 1: You were reading?  What'd you like to read at that point?  Was there any particular type of literature that you were interested in or?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So at age seventeen, you entered the U.S. Navy?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where were you first stationed?  Tell me about how long you were in the Navy and what did you do in the Navy and--
Speaker 2: Well, I was there was about three years.  I trained at Bain--Bainbridge, Maryland.  I was on three different destroyers, three, three ships.  First, I was in the steward's branch dealing with the officers and cooking and things like that.  Then, I got transferred to the engineering.  I thought I'd be in engineering, but they put--but they put me in the boiler make--you know, I was a boiler, room, you know, watching the water boiling (laughter).  So--but I--but, but I loved being at sea, you know, traveling and the whole cruising thing, and seeing different lifestyles and all of that.  That's when the, the bug bit me to go back to school and, and I read a lot, of course, at sea, and--in the Navy, you know.
Story_ID: 269582
Speaker 1: You pursued self-education in the [U.S.] Navy by reading and you also said that the travels that you did in the Navy, you found stimulating.  I guess that contributed to your education in some way?  Could you talk about your travels, different places that you went during the three years that you were aboard ship?
Speaker 2: Okay.  But the education wasn't only self-education.  The Navy had a program, correspondence, you know, courses, so I took some correspondence courses in reading and English, and something to do with electronics.  For, for some reason, I thought I wanted to be in electronics, you know?  So I did that as well as--well as read.  Well, as far as cruising or, or, you know, being, being out of port, I went to the Caribbean to a number of places and that was a bit eye-opening, Panama, Jamaica, Trinidad, Cuba.
Speaker 1: Eye-opening in which way, in what way for you?
Speaker 2: Well, black people, you know, like me that, that had different cultures, different languages, lived differently.
Speaker 1: Did you--beyond the Panama area and the Caribbean, did you go to the east or Europe or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the Mediterranean.
Speaker 1: Mediterranean.
Speaker 2: A, a number of times.  Lisbon [Portugal], Marseilles [France], Genoa [Italy], Naples [Italy], Venice [Italy], Algiers [Algeria], others, Turkey.
Story_ID: 269583
Speaker 1: You also won something in addition to educational gains.  You were involved in an athletic competition while you were in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on--I was in the fleet or the ship boxing--
Speaker 1: Boxing.
Speaker 2: --boxing team.  And, and they would have--they would have fights, you know, and, you know, boxing fights.  And they would take us off our, our ships and bring us to the aircraft carrier, which is like a big city almost.  And then we--then we do our fights.  And so I was awarded a, a fleet championship in, in my weight division.  Now, I don't know, maybe everybody got certificates or, or whatever they give you (laughter) like they do in karate tournaments.  But I think it was more or less like, you know, an actual achievement.  But it's--you know, it was--it wasn't a big professional world championship.  It was just dealing with the fleet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There, there were a couple times I got a--got a chance to fight Marines and I, I used to like that (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --because, you know, the other sailors, it was--it was almost like they were my friends in, in a way, even though I didn't know 'em but we were in the same thing.  But a--but the Marines, they--no, no holds barred (laughter) 'cause they always--they used to always razz sailors about, oh, you sailors, you 'aint nothin'.  You--you know, and so when you--when you beat up on a Marine, that was--that felt good to you and, and your shipmates (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any other memories of your Navy years that you wanted to share during this interview?
Speaker 2: I saw how the other half lived and I said, there's something more to the world than being at the bottom.
Speaker 1: Being at the what?
Speaker 2: The bottom.  Of course, you know, this is--the officers had been to college and stuff like that and they can--controlled everything and--but even as--you know, there's--even the, my shipmates, you know, white and others, they--pretty good people.
Story_ID: 269584
Speaker 1: You were discharged or left the [U.S.] Navy in 1955, is that correct?  You were there from '52 [1952] to '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: I think so, that sounds right.
Speaker 1: What happened next once you left the [U.S.] military service, completed the time that you wanted to spend?  What--where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I was--immediately upon getting back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was--immediately went into the business school, William Penn Business Institute [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What was the name of it again?
Speaker 2: William Penn Business Institute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a black business school in Philadelphia on Broad Street and Girard [sic. Lombard Street], and was interesting.  It showed me a lot.
Speaker 1: What, what did you study there?
Speaker 2: Well, this is part of my G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]--I had to study something to get the G.I. Bill money and, and all of that.  So I sorta just accidentally fell into that school.  I, I was gonna get into the school anyway.  And, and I didn't think I had a place in business or interest in business, but I ended up enjoying it.  And--but I learned to type, which was one of the biggest, then, skills I could've, you know, learned 'cause it got me jobs that I could support myself and I could write my own literature.
Speaker 1: What work or employment did you have at the time you were in business school?
Speaker 2: Well, soon after, I got into the post office and I would work at the post office at night and go to school during the day.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.  And you did that for how long, roughly?
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine months, I mean, the post office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was two, two years plus.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened next?
Speaker 2: Well, I went into--well, I went, went into Temple Prep or Temple High School [Temple University High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I finally left Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: And what did you study at Temple Prep?  Was that on the campus of Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your program?
Speaker 2: It was--it was like a program for veterans and other misfits who didn't quite fit into college or, you know, high school.
Story_ID: 269585
Speaker 1: How did it feel being back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] after being away for three years and coming back?  What did home feel like at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt that as a black person, I would never achieve my potential staying in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So what'd you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I left and went to California.
Speaker 1: Went to California.  Why'd you go to Cali--why California?
Speaker 2: I heard that that was like the new frontier, things were going on, and I'd been reading about California and heard about California, the Beat movement was going on and Jack Kerouac was on the road and--
Speaker 1: Did you have any friends out there when you went there or?
Speaker 2: No, I went and, and stayed with one of my aunts, my Aunt Sarah [ph.], my mother's [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins] sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of my mother's sisters.  My mother has two sisters, had two sisters, Aunt Sarah and Aunt, Aunt Bea [ph.], who lives in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what city did you go to?  Where was she living?  Where was she living?  Where did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, she was living in South Central L.A.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you went to Los Angeles.  What'd you do when you first got there?
Speaker 2: Looked for a job and I worked at some janitorial job, driving a truck for a book binder, and then I got a typing job at Los Angeles [County] General Hospital [Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] in the basement at night, typing up reports that they had--in the housekeeping office.  And I started Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California] and I went to school during the day again and worked at night.
Speaker 1: You earned your GED, GED [General Educational Development], is that correct, in, in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How soon after you got to L.A. did you get the GED?  In a year or is it--
Speaker 2: Maybe six months.
Story_ID: 269586
Speaker 1: Were you doing more writing at that point?  Did you have an idea of what you really wanted to do at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I wanted to be in electronics (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you were still--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so I got into Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California].  It's a community college, but it's a large one and it's almost like a real college, you know, but it's only two years, then, I don't know what it is now.  And I majored in economics. And I knew something about business, so why shouldn't I know something about economics, you know?  I, I can--I can do economics part-time and get rich and do electronics and, and (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I want to take a little diversion here for a minute because later on I wanna talk about a number of your plays, your fifty plus, plus plays.  But you've mentioned your interest in electronics several times and I know that one of your plays is entitled 'The Electronic Nigger' [Ed Bullins].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that play.  Does that relate in any way to your interest in electronics?  Tell me--tell me about the play, the theme, what was that all about?
Speaker 2: Well, it's about--it takes place in a creative writing class and--with a--with a mix of students, you know, and this black guy near middle age comes in and he, through bullying--I wouldn't even say intellectual bullying, but bullying, talking louder and dismissing everybody's point of view and challenging the teacher and throwing around big words, and, and all the rest.  He takes over the class and he destroys it, and he's, he's almost like seemingly--he's so focused on his, his--you know, his will dominating the class, he's almost robotic, and that's the robotic factor comes--stands for the electronic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: --part of it.
Story_ID: 269587
Speaker 1: You attended, as you said, classes [at Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California].  You started to, to write.  What kind of things were you writing at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the English classes began stimulating my writing and I would write--and then I would go to poetry readings, and so I half-heartedly at first thought I might become a poet.  But it--really, that was--so I was--as I look, look back, I was searching for my thing, searching for my voice.  One of the writers I used to read up there, Evan [S.] Connell, Jr., he has a--he has--I guess a title of one of his books, 'I am a Lover But I Have Not Found My Thing To Love,' [sic.] so that's--that stuck with me.
Speaker 1: Would you spell his last name for us?
Speaker 2: Evan or Evan, E-V-A-N, Con--Connell, C-O-N-N-E-L-L, I think or maybe one L, junior.  He used to be one of the editors of the publisher of--my, God, I've forgotten.  It was the first magazine I had a serious piece published in.  What is that [Contact Magazine]?  Well, it's in Hay's book ['Ed Bullins: A Literary Biography'], Sam Hay [Samuel A. Hay].
Speaker 1: Tell me about the piece that you had published.  What was the title?  What was that about?
Speaker 2: It was called the, the something protest, the--oh, "The Polished Protest:  Aesthetics and the Black Writer."
Speaker 1: Is that an essay?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like an essay?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you were dabbling in poetry, essay.  We doing any fiction at that point at all?
Speaker 2: Could be.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Six years.  Yeah, yeah, from the time I, I entered the borders of Los Angeles to the time I left was six years.  And I--and I--and I never left the--left Los Angeles in, in, in that period.  And then when I got out, it was like (laughter) I had been freed (laughter).
Story_ID: 269588
Speaker 1: What was the most influential experience or experiences that you had in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that pushed you into your career and your profession as a writer?  Were there any particular people or programs that really pushed you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right along?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a, a professor or instructor, James Simmons, at--in the English department of Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California].  There was Isabelle Ziegler who, who really got me into my creative writing.  There were people like Ron Everett who became Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga].  We used to be in and around--or I used to be on the fringe of the group, group of people that he had around him.  One of them, Leon Smith, who were all young people, you know, coming up.  And they were into Pan-Africanism thought, you know, black militancy studies.  And this was back in the early '60s [1960s], and so that's how I got into student activism and things like that.  And wanting to become a writer, I finally committed--I, I had a poet friend, Steve Crumley [ph.], and he, he, he was working as a poet and I was working as a writer, and finally, I committed to be--being a, a writer.  No, no looking back, no turning back.  Crumley, he's been a, a--Chez Panisse, Pa- I think it's Chez Panisse, a really, really famous restaurant out in Berkeley [California].  He's, he's on the staff of, of, of--he's been there maybe twenty-five, thirty years, twenty-five years at least 'cause I think he left the country, went to France for a while.  But any case, there were some of the, the people--I could give a string of names, but they wouldn't mean much out of context, all influences.
Story_ID: 269589
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you were meeting and getting to know and--some of them were writers in black activism.  What were some of the activist things that you were doing in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] before you went to San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I founded a magazine at school, which was a literary magazine.
Speaker 1: You founded it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called Citadel, Citadel.
Speaker 1: Citadel?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, in fact, I think it's still at the Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California].  They made--they made the--made it a course, you know, a magazine publishing creation.  And so once they make something a course, you know, it's hard to get (laughter), get rid of it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --sometimes, especially if students show up wanting to do that.
Speaker 1: What was the content of the Citadel?  What kind of writings did you have in there?
Speaker 2: It was literary.  I, I did a, a--some vignettes, some short piece, one of the first monologues I wrote.  This was called "The Real Me" and was--starts out going--it, it tells about this character who says--who talks about being black and, and ended up saying that it was--you know, I'm really--I found myself, I'm really myself.  But it was a satirical thing about a character I met one, one time.  So, but it's a--I still read it sometimes--
Story_ID: 269590
Speaker 1: You said you were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for six years, and then you went to San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Why did you go to San Francisco?
Speaker 2: Well, things were happening in San Francisco around [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and the--you know, the student movement and San Francisco State--I ended up at San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and the arts and, you know, the scene was just alive.  It's--so I had to go.
Speaker 1: Who were the--some of the first people that you met and became involved with when you got to San Francisco, writers or non-writers?
Speaker 2: Well, I--Steve Crumley [ph.]who I--who I mentioned a little while, put me up a little--a little bit, and soon I was out there.  And Marvin Jackmon, who became Marvin X, we--oh, but before then, I wrote a play--wrote, wrote some plays and had them done at the Firehouse Repertory Theater [San Francisco, California] in 1965 just when Watts [Los Angeles, California] was blowing up.  And all this experience brought me to Marvin who was a stu-student at San Francisco State, and I went to San Francisco State later, soon after.  And Marvin was writing plays, too.  He had a play called 'Flowers for the Trashman' he was showing around.  And I had my plays and we started--got together and started a theater, Black Arts/West [San Francisco, California], built on [Amiri] Baraka's concept.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the theater again?
Speaker 2: Black Arts/West.
Speaker 1: Black Arts/West?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And LeRoi Jones as Baraka was known then came out to, to the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] and we got very active with all this stuff.
Speaker 1: One of your first plays was 'Clara's Ole Man' [Ed Bullins]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that written in L.A. or San Francisco?
Speaker 2: San Francisco.
Speaker 1: You did it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was that your first play that was produced there or not?
Speaker 2: It was produced with '[The] Electronic Nigger' [Ed Bullins] and a play called 'Dialect Determinism' [Ed Bullins].  I think that was the bill.
Story_ID: 269591
Speaker 1: Before we talk about 'Clara's Ole Man' [Ed Bullins] and several other of your early plays, what was the turning point or the thing that happened that pushed you into playwriting?  I mean, that's where you went and you stayed there and you're still there.  What--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I worked at poetry and I worked at writing, you know, other things, academic type literary essays and journalism, but I wasn't--I didn't feel that was me, and I'm--I wrote three, three novels, three bad novels.
Speaker 1: Three what novels?  Bad--
Speaker 2: Bad novels (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Couldn't stand them.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: And--but I got all that writing out of me.  I got all--got all that--get those mistakes and stuff out of me.  And so I--sitting up in electronics shop in [Los Angeles] City College [Los Angeles, California] one time, there were--an, an instructor was explaining the, the binary theory and how, how to use it.  And I--and I, I was--found myself writing a play, writing--you know, writing a play.  I, I didn't know it was a play then, but it had those elements that later appeared in 'Clara's Ole Man.'  So later on, I was, was--had, had been at a, a party and drinking and, and having a good time and wanting to do something, wanting to be part of the scene and, and I thought I was gonna write some poetry, but I wrote this play almost spontaneously at one sitting called 'How Do You Do.'  So that was my first play that--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --that I really achieved.  And it felt so good--it felt so good that I said, this is it.  This is it.  This is my form.
Story_ID: 269555
Speaker 1: I think you were saying that a play called how do you--'How Do You Do.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) was a, a major stepping off point for you.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--
Speaker 1: What was the significance of that play in your development as you moved along?
Speaker 2: It was my first play and I was very--felt very good about it.
Speaker 1: Your first play, what in San Francisco [California] or?
Speaker 2: No, my first play I wrote--ever wrote.
Speaker 1: Oh, the first one.  That was before ole Miss Clara [sic. 'Clara's Ole Man,' Ed Bullins] then?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well the first thing I did that became 'Clara' was more or less putting on the idea just for, for the play.
Speaker 1: What was the theme?  What was the message, the story in 'How Do You Do.'
Speaker 2: All right, three characters, two men and a woman in limbo.  One is named Roger Stereotype and the woman is Dora Stereotype, and the third character is the Image Maker.  And so it revolves around a bench and they're--Roger and Dora talking stereotypically and dealing with repetition of, of that continuing--continuously.  And the Image Maker, he can't control them or make them do more than that, and so consequently it's a short play on, on that theme.
Story_ID: 269556
Speaker 1: You mentioned that LeRoi Jones, Amiri Baraka, came to San Francisco [California] while--after you got there or he was there when you got there?
Speaker 2: No, he came--he was brought out to participate in what's called the Black Communications Project by the students of San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], the black--the black students association.  And we started doing plays on campus, Baraka's plays, my plays, Jimmy Garrett's, some other local playwrights, and doing them out in the community.  We made a documentary film called 'Black Spring' and we helped establish the community house called the Black House [San Francisco, California] with Eldridge Cleaver and one of our actors, Bobby Seale.
Speaker 1: So Black House was a repertory theater?  What was--what was Black House?
Speaker 2: It was a community center that had--Marvin [X] ran the poetry with a section with [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez.  I worked in the theater.  Eldridge Cleaver dealt with politics and that kind of stuff.  And that was the meeting place for the community.
Speaker 1: In what ways did Amiri Baraka influence you?  Was he an influence on your life?  Did he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when--yeah, he was a, a--my--one of my main, main--I, I call him mentor number one, you know, one of my main influences and mentors early on and, and since.
Speaker 1: When he came to San Francisco, he had been in the New Jersey, New York area, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he had already established himself, had he not as a--as a protest poet and writer?  He was kinda nationally known when he came to San Francisco or?
Speaker 2: Well as a--as a black poet, I don't know about protest.  Definitively, some view protest writers as writers who protest to the, the oppressors, all the white folks, and, and asking--begging and pleading them to take their foot off their necks.  But black ways at the time were, were attacking, which was a revolutionary stance at the time, so there was a--there was a difference.
Speaker 1: How did--how did Baraka influence you?  You said he was an important person in your development.  How--in what ways did he help you and influence you?
Speaker 2: Well, I read his work.  He, he--I listened to his ideas, I saw his plays.  I wrote plays.  He encouraged me.  We worked together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He's still living, is he not?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Are you two--
Speaker 2: He was--he was at the Paul Robeson--
Speaker 1: Oh, he was?
Speaker 2: --conference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I was gonna say you two are still in contact with each other?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Maybe we'll, we'll come back to that.
Speaker 2: We have a--we have a, a website, the black arts website that we do from time to time.
Story_ID: 269557
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but I took this from some background material and I had--and I think I'm quoting you or paraphrasing you, but you said that black theater must be revolutionary for black art to be successful.  Could you comment on that?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I don't remember saying, saying that.
Speaker 1: Did you consider your, your writing--your playwriting to be revolutionary in any way?
Speaker 2: Some of it--some of it was consciously revolutionary or--
Speaker 1: Sorry, it was what?
Speaker 2: Some of it--some of it was consciously that.  Others was just plays.
Speaker 1: Which of your early plays would you put in that revolutionary category?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe they were misnomered.  I guess a, a lot of them is it's--I would tell the, you know, the interested readers to read 'em and they can determine which ones fit any criteria that they have for that.  I have plays where the protagonist kills all the white people in, in, in the audience as well as in the play.  Of course, it's a dramatic metaphor being achieved, but they may not be revolutionary to some at all.  It might be self-destructive or--
Speaker 1: The Black Art[s] Movement [BAM], you were part of the black art movement in San Francisco [California], there was a black art movement across the country, the visual artists, the writers; it was all part of that.  What was your involvement with the BAM in San Francisco?  Was that part of the Black House [San Francisco, California] operation or was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Black, Black Arts/West [San Francisco, California], the Black House, and, and soon I left and went to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: It what?
Speaker 2: And soon after, I left and went to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You went to New York--well, let me--let me stay with San Francisco State University [San Francisco, California].  You taught there?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I came back years later and taught there.
Speaker 1: Do you study there and did you get a degree from--
Speaker 2: I ended up with a M.F.A. in creative writing.
Speaker 1: From San Francisco State?
Speaker 2: Playwriting, yeah.
Speaker 1: In playwriting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was years after I moved--went to--went to New York and became a playwright.
Speaker 1: Oh, and then went back for the--
Speaker 2: The degree (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for that degree.
Story_ID: 269558
Speaker 1: Tell me about your move to New York [New York].  Why did you leave the West Coast and come back and come to New York?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't feel that the--there was anything left for me to do on the West Coast.  So I got a-an offer by Robert Macbeth, who was starting a theater called the New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: The New Lafayette Theatre?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Who was Macbeth?  Who was this guy?
Speaker 2: He was a, a, a visionary black man, a talented theater person, a director, a, a force.
Speaker 1: And he established a theater where in New York?
Speaker 2: In, in Harlem.
Speaker 1: What street?  What--
Speaker 2: It was Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] Boulevard then.  Now, it's whatever they're calling it.  No, no, it was--was it 7th Avenue?  But it's--now it's Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard, I believe, and, and 137th Street [sic. 132nd Street].  It's where the Renny [ph.]--the Renaissance Ballroom [New York, New York], around the corner from Abyssinian [Baptist Church, New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I--
Speaker 2: --Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: --I know the--I lived there for a while, so I, I know exactly where you're talking about.  So he offered you--what was the offer that he made to you?
Speaker 2: Come and do some theater.  And so I, I started off type--typing scripts and helping him edit them and, and help--helping in the workshop, organizing his theater workshop that he had.  There was--it was a acting workshop he was devoting, actors for the group, and so I was always there even though I'm not an actor, but I was learning what happened--what professional people do in theater (coughs).
Speaker 1: Was this a full-time employment for you, I mean full-time activity with the Lafayette Theatre?
Speaker 2: Not, not at first, but very soon it, it, it was and, and I became resident playwright and I edited Black Theatre Magazine.
Speaker 1: You did which magazine again?
Speaker 2: Black Theatre Magazine.
Speaker 1: Black Theatre Magazine.  Okay. What were some of the first plays that you wrote in New York that were--that were performed at Lafayette?
Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that was what at the Lafayette?
Speaker 1: The, the plays that you wrote and were performed at the Lafayette Theatre?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  The first play that the Lafayette did of mine--I think in the workshop, we, we had the black theater workshop too, but maybe they did that afterwards--well, was 'In the Wine Time' [Ed Bullins].  That's--that was--
Speaker 1: 'In the Wine Time.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'In the Wine Time,' a full-length play.  And then they did 'Goin' A Buffalo' [Ed Bullins], another full-length play.  And then we did a series of rituals, black rituals, the ritual to, to raise the people and blah, blah, blah, ritual for black time.  Then we did 'The Duplex' [Ed Bullins] another play of mine and then '[The] Fabulous Miss Marie' by me also.
Speaker 1: Where did your ideas come from for these various plays that you just mentioned?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Were, were any of these plays in any way autobiographical?
Speaker 2: Well, everything that a writer does is autobiographical.
Speaker 1: You say everything you write is?
Speaker 2: Everything a writer--
Speaker 1: Oh, is--
Speaker 2: Autobiographical.  Even--I mean, it's, it's their spin on the world, you know, even if they wanna like declare total objectivity.  But was it about me, definitely?  Well, yes and no.  That--I try to remove myself from center stage.  Maybe I might come in with the mop to clean up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Are there any of your plays that would be more definitively reflecting [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins' experiences in life?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if those are my best plays (laughter).
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: I don't know if those are my best plays.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, I don't know about--but any of them reflected some aspect or dimension of your life that you--
Speaker 2: I guess if you can--you, you know, you--people who study my plays should have an answer on that.
Story_ID: 269559
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in New York [New York] with the [New] Lafayette Theatre?
Speaker 2: About fifteen years.  Well, not, not, not all the time at the New Lafayette.  The New Lafayette lasted about six or seven years and then I went to work for, for New York Shakespeare Festival [Shakespeare in the Park], Joe--Joseph Papp.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't get the first part.  You went to work for--
Speaker 2: The New York Shakespeare Festival.
Speaker 1: Shakespeare Festival, okay.
Speaker 2: Joseph Papp was the producer.  And I worked there for a number of years.
Speaker 1: And what was the nature of your work there?  Playwriting or?
Speaker 2: I headed a playwrights workshop and I worked in the, the press office.
Speaker 1: During the time that you were in New York in Harlem [New York, New York] at the Lafayette and the Shakespeare, what else was going on in Harlem at the time, politically, socially?  How do you remember--you were living--where were you living at the time?
Speaker 2: I was living in the Bronx [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: In the Bronx.  What was going on in, in Harlem at that time that you remember--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: --there was a lot.  I was mainly focused in plays.  I--not only did I have plays at the, the New Lafayette, I had plays off, off-Broadway, off, off Broadway, Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], Manhattan Theatre Club.  Sometimes, I had several plays running at one time.
Speaker 1: How do you go about or how did you go about getting your plays on stage?  What's the process?  I mean, is there a lot of competition?  I'm asking 'cause I--I'm interested in--how did you--what's the politics of that?
Speaker 2: Well, the pol- if you're on the right side of the politics, the politics are, are, are cool, but if, if you're not, it's deadly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, what was your experience?  How did you make out?
Speaker 2: The pendulum swings.  The pendulum swings.  I, I came into town hot and then it cooled off and, and so it moves back and forth.
Story_ID: 269560
Speaker 1: Were you successful in New York [New York]?  Were you happy there?
Speaker 2: I was extremely successful in New York.
Speaker 1: What were your biggest successes in New York as a playwright?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess if you wanna mention reward--awards, I was awarded the New York Drama Critic[s'] Circle award for best American play of the 1975, '74 [1974], '75 [1975] season, 'The Taking of Miss Janie' [Ed Bullins].
Speaker 1: 'The Taking of Miss Janie'?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's about the '60s [1960s].  It's framed by a relationship between a, a young black man and a young white woman.  But it, it tells of the conflict in social and other schisms of the '60s [1960s] decade from integration to separatism from sexual chauvinism to homosexuality.  So, so it talks about a lot of things.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: There--there's even religious struggles, Jews fraternizing and dealing with Germanic people, whites with blacks, women with women, militants with non-militants.
Speaker 1: You mentioned--were there other awards that you received?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I've had about three Obies [Off-Broadway Theater Awards], that's the off-Broadway achievement awards.
Speaker 1: Obie stands for off-Broadway something else?  What does Obie stand for?  What is--what's the derivative?  What does that derive from?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: But these are all off-Broadway awards.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the three that you--that you received.
Speaker 2: Well, for 'In New England Winter' [Ed Bullins], I was--got--I got an Obie for that.  For 'The Taking of Miss Janie,' I got an Obie for that.  For another one, which I forget which play I got that for, oh, 'The Fabulous Miss Marie' [Ed Bullins].  And then I've gotten like the Vernon Rice Award; that's a prest- that's a little prestigious award.  And but while I was there, I also got four or five Guggenheims [Guggenheim fellowships].
Speaker 1: Before we go to Guggenheim, let me go back to the 'New England Winter.'  Was that your first Obie, 'New England Winter'?  Well tell me what that one--
Speaker 2: No, no, I think 'The Taking of Miss Janie,' but it could've been.
Speaker 1: 'The Taking of Miss Jane' tell me about that play.  What was the theme?  What was the--
Speaker 2: 'The Taking of Miss Janie,' I just told you.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Oh, you had moved into that.  Oh, okay.  'New England Winter,' what was that?
Speaker 2: It was about a young man who is involved in robbering a--robbing a loan company with his associates, boys, you know?  And as he's--plans this and goes through with it, he thinks of his life in another time when he lived in New England in the wintertime as opposed to being in a sultry climate, putting his life on the line for, for peanuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned the Guggenheim recognition.  Can you tell me a little bit more about that recognition?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was, was given to me to write or given to others to do whatever they do in their field.
Speaker 1: And so what did you produce with this opportunity?  Were, were you--what plays came out of your--
Speaker 2: Well, I can't target the play.  I--I'm gonna write plays anyway.  So it just helped me live, you know, help- helped my family live.
Speaker 1: I see.  How many Guggenheims did you receive?
Speaker 2: I think four, might've been more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And these are awards over a period of time to support your, your work, is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I got a couple of NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] grants, play--playwriting grants.
Story_ID: 269561
Speaker 1: Did you travel back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at all once you got back to New York [New York]?  Did you go back to your home city at all for--
Speaker 2: Well, for a long time only for funerals.
Speaker 1: You went to London [England].  Did you go to Europe?
Speaker 2: I went to London, yeah, for one, one summer.
Speaker 1: One summer?  Okay.  Well, you were married, where?  Somewhere in the '60s [1960s], is that right?
Speaker 2: I've been married three times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  You stayed in New York how long now, again?
Speaker 2: Well, this, this--at that time, fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Fifteen.  And then with all these successes and awards, what was next?  You, you left New York, where'd you go?
Speaker 2: I went to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: You went back to San Francisco.  Now, why'd you go back to San Francisco?
Speaker 2: I had some un- unfinished business.  I got my B.A. at Antioch University of Los Angeles [sic. Antioch University West, San Francisco, California].  There--there's a satellite of Antioch from Yellow Springs [Ohio].  And I got my M.F.A. from San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California].  That's two achievements I, I--
Speaker 1: Oh, Antioch was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?  The Antioch?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a satellite of the Antioch from the--
Speaker 1: So since you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The Antioch San Francisco, they, they had a--I think they--the--it closed after I graduated but I think they have an Antioch in L.A.  It's still, still functioning.  They may.
Speaker 1: So you went back and, and completed your, your--some academic work then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and get your master's degree.  Was that your reason for going back or was there other things you--
Speaker 2: There was--there was other, other reasons.  I was--
Speaker 1: Were they--
Speaker 2: I was a single parent at the time, so I couldn't do that in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  You have a son or a daughter or more?
Speaker 2: I have a number of children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any of them go into playwriting or creative arts?
Speaker 2: My most--I guess my most creative so far child is one of my sons.  He's a bio-scientist.
Speaker 1: You say a bio-scientist?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I don't know anything about the field, but I know he works in a high level of biology.
Speaker 1: What university or research center, where does he--do you know the name of the--
Speaker 2: I don't think he'd want that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was a--I was a biology and chemistry major and I was just--I was just interested--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in where he--where he ended up.  You see where I ended up.  I went into history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he, he was an actor for a while.
Speaker 1: He was an actor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he even did some TV work.
Story_ID: 269562
Speaker 1: Could I ask you about a play, 'The Mystery of Phillis Wheatley[: An Historical Play for Young Americans,' Ed Bullins] because, of course, she was of, of Boston [Massachusetts] and as you know, at the University of Massachusetts [Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] we have a building, in fact the building I think that you had your class in was the Wheatley building [Wheatley Hall].  Tell me about this play.  What, what, what line did you take on this one?
Speaker 2: You, you haven't read it?
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't know until I looked at this two days ago that you had done this, so--
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, it pretty well follows the historical version of Phillis Wheatley, but--
Speaker 1: Where was that--where was that performed?
Speaker 2: It's--a number of places, but it was first performed at either The American Place Theatre or--in New York [New York].  And when it was written, I, I got a--got a grant from the New York State Council on the Arts.  And I wrote a couple of, of plays for young people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Phillis Wheatley was one and Lucy Terry ['I am Lucy Terry: An Historical Fantasy for Young Americans,' Ed Bullins] was another one.  And they've been done around.
Story_ID: 269563
Speaker 1: In addition to your academic achievements back in San Francisco [California], you continued some playwriting out there, worked in the theater there during that time on your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, small community groups and community college and type of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When--how long did you stay in San Francisco that second time back?
Speaker 2: About a dozen years.
Speaker 1: And then you moved to where?
Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Came to Boston, that's what I thought.  Why Boston?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] offered me a job.
Speaker 1: I see, with Northeastern.  Were there individuals, I suppose there were at Northeastern that knew your work that you could work with?  Who were the people who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mort--Mort Kaplan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was Mort Kaplan?
Speaker 2: Mort Kaplan, he--when he brought me to Northeastern was director of the Northeastern University Center for the Arts, plus had been a chair of the--of the theater department, and had in the '70s [1970s] brought me to Northeastern for a couple arts residencies, so he had kept up with me over the years.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you had already had some experience at, at Northeastern.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you had that offer.  Was it an easy one to accept at that point in time?  Were you excited about it?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--I was trying to move again--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --trying to get out of California.
Speaker 1: Tell me what Northeastern offered you.  You were certainly one of the foremost playwrights, probably black or white in the country at the time.  You had worked in New York [New York] and San Francisco.  What--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I felt that being out in California, I had been essentially forgotten, and so I wanted to get back into a, a theater climate.
Speaker 1: So Boston gave you that window, gave you that opportunity.  What else did Northeastern and Boston provide for you as you thought about coming here?  What were the--
Speaker 2: An alternative because I had been offered a position at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], but it was more or less a standard academic position and I, I felt there wasn't enough in it to keep me focused.
Speaker 1: How did you find Boston when you came here in 1995?  What do you remember about your early months and years--the first years here?  How did you find the city?  It's a lot diff--
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was--well, the, the '70s [1970s], my trips in the '70s [1970s] and having my plays done here since the late '60s [1960s] by the New African Company, you know, Jim [James Spruill] and Linda [Patton] Spruill, they had me prepared, so it was okay.
Speaker 1: How did Jim and Linda prepare you?  What--
Speaker 2: Well, they got my plays done.  They--I--you know, I stayed here when I would come here and see my plays and hang out and, and, you know--I mean, Boston's--it has it's own peculiarities but it's not too unlike Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the '50s [1950s] (laughter).
Story_ID: 269564
Speaker 1: You came to Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] and, again, your responsibilities were to do what?
Speaker 2: Well, I was full professor in the theater department, so I guess I was--I was to be the, you know, the work horse of that.
Speaker 1: What courses did you initially conduct?
Speaker 2: Oh, the theater one, you know, the acting one, a whole line of other stuff when really I was only interested in teaching playwriting, but they had somebody for playwriting.
Speaker 1: Did you--what plays did you write once you got to Boston [Massachusetts], 1995 onward?  What have you written during the last ten years that you've been here?
Speaker 2: Well, I've just finished two plays this, this, this month.  One is called 'Black Caesar,' [Ed Bullins] ten-minute play.  It's gonna be done at the Boston Theater Marathon and I've written a play every year in the marathon.  But I, I finished a full-length play called 'Sugar Hill Diva' [Ed Bullins], which I hope to really develop that into something that's meaningful and will go forward.
Speaker 1: What is the theme of, of that play?  Can you share that with us at this point or?
Speaker 2: It deals with a, a, a elderly woman who lives in the Sugar Hill district of Harlem [New York, New York] and has had a, a rich life in Harlem being a performer with her husband and, and how she wants to do better by herself and her two grown children who sometimes don't act like they're grown.
Speaker 1: The '[In] New England Winter' [Ed Bullins] in part is geographical in terms of this area.  Do you have any thoughts or ideas about plays that would have a Boston setting?  You did '[The Mystery of] Phillis Wheatley[: An Historical Play for Young Americans' Ed Bullins] of Boston, but have you thought about anything that might have a Boston setting given the history of this city and given--
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't be--
Speaker 1: --the peculiarity of this city?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't be surprised.  I've, I've really come to really like Boston.  Boston's been good to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Good.  Beyond your professorship at Northeastern before--beyond the, the plays that you've developed very recently, what other kinds of involvements have you had in the arts world in Boston since you've been here that you--you've appreciated and contributed to?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been involved with the, the ACT Roxbury arts group [ACT Roxbury Consortium] since its inception and I feel very proud of that.  It's one of the many theater groups that I've or, or arts institutions that I've been involved with that are independently strong and standing on their feet.
Speaker 1: Candelaria Silva, you've worked with her?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She's the--kind of the--part of the energy behind that, is she not?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Along with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I--and Ron Bailey [Ronald Bailey] and myself were on the hiring team for Candelaria.  We feel we did something right for a change (laughter).
Speaker 1: I had worked with her years ago on a number of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] projects.  I was in the department, African American studies when Ron came here, and we've done some things together, so I'm familiar with the milieu of what you've been, been working with.
Story_ID: 269565
Speaker 1: Have you traveled much since you've been in Boston [Massachusetts]?  I mean have you had a chance to go to other, other parts of the country?  Have any of your plays premiered in other places during the last ten years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I mean--I, I, in modesty I'm gonna say something.  If, if I start telling you just half of the things I can remember, it would--it would seem so boastful and, and egocentric that most people would vomit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I think you should continue in that vein and tell us some more things about [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins and things that we don't know that we should know about your work.
Speaker 2: So you're, you're encouraging me to--
Speaker 1: To say more about, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.  For the past two years, I've been a mentor at Cherry Lane Theatre in Greenwich Village [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Cherry Lin--
Speaker 2: The Cherry Lane--
Speaker 1: Oh, Lane, okay.
Speaker 2: --Theatre in Greenwich Village, 38 Commerce Street.  And of the two writers I worked with, one of their plays is currently running as a--as a full production and it's called 'Slag Heap' and I'm pretty happy about that even though I don't think The New York Times critic was fair.
Speaker 1: It's called 'Slag Heap'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Slag Heap,' S-L-A-G, heap, H-E-A-P, by Anton Dudley.  And Dudley Street, Dudley--yeah, Anton Dudley comes from the British Isles.  Also, I went, went three years to Alaska in the summer to work with the, the New Frontier [sic. Last Frontier Theatre Conference], the New--in Valdez [Alaska], a playwright's conference camp show as a--as a--as a play judge.  They bring, bring playwrights.  Edward Albee is one of the big icons in that and, and they bring together a number of playwrights and have play readings and, and critiques them, and I acted as a, a play lab judge for three years up until the year before last.  And one of those, those, those playwrights was a lady by the name of Shirley Timmreck and her play, 'Circles of Time,' was produced by, by Mort Kaplan and myself at The Lyric Stage Company [of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] here in Boston summer before last.  A musical show of, of my musical, 'Storyville[: A Jazzy Musical of Old New Orleans,' Ed Bullins], was done at the Galveston Island musical theater [Galveston Island Outdoor Musicals, Galveston, Texas] last summer and, and Barbara Bush came.  I didn't--I didn't get down there.  I don't know if I could take Galveston [Texas] in the summer, but she was well received and the play was well received.  And I know after you leave I'll remember all types of things.
Story_ID: 269566
Speaker 1: I was reading some of your rundown on your work earlier and I had made a note, 'Boy X Man.'
Speaker 2: 'Boy X Man.'
Speaker 1: 'Boy X Man.'
Speaker 2: That was a math one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell, tell me about, about that play.  When did you write that?
Speaker 2: I wrote it I think in '94 [1994].  It was produced in Boston [Massachusetts] the, the next year at the Boston Center for the Arts [Boston, Massachusetts].  I think it was in the, the next year.
Speaker 1: And what was that about?
Speaker 2: It was a young man growing up and remembering a contribution of his--not only his mother but his stepfather to his development as, as a man himself.
Speaker 1: Well, that's why I asked you earlier if any of your plays were autobiographical and--
Speaker 2: Well, that, that--that's, that's, that's sort of parallels the development of many young men.
Speaker 1: Can I ask you who was Kingsley Bass?
Speaker 2: Kingsley B. Bass, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a pseudonym that I used to write a play.
Speaker 1: And what was the play?
Speaker 2: 'We Righteous Bombers' [Ed Bullins].
Speaker 1: 'We Righteous Bombers.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was done at, at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] a year or so ago.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'We Righteous Bombers,' what was that about?  Who were the characters?
Speaker 2: About--it's, it's set in a fictional--a fictional time in, in the--in the future where a group of black revolutionary or black terrorists are plotting to destroy or kill the, the prefect of Harlem [New York, New York].  Harlem is now its own little fiefdom surrounded by barbed wire and, and razor wire and, and all of that.  And they're, they're the revolutionaries that are--or the--or the--or the, the confronters of the, the power structure, and it tells that story.
Speaker 1: Why'd you use the pseudonym?
Speaker 2: Because it tells some interesting stories that at the time I didn't want to be traced back to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the issues of Black Theatre Magazine deals with that in, in total, so if you ever get a chance, it's a collector's item now.  If you ever get a chance, you know, to read that, get that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the title again?  Black--
Speaker 2: Black Theatre Magazine.
Story_ID: 269567
Speaker 1: You had a play ['Boy X Man,' Ed Bullins] that also premiered at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?  What was that?
Speaker 2: Premiered?
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: I know I had 'The Electronic Nigger,' [Ed Bullins] but that was no premier.
Speaker 1: I thought I had made a note that you had done a play there.
Speaker 2: Maybe I had.  Well, they, they, they did the, the, 'The Electronic Nigger.'  Maybe some in years past, I did do something, but I forgot that.
Speaker 1: Well, I can't find that note right now, so--before we started the interview, you had shared with me a, a program that you recently attended, participated in.  It was called the Paul Robeson Conference?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where was that held?
Speaker 2: At Lafayette University [sic. Lafayette College] in Easton, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Is this Paul Robeson--is this an annual event or was this the first time?
Speaker 2: That's the first--no, that--there was one a number of years before that Professor Samuel [A.] Hay organized, I think at--I think it was at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] or something like that, so this is the second one, but that was a couple decades ago--
Speaker 1: What was your role at this recent Paul Robeson Conference?
Speaker 2: I was brought there to discuss the, the boycott of the 'Paul Robeson' play in 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell, tell me about that boycott.
Speaker 2: All right.  The play was written by Hayes Dean--the, the name will come to me--senior moment, Philip Hayes Dean, and done on Broadway, and there was objections to the play for various reasons.  Some of them, I'm--I, I hadn't heard until I got to the conference.  But in any case, back then in '78 [1978], it was a, a, a number of noteworthy people like James Baldwin and others who was--were saying that the play should be boycotted because it didn't re--reflect Paul Robeson in a good light.  And so I was--at that time, I was on the Dramatists Guild council, and so the Dramatists Guild along with Joseph Papp and others asked me if, if I'd go see the play, and I saw the play and I liked it.  I said--didn't see anything wrong with it.  I been knowing positive things and listening to Paul Robeson's music for years.  My mother [Bertha Marie Queen Bullins] used to play him a lot.  And so, so I went, saw the play, and I thought the--you know, the play was okay, the Broadway play.  I mean, it's, it's, it's something that anybody could see, and so I don't see why--what, what the problem was.  So that was about the extent of it.  I, I, I voted against boycotting and, and the boycott--the boycott was successful.  They closed the play on Broadway but it opened later in repertory [Ebony Repertory Theatre, Los Angeles, California] with 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' you know, and Ntozake Shange's play.  So, that seemed like a long time to me, but I went to the conference in--at, at Lafayette University anyway and it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: How was your presentation received?
Speaker 2: Very well.
Story_ID: 269568
Speaker 1: You mentioned James Baldwin.  He spent, of course, a good part of his life in Europe.  Did you have interaction with James Baldwin at--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--we ended up being friends, you know.  He was, was a--
Speaker 1: When did you first meet James Baldwin?  Do you remember your first contact with him?
Speaker 2: Did he come to the New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York]?  I, I, I met his brother first, David, but this was all in a swirl of people.  And then Marvin X interviewed Baldwin and I was with Marvin X that day, and I think that may have been the first time I, I met him.  And then over time, you know, periodically, we'd run into each other, be at the same place and--
Speaker 1: Did you and James Baldwin ever talk with each other about your writings, his writings, your writings?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I might have--I don't know.  I can't promise that.  I may have written him a note but I--but I'm not sure of that.  But I remember him saying things to me, but--
Speaker 1: Like what do you remember?
Speaker 2: What do I remember?
Speaker 1: You said you remember him saying things to you.  What--do you remember the conversation specifically?
Speaker 2: Well, see, the interview that Marvin took was, was, was never published.  Marvin lost it along with a lot of other crucial material, which was really a tragedy.  So maybe if I heard that interview, it would recall some things that Baldwin said to me that I may have, have asked questions about or whatever at, at later times--
Story_ID: 269569
Speaker 1: In addition to [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins, who are your favorite playwrights?  Do you have a favorite playwright?  Somebody that, that continued to stand out in, in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--well, there's a number of them but I, I don't wanna--don't wanna cheat any of (laughter) them.
Speaker 1: Putting you on the spot.  Is there anything that you would like to add to this [The] HistoryMakers interview that I haven't asked you about?  Other accomplishments, obstacles, things that you'd like to be part of your HistoryMakers interview?
Speaker 2: Well, I have an enormous amount of stuff, material and archival stuff and I was thinking maybe I should get somebody to start a museum and put some of that stuff--because it's all boxed up and, so--
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier to me that you have a studio here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where you--where you write, where you have actors come in that you work with?  What goes on in your studio?  Is this studio related to Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] or is it your own studio?
Speaker 2: It's my own studio.
Speaker 1: And what do you do there?  What--how do you use it?  As a place to write and think?
Speaker 2: Generally, the, the, the television is over there that Marva [Sparks], that's, that's my companion and she and I don't keep television in the house 'cause I'd be looking at television instead of (laughter) looking at the--well, I've got a DVD machine back there and a cassette player so if you wanna look at something special, but we go visit the television if we're just gonna like, you know, watch a fight on the TV or, or see some of her shows.  But, but aside from that, there's computers, fax machine, copiers, and all the stuff I need to, to turn into a writer instantly, you know.  So, but, but ironically, at this moment, it's, it's, it's broken down, the email and the fax because I moved the studio from the first floor, which is just a smaller floor or smaller space than one of my tenants wanted and moved it to the second floor, which is a much larger space, so I have a more spacious studio.  I can even--well, when my family members come in from out of town, I put 'em up there a lot and maybe some actors if I ever have to get some out of town actors to come in or directors.  So it has its uses, uses.  And I made one DVD--well, I, I didn't make it hands on.  I, I, I produced it more or less and that's--and I might, you know, put, put some kind of facility for making DVDs in, in the--in the studio.
Story_ID: 269577
Speaker 1: --I know Sam Hay [Samuel A. Hay] is going to be coming in to reorganize the material.  I'd shipped it--well, coming from California and all that, I shipped it around and the last place who I entrusted it to, I don't think they were too responsible.  So maybe out of that will come some ideas to--what to do with it.
Speaker 2: Who is Sam Hay?
Speaker 1: He's, he's the one who wrote the biography ['Ed Bullins: A Literary Biography'] of me and he's the professor who organized the Paul Robeson Conference (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  We'll give you a chance to say a little bit more about him later when we put his picture up on, on the screen.  These are some closing questions that we use with all of the interviews.  How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life so far?
Speaker 1: I feel pretty good.
Speaker 2: What's been important to you in your life?
Speaker 1: My children and my writing.
Speaker 2: And your writing, okay.  What do you still want to do--
Speaker 1: And, and--I, I better put in the mothers, put, put, put in the mothers and the others, you know, the people who are close to me.
Speaker 2: You were talking about museum and getting materials together, but let me pursue that with this question.  What do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 1: Oh, I have--still have some plays in me, I guess.
Speaker 2: Anything beyond playwriting that you still wanna do that you haven't had a chance to do yet?
Speaker 1: Not really.  If it happens, okay.  Every time I get in the filmmaking mode, it starts getting crazy, you know?  So I might be happy to see some of my, my plays done, but I don't know how close I'm gonna get to it.
Speaker 2: Is there anything that you've already done that you would have liked to have done differently?
Speaker 1: Many things.
Speaker 2: Such as?
Speaker 1: Many things (laughter).
Speaker 2: Many things.
Story_ID: 269578
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, whether it's here in Boston [Massachusetts] or nationally?
Speaker 2: Well, being in the situation, I just hope they survive because my people were in that situation.
Speaker 1: Our young people hopefully will all learn to write well and there are young people who wanna be writers.  In fact, I'm sponsoring an African American essay, historical essay contest right now down on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] where I live for high school students as part of the Martha's Vineyard branch of the Association [for the Study] of African American Life and History [ASALH].  What advice and lessons would you like to share, would you share with young people, black, who, who wanna be writers, whether they're playwrights or whatever.  What would you say to young people who wanna write and wanna be writers?
Speaker 2: Work hard, don't take anything for granted, you gotta do it yourself, and work hard, work hard, work hard (laughter).  And learn all--learn all you--all you can about your field, and then that'll only be half as much as you'll need to learn.
Story_ID: 269579
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: If, if all of the history isn't thrown away, I'd like to be noted and so my works are around to be appreciated and that's just as far as my art and craft and career.  And I want my children and their children to grow strong and maintain.
Story_ID: 269580
Speaker 1: 'The New Lafayette Theatre Presents[: Plays with Aesthetic Comments by 6 Black Playwrights,' Ed Bullins] is a compilation of plays from mainly the New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York] workshop.  See, I, I didn't see this so I forget--I forget exactly what's in it, so could you just shoot--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right--
Speaker 1: I think Richard Wesley is in that, Marty Chiles [ph.], J.E. Gaines, OyamO [Charles F. Gordon], and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's see, [HistoryMaker Sonia] Sanchez is, is in that and Richard Wesley.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All righty.
Speaker 1: This is the first book that I edited in New York [New York], 'New Plays from the Black Theatre' [Ed Bullins] and it has many of the black move--the black theater movement writers of that time including myself.  And I have a, a quote on the--on the cover also saying we don't want another type of western theater in the black race.  We, we want our own image of theater that moves us to express another reality and, and identity.
Speaker 2: 'Four Dynamite Plays' [ed. Ed Bullins] deals with four of my plays that deal with more or less revolutionary themes or other provocative themes and it was--and it was put together after my 'Five Plays' by [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins (sneezes), excuse me, which you won't see here.  It's--I don't--I don't have a copy on, on hand, but it's recently been--will be reissued by another publisher and available.  Also, that--The University of Michigan Press [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is bringing out Ed Bullins play reader.  They're threatening to do it next year, but we'll see.  But that's about as big as a telephone book.
Speaker 1: Then we have 'The Theme is Blackness' which is 'The Corner and Other Plays' [Ed Bullins].  I have to stop and blow my nose, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, 'The Theme is Blackness.'  It has fourteen or fifteen short plays of mine and it has a play called 'The Corner' which lately I saw someone with a television show with the same title, but their drug of choice was crack cocaine instead of wine like in 'The Corner.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: 'The Hungered One[: Early Writing' Ed Bullins]  I guess I was presumptuous, putting out a early book with subtitle, early writings.  Yes, early writings, but do they deserve to be published?  Well, we have the book.  And some of the pieces are very promising, so when compared to my other number of books in years to come, perhaps it'll have something to say for itself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us when this was taken and where, the occasion.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was in the last four or five years.  It was taken in Valdez, Alaska.  It's--I was a play lab judge at the Last Frontier playwright's workshop [Last Frontier Theatre Conference] in Valdez over three summers.  That's the conference organized by Edward Albee, one of my old theater friends from New York and the world.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Why did he--
Speaker 1: That's me with Robert MacBeth.  Robert MacBeth brought me to New York in 1966 or thereabouts or seven to work with him at the New Lafayette Theatre.  And he was a great influence, had a great impact on my life and my work, and he's currently writing the history of the New Lafayette Theatre.
Speaker 2: There I am with Sonia Sanchez and August Wilson, both friends.  Sonia, I've known since the days of San Francisco [California] in the '60s [1960s] at the Black House and at San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and the Black Communications Group.  August, I've known his work and met him at the Gwendolyn Brooks Center for Black Literature [and Creative Writing, Chicago State University] at Chicago, Illinois, and we've been friends since, and a great deal of respect and admiration for both of them, and I'm glad to be able to stand beside them.
Story_ID: 269581
Speaker 1: That's a photo of a recent event, maybe in February of this year, 2005.  It shows me standing behind my cousin, Florence [ph.], and beside Trey Garrett, a young promising theater person, at The Town Hall, Town Hall in New York City [New York, New York].  The New Federal Theatre [New York, New York], [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.]'s New Federal Theatre, was awarding, making awards to theater personalities that, that had been involved with his theater over his thirty year history.  And giving a roast--they gave a roast to [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, and it was really a wonderful event, and I was honored to be a part of it.
Speaker 2: This is something that happened the, the past weekend.  Marva [Sparks], my companion, since 1986, who came from San Francisco [California] with me to Boston [Massachusetts].  We went for a, a Boston Bay [sic. Boston Harbor] cruise on the Spirit of Boston, and we had a good time.  And we've taken cruises to the Caribbean and, and, and now that, that was our bay cruise, and who knows?  One day, we might go around the world on a boat.
Speaker 1: That's chief mentor number one, Amiri Baraka, known to many earlier as LeRoi Jones.  That's the man of the revolutionary letters in America.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Sam Hay?
Speaker 1: That's Professor Samuel [A.] Hay who's one of my best friends and my biographer, 'Ed Bullins[: A] Literary Biography,' writer, and he's also the organizer of the recent Paul Robeson Conference at Lafayette University [sic. Lafayette College] in Easton, Pennsylvania.  I wondered why Sam went to Lafayette University after retiring from the school.  He was in the South, but I--now I know.  It's a great--it's a great institution, the Lafayette University in Easton, Pennsylvania.  And Sam's doing great work there, and they're helping him do it.
