Story_ID: 3806
Speaker 1: My name is Nelvia, N-E-L-V-I-A, Brady, B-R-A-D-Y.
Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: I was born February 11, 1948 in Fairfield, Alabama.
Speaker 2: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm an Educator.  I am a businesswoman.  I'm an author.  I'm a college professor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm all of those things.
Speaker 2: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: February, oh, February.  Today is Apr-  August twenty-fifth?  Sixth. 2003.
Speaker 2: Right.  And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 1: We're in Palos Heights, Illinois.
Speaker 2: In your home?
Speaker 1: My home.
Story_ID: 3807
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Before we go into depth, there are five 'People' magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer.  These are lightweight questions and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: don't require any--.
Speaker 2: I have a hard time with lightweight questions. (Laughs)  Okay.  All right.  The first question is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 1: I like greens.  I love greens, turnips and mustards.
Speaker 2: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.  Purple.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: I think I like the spring.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.
Speaker 2: All right, and--I know you'll have one of these now.  Do you have a favorite phrase of saying.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I got lots of those.  "If you keep doing what you're doing, you're going to keep getting what you're getting."
Story_ID: 3808
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Jessie Pearl Shuford Moore.  And that's J-E-S-S-I-E, P-E-A-R-L, S-H-U-F-O-R-D, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on May 19, 1925 in Bessemer, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And she has the same birthday as Malcolm X.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Same date and year.
Speaker 2: Oh, I hadn't thought about that.
Speaker 1: And, what do you know about her side of the family?  Are they all from Alabama or--.
Speaker 2: Yeah--.
Speaker 1: How far back do they go?
Speaker 2: You know, unfortunately, I don't go back as far as I'd like to.  I know that her mother was a gardener and she married into the Shuford family.  And they're all from Alabama.  My grandfather had been, my grand- my great grandfather had been a white man.  And my mother had twelve or thirteen brothers and sisters, and they lived in rural Alabama.  The men in the family all ended up going to the military, to the [United States] Navy.  And that's how they built their lives.  They started out using the Navy as a way to get out of rural Alabama.  And mostly they were quite successful in using that as a bridge to a different way of life.  My mother married when she was a teenager.  My father was from rural Alabama also, a different part, not the same area that she was from, but nearby.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met that they tell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an, it's an interesting story.  My father [David Moore] was ten years older than my mother and when she was fifteen he made it known to my grandmother that he was interested in her.  She was a beautiful, a very beautiful woman.  And he was, as I mentioned ten years older.  And he told my grandmother  that when she became of age, he would like to date her.  And that's exactly what happened.  My grandmother subsequently pushed this relationship.  My mother wasn't too enthused about it.  And my grandmother pushed the relationship and pushed the relationship until they finally were married when my mom was eighteen.  And he, by this time, was in the Navy.  And one of the good things for my mother was that it allowed her to travel around the world and see a lot of places and things like that.  I have an older brother.  He was born in San Diego [California].  And then, the reason I was born in Alabama was because my father was stationed away and so my mother had come back home.  And I was born in Alabama.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was kind of an arranged marriage, if you will.
Story_ID: 3809
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense that this arranged marriage-type situation was done, was a regular practice in that part of the country or something that they were used to?
Speaker 2: I don't really have a sense of that.  When my mother [Jessie Pearl Shuford Moore] talks about it, she doesn't speak of it as being anything that was highly unusual for the parents to kind of want to match-make.  Frankly, I think it's rather a good idea.  (laughter).  But in her case, she--I think my mother resented that and as she tells the story, sometimes it makes you wonder what might have happened had my grandmother not done that.  Whose daughter would I be?  (laughter)  So, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories from your mother's side of the family that are, are passed down about slavery or about Africa, about the ninteenth century or Civil War or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, it's--you know, it's kind of troubling to me because there seems to just be a whole part of my history that's gone that we don't have any sense of.  And I think it's because on both of my parent's side, the great-grandparents, there was white.  And so that history is just gone.  And I don't know whether it was because out of shame or whatever, it wasn't passed on or what, but it's just not there.  So I don't have any stories about slavery or any of that at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were your-- where your mother was raised, did her family own some property or did, were they sharecropping or what were they doing?
Speaker 2: They owned the property.  They owned the property.  They had, my mother's family had a, a small, what we would call, farm.  They raised cows and chickens and pigs.  And we would spend our summers there as I was growing up, spend some periods of time during the summers there.  So, but they were not sharecroppers.  My father's family were considered somewhat well-to-do.  They owned a grocery store about as big as this basement.
Story_ID: 3810
Speaker 1: Now, what is your father's full name and can you spell that for us and give us his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His name is, was David Moore  and he was born April 22nd, 1916.  He's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and he was born in that part of Alabama-- (unclear)
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Um-hum.  Lowndes County.
Speaker 1: Lowndes County.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Right, that's the-- where the famous Voters' Registration Campaign--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: took place in '65 [1965] and that's where they formed the Black Panther Voter Registration Party.
Speaker 2: Oh, really, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fannie Lou Hamer and the rest of them, Lowndes County, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where he was from.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--.  Okay,  now, are there any stories from his side of the family?
Speaker 2: (sighs) No.
Speaker 1: Is there any, any stories about how they, they accumulated property because it is,  I think most of us know,  right after the Civil War, they weren't giving away much property to black people.  I mean we--.  Most of them got nothing.  So.
Speaker 2: I do not have any idea of how they got property and both families had property.  I don't know how they got it and there's, there's been no stories told about that at all.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, any, anything at all they passed down, any stories or songs or tales or fibs even, or (laughter) anything about life?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  You know, they left the South when, when they married and, and it seems as though that was just left behind.  There was no desire to connect to that at all.  And then as the family, I said all my mother's brothers were Navy guys.  The family ended up all over the place and so the, those Southern roots didn't leave a lot, a lot for me.  And I've not taken the time to find out about all of, all of that.  So, don't know a lot about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, well tell us about your father.  What kind of a person was he?  What did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a tough guy.  He was, he was a little man, but he was tough.  He had been in the Navy.  He spent I'd say about fifteen years in the Navy.  And left the Navy and came North to Chicago [Illinois]  and after a variety of jobs, got hooked up with the U.S. Postal Service and worked until retirement for the Post Office.  He was an entrepreneur of sorts.  I mean he always had a, like a little scam going, little things that he would hustle.  He was a hustler, I guess you would call it.  What else can I say about him?  He was very bright, very, very smart.  Not--.  He had completed about two years of college.  He spoke three languages.  He'd tell stories about--.  He was a military hero.  As a matter of fact, his--.  I have some documentation of him being in shipwreck and--.
Speaker 1: This was during World War II?
Speaker 2: World War II, yeah, being in a shipwreck.  He has a Bronze Star [awarded for combat heroism or for meritorious service.]
Speaker 1: Where, where did he serve in the--.
Speaker 2: In the Navy, U.S. Navy.
Speaker 1: And what, what theater (unclear) of the war?  In Europe or, or the, Japan or--.
Speaker 2: It must have been Europe because he was on a ship.  But I don't know all the details of that, but--.
Speaker 1: It could have been in the Pacific too, you know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Mediterranean or the Pacific and Atlantic, you know.
Speaker 2: But his ship sank.  And he was given a, a metal or something for saving a couple of other guys after the ship was wrecked, spending two or three days on the water and saving a couple of other people.  But what he told us about was, he told us about how racist the military was and how they couldn't have the jobs that the other guys had and he was relegated to a Cook.  And, and he didn't speak highly of the experience he had in the military at all.  So.
Speaker 1: Was that information shocking to you when you were young?  Or did you--.  How did you take it?
Speaker 2: Didn't pay it any attention at all.  I, I didn't, it didn't click.  He, he had wounds in his legs from apparently when he was sea and he was out on shipwreck and he would talk about that.  But we, we really didn't pay it close attention to it growing up.  It was later when I, as a matter of fact, when he died, I took his papers and started to go through some of them and read in detail about this and he was truly a hero and we never knew.  And it's kind of sad, you know, that we didn't, at least I didn't, have an interest in all of that coming up.  So.
Speaker 1: You're saying while he--.  Your parents got married and they, they traveled together in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To places that he was stationed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he stay in the Navy a long time?  Was this during the war or, or after the war?
Speaker 2: He stayed in about twelve to fifteen years and I think he got out around Korea or before the Korean War.
Speaker 1: So he joined prior to World War II and was in (simultaneous) all the way through--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: until the Korean War.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He joined in the mid-30's, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: He was --.  He was just of age, whatever that age was, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, whatever it was.
Speaker 1: How many years older was he than your mother?
Speaker 2: Ten.
Speaker 1: Ten.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  And so she kind of, you know, he was in uniform and all of the--.  And if you--.  I would show you some pictures, you would be able to see the kind of lifestyle that, that they had.  The flowers in the hair and him in a uniform.  He was a very handsome man.  But then after the military, he, as I said, join the Postal Service and then ultimately retired from the post office.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Story_ID: 3811
Speaker 1: Now, what, what is your first memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: One of my earliest memories was when we moved to public housing.  It was an exciting time.  We were moving on up, if you will. We were going to have our own bedrooms and we were living on, on the West Side of the Chicago [Illinois] in the basement, kind of, I guess what we call today a tenement apartment and we were going to be moving into this new high-rise housing.  And it was a very exciting time.  At that time there were four children and we were gonna to have our own bedrooms and it was brand new and that's one of the earliest memories that I have.
Speaker 1: Okay now, people looking at this may think it's strange today or in the future that people would be excited about moving into public housing.  But it was different in those days.
Speaker 2: Absolutely different.  It was not housing of last resort.  It was viewed I, as temporary housing, for lower income people, lower income and working people with families.  At that time, there was still segregated housing in Chicago.  And, there weren't a lot of options for families, poor families.  And I can recall people living next door who--there was a guy who was in medical school and his wife.  Everybody had fathers and mothers, not everyone, but most families.  There were families, two parent families and kids.  And they were new and they were clean and they were well kept and there were rules and regulations and standards had to be met.  You were interviewed before you could move in.  Children were well disciplined.  It was clean, very different from today.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: There are seven of us.  I have four sisters and two brothers.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in that grouping?
Speaker 2: The second child; the oldest girl.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, well, you grew up in Rockwell [public housing] project?
Speaker 2: Rockwell and Henry Horner [Homes] [public housing projects, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Rockwell Gardens and Henry Horner?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Give us some idea what it was like growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the playgrounds.  And I remember playing hop scotch and, and playing with tennis balls and playing games and patty cake  and I remember lots of children.  I remember it being very safe.  I remember adults being around us.  I remember that families took care of families.  If you did something wrong Ms. Jones was gonna tell your mother, and you were going to be trouble.  If not, Ms. Jones was gonna take care of it herself.  It was sort of a, a sense of family in the projects at that time.  I remember that people--we expected--we didn't know we were poor.  I guess that's what it is.  We, we didn't think about the life we were living as a life of poverty.  I, I never knew I was poor until I went to college (laughter).  And so, I never knew I was poor.
Speaker 1: Okay, how many families were in like Rockwell or Henry Horner? Did you live in Rockwell first or Henry Horner first?
Speaker 2: Lived in Henry Horner first.  In Henry Horner, we lived in a seven-story building.  I lived on the fifth floor in a  seven-story building. And then Rockwell was a larger building, so thirteen floors, and we lived on the thirteenth floor.  About how many people were living in the same building would you estimate?
Speaker 1: Well, if you figure there were thirteen floors and there're ten families on a floor, at least ten.  That's 130.  Maybe five in a family.  What's that? About 800, something like that.
Speaker 2: That's a lot yeah.  But it, and yet, you know, the buildings were maintained pretty well and people, you know--.
Speaker 1: They were.  They were maintained pretty well.  And I sort of--I was there until--I was there through high school graduation which was in 1966 and I came back in 1970 after I received my degree.  I lived at home and taught for a while.  And between the time that I left in '66 [1966] and 1970, when I returned, there was a real change.  It was, and I was beginning to see the deterioration myself, by that time.  And I'm not,  I'm not sure exactly when it happened or what happened or why but, you began to see that change occur.
Story_ID: 3812
Speaker 1: Now, at Henry Horner [Homes] [public housing project, Chicago, Illinois], you were near the Chicago Stadium, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any events--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember my brothers used to (laughs) park cars when there were events at the Chicago Stadium [sports arena], my, my brother would go over and park cars.  And I guess it was a way of making some money.  He would go out and--I guess people felt insecure about parking their cars.  And so they would say, "We'll watch your car for, for some change."  And he would do that.  But you know, even though we were close to the Chicago Stadium, the Chicago Stadium wasn't part of our life.  It really wasn't.  It was just something that happened in the neighborhood.  We didn't, we--.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go to the hockey games--. (laughs)
Speaker 2: No, no, un-un, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: I know, I know Chicago struggled for a long time when we were coming up to acquire a basketball team.  And I think they got-- they had a couple of failures in a group called Chicago Stags that didn't work and Chicago Zephyrs didn't work.  They finally caught on with the [Chicago] Bulls.
Speaker 2: When did they get the Bulls?  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: The Bulls was in the mid-60s (1960s), I think '63 [1963], '64 [1964],  I think--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Finally acquired the, you know, the Bulls.
Speaker 2: But they were, they were doing the hockey games, I know that.  You know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the [Chicago] Blackhawks and the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So you, you never got like free, those free tickets to go to the ice show or anything like that over there?
Speaker 2: Un-un, un-un, un-un.  No, they might have been given out in the community but I don't recall ever, ever being the beneficiary of any of that.  So.
Speaker 1: But did the stadium add to the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Not as far as I am concerned.  I mean I don't remember the traffic being any worse when they were there or anything like that.  It was almost as though we weren't a part of all that.  I lived at 1900 West Washington [Boulevard].  And the way that was set up, we weren't on Washington Street.  We were sort of set back a little bit from the street.  And so all of those were sort of something that was around us.  And, of course, in those days, after dark, we were supposed to be in the house.  We weren't outside.  I mean you'd go in when the street lights go off, come on.  So (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] hadn't been built yet at that time? That was over on Van Buren [Street]. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Malcolm X, Malcolm X was coming.  And I vaguely remember when it started.  I want to say it was around '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].  But it wasn't called Malcolm X College initially.  I can't remember what it was called either.
Speaker 1: I can't help you on that one.  I can't think of it either, but--.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't think it was originally called Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: It was called Crane Junior College because I took classes at, while I was still in high school, I took classes at what was then Crane Junior College.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were also near the, I guess the beginnings of the University of Illinois Circle Campus [Chicago, Illinois].  University of Illinois Circle opened its door I believe the year that I graduated from high school, which was 1966.  And my parents wanted me to go there.  It was like one L [elevated train]  stop from my house.  And, and that was the last thing that I wanted to do (laughs).  So, so there was somewhat of a little battle to, to get to go to University of Illinois at [Urbana] Champaign.  So--but I won.
Story_ID: 3813
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little girl, I mean what did you like to do and what were you like?  What kind of little girl were you?
Speaker 2: I was very studious.  I would be called today a nerd probably.  I loved to read.  I would play games that had to with, with my learning.  I used to love to play school when I could be the teacher.  We were involved with some church programs.  There was apparently a, a missionary group that would come into the community on weekends and pick the kids up and take them for Bible study.  And we would have contests and if you memorized these Bible verses, you could get prizes.
Speaker 1: Was this a black group that--
Speaker 2: Un-un.  It was not a black group, and they'd bring us on vans, come in their vans and take us out.  It was--they had a camp and I remember the camp was called Camp Sunshine Win.  And we, we would like to go because we could win prizes.  If you memorized Bible verses.  And so if you memorized fifty, you got a camera.  If you memorized a hundred, you got a bicycle.  If you memorized 300, you got a trip to this camp.  And so my sister and I, whose eighteen months younger, we would do these things with these Bible verses.  And she would say, Luke 3:16, and I would say, you know, give her the scripture.  And we'd memorize all these bible verses, stuff like that.  It's interesting.  We would--.
Speaker 1: Was this the Church of the Brethren sponsoring that or--.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Which I'm guessing.  I'm sorry.  I shouldn't even ask that.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: But I know it was some West Side [of Chicago, Illinois] groups that do that now, and I was trying to figure out which one.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you would play and memorize the verses and--.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.  I remember once we memorized, to memorize 300 of them, we could go to camp.  And we wanted to go to camp.  And we memorized all 300.  And we sat for them.  And then we won, and my mother [Jessie Pearl Shuford Moore] wouldn't let us go to camp.  And we should have known because she would never let her children spend the night outside the home.  And we just never thought that, somehow, it just never occurred to us that this camp was a, a venture away from the home, and she would not let us do.  So they were pretty protective of their children.
Story_ID: 3814
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school.  Now, where did you go to school initially and how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was nerd now, remember.  So I loved school.  I loved school.  I never wanted to miss a day, even if I was sick or, or my mother had to do something and she needed us at home or--I cried because I didn't want to miss school.  I attended a, a variety of schools on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in the, at the elementary grades.  I don't know what might have been going on in the late '50s [1950s], but we, we were moved a lot.  And I think it probably had something to do with school segregation.  They were moving kids around a lot because I went Bernie, Brown [William H. Brown Elementary School], [Henry] Suder [Elementary School] and [Ulysses S.] Grant [Elementary School].  And we only moved once.  We moved from Henry Horner [Homes] [public housing projects, Chicago, Illinois]  to Rockwell [Gardens].
Speaker 1: Bernie, Brown, Suder and Grant.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, Suder is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [Washington] Irving [Elementary School] also.
Speaker 1: Irving too?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right because that's a photo of yours (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: And so we went, I went to several different elementary schools, but I was, always a high achiever, always on honor roll and spelling bees and whatever it was academically, I was a part of it from as early as I can remember.  And as early as I can remember, I wanted to be in education.  And as early as I can remember, my father [David Moore] said that I was going to be the first child of his to go to college.  It was interesting because it was not gonna be my brother [Allen Moore] who was older.  It was going to be his daughter.
Speaker 1: So did your brother go to the [United States] Navy?  Is that what happened?
Speaker 2: My brother--no, my brother went to the [United States] Air Force.  And then he went to college.  But he, he is a college graduate.  So he went to the Air Force, to my father's [David Moore] dismay.
Speaker 1: He was a real Navy man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.  But I, I remember school fondly.  And I remember high expectations for me in school.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you remember from school that really made an impact on you?
Speaker 2: Oddly enough, not any one teacher.  And as strong as, a presence that school has had in my life, I don't have one teacher who influenced me above any.  The closest I come to that is a high school math teacher, Mr. Chedister.  And, and I guess by that time I was old enough to recognize what was happening in society.  Mr. Chedi-, Mr. Chedister was white.  But he was a lifetime, card-carrying member of the N, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And he made all of his student join the NAACP.  So we became very acquainted with the work of the NAACP through [William] Bill Chedister.  And I remember when they were having boycotts and things like that, he would try to, I guess to the extent that a teacher could, he would try to tell us what to do under those circumstances and it would always be in line with whatever the NAACP was pushing at the time. So, so I remember school as being a fun place and a place where I was very successful.  And I remember having to do other kids homework on occasion.  I remember fighting when I decided I wasn't gonna do that.
Story_ID: 3815
Speaker 1: Oh, they [bullies] were trying to make you do their homework?
Speaker 2: Um-hum [laughs].
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what happened.  Tell us the story.
Speaker 2: Well, I remember once after school, one of the little bullies, I don't remember the name, had said, I'm a get you at 3:15 [P.M.].
Speaker 1: This is a girl or a boy?
Speaker 2: A boy.  It was, it was never girls.  It was usually boys.  Because you didn't do--you were supposed to do my homework and you didn't do it.  And I was so frightened.  So about two o'clock, I got really sick (laughter).  And they sent me home so I wasn't gonna get beat up.  Once, a young man caught me after school at the grocery store, and, a matter of fact that was something pretty serious.  He hit me in the head with a [soda] pop bottle.  And I had to have some stitches in my forehead.  But it was like I ended up learning how to protect myself from that, but it was expected that if you were smart, you were supposed to help other kids and do their homework.
Speaker 1: That was pretty rough, being hit in the head with pop bottle.
Speaker 2: Oh, I had to go to hospital (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) somebody else's homework.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What happened to him?  Did they ever--anything ever happen to him?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't remember.  I don't remember what happened but, I remember--.
Speaker 1: Did you tell your parents who did it and--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah they knew.  We were kind of afraid to tell my father certain things.  My father [David Moore] was very protective, and we were always, always afraid that if we told him certain things that, that he would, he would get in trouble for trying to protect us.  And we didn't want anything to happen to him.  So things would happen to us and we wouldn't tell those stories to my parents.  I remember being attacked as a teenage girl in the projects.  And this is when things were beginning to change.  And I remember, then I had gotten in the elevator, I mentioned that we lived the thirteenth floor.  And I had a--I was fifteen, but I was lying about my age so I could work.  I was working at a local dime store and was going to work one Saturday morning.  And I got on the elevator at the thirteenth floor, and there was somebody, a man on the elevator.  That was highly unusual for it to reach the top and there be someone on it because usually by the time it would reach the top, somebody, if someone was on it, they were going to get off.  And so it was usually empty.  And I noticed there was a man on the elevator, but I got on anyway.  And he was in back of me and he walked over and he pressed the ninth floor.  And I again, intuitively, cause that's unusual.  Why would he be pushing nine?  If he wanted to go to nine, he would have gotten off before it got to thirteen.  But anyway, when it got to nine, he grabbed me and took me off of the elevator and was carrying me towards the stairwell when I decided that I had to fight, I had to break away because I, I knew that if he took me in the stairwell, nobody was going to be walking down, if the elevators were working.  It might be days before somebody found their way to the stairwells on the ninth floor.  So, I started to fight, and I was able to break away from him.  But the, the tragedy of that story is, is not as much what happened to me with the attack, but what happened to me in the aftermath, and that is how I was treated by policemen afterwards.  I ran into someone's apartment, and then they got my parents and they started to look for this guy, and, and of course, my father started to look for this guy.  And I was afraid that he (little laughter) would find him.  But I went on to work that day, and later the police detectives came by my job to question me about this attack.  And they showed you mug shots of people that had done things in the community.  And it could have been anything.  It could have been robbery or anything but they were just showing me pictures of men who had, who had crime in the neighborhood.  And I knew a lot of them because I had lived in this community all of my life.  And so I'd say, "Oh, is that Larry?  What did he do?"  You know, just very naively, and this apparently made them think that, that I was an unsavory character.  And so they started to imply that somehow it was my fault that I had been attacked.  And what kinds of promises had I made to boys in school and all these sorts of things.  And as it turned out, I was--it was so negative that I refused to go back to look at other  mug shots after that, but that sort of treatment of girls during that era who had those kinds of crimes or attempted against them.  So.
Story_ID: 3816
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were the-- you said very few teachers really stand out in school, but what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Math.  I was a, a math major in college [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] for the first couple of years.  And I enjoyed math.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any clubs and activities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was involved in everything.  I was National Honor Society.  I was Class Officer.  I was in the Spanish club--.
Speaker 1: This is in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Crane [Richard T. Crane Technical Preparatory Common School, Chicago, Illinois].  Yeah.  So I was very much involved in high school. Graduated Valedictorian, most likely to succeed, all that good stuff, National Merit Scholar, Illinois State Scholar, all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Well, that is good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, how was your social life then?  Did you, you know, did you--?
Speaker 2: Very social by this time.  I was no longer a nerd in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to the prom and all that stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was very popular, very social.  By this time, see, being smart was okay.  And I was kind of cute too.  So (laughs), so that was--I had a good time in high school.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you were a [high school] senior, did you--?  What did you--?  Did you have an idea what career you were gonna pursue when you finished high school?
Speaker 2: I wanted to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to teach.  And then I, I went to college on a scholarship, a full scholarship.
Story_ID: 3817
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose U of I [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]?  How did that work out?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, that's, that's sort of what happens to you.  You just don't really know.  My parents were not college educated so I was the first one.  And, and nobody had gone through that process before.  And we didn't know, you know, the kinds of things to look for.  Or--I was interviewed by Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York]  and offered a full package at Vassar.
Speaker 1: You didn't want to go there because--
Speaker 2: Let me tell you what happened.  The lady came from Vassar to my high school.  And she was, she had a little pill box hat on her head and gloves and she was very prim and proper.  And, and she told me that if I would come to Vassar that they would make sure that when the girls went away from spring break to Florida and places like that, that I could go.  And that that they would make sure that I had the right kinds of clothes and, you know, people would take care all of that for me.  And she went through this whole list of things that they would do for me if I came to Vassar.  And I was smart enough to know that if they were going to have to do all of these things for me to make me fit in, then maybe that's not the place for me to be.  It was just a slew of stuff that they were going to have to do to make me all right for that environment.  So I chose not to go.  I was accepted at Carleton [College] in [Northfield] Minnesota.  And I chose the University of Illinois because my best girlfriend had a scholarship there.  So (laughter).  So, and what's interesting about that though is that she only made it the first semester and then I was there by myself.  So.
Story_ID: 3818
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did you like the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: You know, it was a foreign territory to me coming out of the West side of Chicago [Illinois].  It was like, what is this?  I just had no notion of what college was going to be about.  I had never been around that many white people.  I mean I lived in public housing.  It was all black.  And, and I went to Crane High School [Richard T. Crane Technical Preparatory Common School, Chicago, Illinois].  That was all black.  And now, all of a sudden, I am in a totally white environment.  At that time, African Americans were 1 percent of the pop- the population there.  They were less than three hundred out of the, the twenty-five [thousand], thirty thousand students on campus.  And so it was like a, a culture shock.  I remember going in to see the admissions counselor, you know, how you do the, get ready for your classes and stuff.  And and I walked in and he had all the paper in front of him about my background.  And he knew I'd graduated number one in my class, and I'm an Illinois [State] Scholar and National Merit [Scholar] and all this stuff.  And he had a chart.  And he looked at it, and he said, "Ms. Brad-,  Ms. Moore, if you work hard and stay out of Kam's, which was a local bar, you might make Cs."  That's what the counselor said to me.  And I was--I mean it was like," Oh my god, what have I gotten myself into here?"  You know, I had never made a C in my life, you know.  And he tells me if I worked hard and stay out of the bar, I might make Cs.  It scared me to death.  And as a matter of fact, I thought about going home, just getting on that train and going back home.  But I didn't.  And I made the decision that I would prove this guy wrong.  And, and I decided to stay.  But--.
Speaker 1: Was it really tough, there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was tough, but I was tough.  So I had to work harder there than I had to, to work in high school.  But it was certainly nothing about my background that should have made him say that to me.  And I think of all the kids who he probably said that to who did turn around and go home or who were so frustrated or who had the self-fulfilling prophecy so-to-speak.  It was those kinds of incidents during my life that made me want to go into the field of education because I wanted to make sure that these kinds of things didn't happen to other young people.  So.  But [University of] Illinois, I did not--I was not straight As, but I'm, I did fine.
Story_ID: 3819
Speaker 1: Now, did you get involved in campus [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] life activities?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That was during the, the Movement [Civil Rights].  And we were organizing on campus and we were challenging the administration in a number of ways.  But some very positive things came out of that.  One of the things.  They're celebrating I think this summer, they're celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of what was called Project 500 at the University of Illinois in Champaign.  And Project 500 was an effort to recruit five hundred minority students to campus.  And it was an effort that the students undertook.  We had demonstrated and, and taken over the Student Union building and we got the administration to commit to allow us to--we told them that we could find the students.  If they would let them in, we could find.  And they allowed us that summer to recruit five-hundred minority students to the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Was this 1965?
Speaker 2: 1968.
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].  That's right because you graduated in '66 [1966] from high school (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So this year or this fall, they're celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of what was called Project 500 and we, we had students stationed in Chicago [Illinois].  We had some students stationed on the East Coast and we had some in the South.  And we actually recruited students to the University of Illinois.  And, and they got in and it was one of the most successful efforts in terms of retention that they'd ever had there.  So.  And that was the kind of thing, the kind of result of some of the student activities and student uprisings that we had on campus.
Speaker 1: Was there a black student organization by name or what?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: What was it called?
Speaker 2: Black Students Association.
Speaker 1: Okay, BSA, would you call it?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that influenced the students, that were--, that influenced you during that time?
Speaker 2: Um--.
Speaker 1: Or people on campus?
Speaker 2: And we were, we were like--although there were only three hundred of us [African American students on campus], we were a very cohesive group.  We had to be.  And I remember a guy by the name of William Savage who was from Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, public housing project, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember we hired a Dean that, to work with us on that program [Project 500]. Dean Clarence Shelly was very instrumental in a lot of things that happened for us there.  We had a couple of professors, I cannot remember their names now, but only a couple who were in the classroom at that time.  So.
Story_ID: 3820
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so any, anything else from, college, from the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I got married.
Speaker 1: In, college?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  End of my sophomore year, I got married.
Speaker 1: So you met your husband on campus?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sophomore year?  Well, you didn't last long--.
Speaker 2: Sure didn't.  He, he was from the same neighborhood.  And he ostensibly (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he ostensibly was helping to introduce me to campus life.  (Laughter)  But I got married at the end of the sophomore year, yeah, stayed married for twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and stayed--well, you still stayed on campus and everything?
Speaker 2: Stayed on campus.  He went to the service and I joined him.  So I didn't finish.  I did my last year out of residence.  So.
Speaker 1: So he joined the service during the Vietnam war?  Was he drafted or what happened?
Speaker 2: He, he had been in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps].  And I think, as I recall, he got into ROTC to keep from being drafted.  And then when he got--when he finished college, they called him and he had to come right in and do his time.
Speaker 1: And served as a Second Lieutenant in (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.  So.
Speaker 1: So was he sent to Vietnam or?
Speaker 2: No, un-un.  No, he wasn't.  Texas.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: That's better than Vietnam. At least in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have children right away or did you wait?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any children. We didn't have any children. He went to the service.  I joined him and finished, I finished--, took some courses at University of Texas, El Paso.  I finished up my degree.  And when he finished, we--where'd we go after he finished?  We went to Madison, Wisconsin so he could get a Master's Degree and--.
Speaker 1: And you were in school there too, the University of Wisconsin ?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum yeah.  I went to University of Wisconsin to get a Master's degree in Counseling.  And left there and went to Minneapolis [Minnesota] where I became a high school counselor and later the Director of Guidance Programs for the Minneapolis Public Schools.  And then I left Minneapolis and went to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] to get my Doctorate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so did you have to live in Lansing, or East Lansing?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did.  You know Lansing?
Speaker 1: Just a little.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Story_ID: 3821
Speaker 1: All right, well, you know, are there any stories from, from your graduate studies that stand out or any teachers in particular or, you know, that you see as outstanding?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you.  I--, at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], you're saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and at Michigan State.
Speaker 2: Not so much so and with the University of Wisconsin.  I think, I think at Michigan State, that's where I encountered Dr. Robert Green and Dr. Wilbur Brookover.  Wilbur Brookover had been the Mayor of East Lansing, but he also testified in Brown v. Topeka [Brown vs. Board of Education, Topeka, Kansas 1954] and, and he became my, my Dissertation Chair while at Michigan State.  So I had an opportunity there to work with one of the preeminent ed, educational sociologist in the country.  And through him, studied under, excuse me, under people like [Ronald] Ron Edmonds.  I don't know if you remember Ron Edmonds who--he's deceased, but he had a theory of education called 'Effective Schools.'  And essentially it was a very basic, belief that all children could learn, a very basic kind of thing.  But he was preeminent in that whole area of minority children being able to learn.  And his theory was that they could learn anything that we decided that we're willing to teach them and the issue was, had we decided we wanted to teach them or not.  So I studied under Wilbur Brookover and worked with Ron Edmonds and began to pursue a course of study that had to do with equity in education.  And that's where my whole career has been, around that whole area of Educational Equity.
Speaker 1: Okay, you mentioned Robert Green too right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: At the University of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, do you know Robert Green?
Speaker 1: at Michigan State.  I've heard his name a lot.  In fact, I had a relative who worked for him at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert Green was one of the few African Americans on the faculty at Michigan State at the time, and I would say during that period, it was hard for any African American to leave Michigan State without having some contact with Bob Green.  I mean he was just there for us.  And I give him a lot of credit for my being able to persist.  I mean he was one of those kinds of guys that was just there for, for as many students as possible.  So.
Story_ID: 3822
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved quite a bit and that's the kind of activity, a lot, a lot of moving, I guess, you moved from Texas and back up to Wisconsin, to Madison a couple of years and then going to Minnesota and then to Michigan State in Lansing [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  It was all for my education, almost every move.  Every move had to do with an educational move really.  Yeah, a lot of moving.  But, you know, I, I'm appreciative of that because not only did I experience a lot of little things and places, but I met people all around the country.  And when you live like that, it forces you to be outgoing (laughter).  And it forces you to sort of find a place for yourself wherever you are.  So that was good for me to do that.  And--.
Story_ID: 3823
Speaker 1: Now, how did the education that you received in Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools on the West Side compare with what you learned in school about education?
Speaker 2: It--I just wondered how we ever made it as far as we did because our resources were just--. I mean, the resources that I saw as I went out into the world to teach and to become an educator, I couldn't believe what I was seeing.  The laboratories, the libraries, the swimming pools, the books, just having a well-maintained, cleaned learning atmosphere.  That was routine and commonplace in some of the places that, that I ended up.  Minnesota, for example.  Minneapolis Public Schools, the quality of the teaching, the quality of the services, the creativity and innovation in the programming that was going on.  I just, really was able to see first hand the, the secondary quality of the education that our kids were receiving here at home.
Speaker 1: Did you have an analysis about what we needed, and--well, probably more money, I guess, for resources right?  Or more--?
Speaker 2: Well, my research kind of indicated that it wasn't always resources.  It was how those resources were deployed in some instances and so many things that--you know, like when I went to Chicago Public Schools, for example, our parents couldn't even call the schools.  We weren't--they weren't even allowed to have the telephone number of the school.  Do you recall--?  Do you remember those days?
Speaker 1: I've heard of that.
Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't--
Speaker 1: No, I didn't go to school here, but I heard about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, you didn't go to school here, but you could not, you couldn't call the school.  And just (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's something that wouldn't take place in Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.  And knowing, and as an educator, how important it is for parents to be involved in schools and to participate in the education of their children.  You know, and then, and for the school system to say, you can't even have the phone number to the school?  That's kind of different.  You know, and the whole notion around desegregation and segregation and, and how the assumption being that, that somehow to integrate a school is gonna change the learning climate.  If you've got 90 percent of your children in segregated schools, are you going to assume that because of that, they cannot learn.  And I think that assumption was--well, it was an excuse.
Story_ID: 3824
Speaker 1: What other examples can you give of things that weren't quite right in the Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools on reflection, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, now, you know, I worked in the Chicago Public Schools for a period of time.  I was--I came in, in '80, 1980.  I'd just finished my Doctorate degree and Robert Green had been hired as a consultant on school desegregation.  The [Chicago Public Schools] board  by this time was under court order to desegregate and I had returned to Chicago and was working for Educational Testing Service [ETS].  And Bob [Robert Green]--ETS loaned me to Bob and the Chicago Public Schools.  So I was one of the Chief Architects of the Chicago Public Schools desegregation plan in the early '80s [1980s].  And I also provided expert witness testimony in the government's--. In the Chicago Public School's federal desegregation case.  And, and we won that case and some fifty million [dollar] verdict to Chicago Public Schools against the government.  But in any case, I think it was very interesting for me to be a product of Chicago Public Schools to then come back in a major role and be able to, to bring my expertise to the table here in Chicago.  I worked under Ruth Love [Superintendent, Chicago Public Schools] at the time.  And as you recall, she was very creative in some of the things that she was doing for and with the schools.  So it was a good time.  And was able to put some things in place that still exists conceptually.  The--, much of the magnet school programs came out of the de-, were expanded under the deseg [desegregation] effort, the creation of community academies and, and all minority schools that were specialty schools were all created out of the deseg plan.  Local School Councils came out of that desegregation plan even before Daley [Richard M. Daley, Mayor, Chicago, Illinois] worked with them recently, the whole concept of local school councils was inherent in the deseg plan that we wrote for the Chicago Public Schools.  So those were some exciting years to be able to not only bring ideas and programs, but bring resources to those kids.  So.
Story_ID: 3825
Speaker 1: And this [the removal of members of the Chicago School Board] caused a political controversy and  [journalist] Lou Palmer publicized it on the radio over and over.  "We shall see in '83 [1983]."  That was the beginning of--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Well, I was there during the years.  I was not--at that level, it would have been [Chicago Public School Superintendent] Ruth Love who, was in the mix of all of those politics.  But I was certainly there.  I was out there going from school to school talking about the deseg [desegregation] plan.  I was out there when Bogan [High School, Chicago, Illinois], when they demonstrated against us and when people were throwing things at us.  And the hate mail that we got.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the message, you think [Chicago Mayor] Jane Byrne was giving people--working on the desegregation plan, and in fact the whole city by appointing two anti-desegregation--I mean anti-desegregationists to the school board?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did you think the message was, what she was saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was exactly that, that she was not for this desegregation effort, but we had a court order.  And we had to be responsive to that no matter what Jane Byrne was saying.  And at that time, the schools were not run by the mayor, at least technically, they weren't run by the mayor.  So we had, school deseg plan.  We had an external consultant.  We had a judge that was involved in making sure that all this got done with timetables and everything else.  So we really had to keep going.  So.
Story_ID: 3826
Speaker 1: Just briefly, what was the plan [Chicago Illinois Public Schools desegregation plan]?  Can you summarize what it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the plan was rather unique for that time because it--we knew that Chicago [Illinois] was increasingly becoming a minority school district and that physical desegregation could not be the primary tool to improve the quality of education for these kids.  So we crafted a plan that had two parts.  And one was the magnet school where peo-, where students could go to specialty schools.  And the second piece was, excuse me, was designed for schools that would, would remain racially isolated.  And these programmatic interventions on schools that would have--be predominantly black and Hispanic--.
Speaker 1: (Off-camera voice) Pause for a second.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: So the, the school desegregation--at that time, we knew that it was going to, with the demographics changing as they were, that Chicago Public Schools were not going to be able to provide a quality desegregated educational experience for all of its young people at any time soon cause it was just going in the opposite direction.  And so our plan had two parts.  One part was the physical desegregation, where as many students as possible, we would try to create a desegregated educational experience through having a physical desegregated school.  For those students who could not have that, we had them plan for schools that were racially isolated and that would remain racially isolated.  And what we felt was that if you brought the proper resources, the proper training, the high quality people and programming services, that these schools too could be high quality schools.  And so we created the whole plan with I think ten educational components about what would happen to those schools.  We dealt with special education, we dealt with parental involvement, and we dealt with teacher training.  We dealt with community relations and all of those things that the research had shown were necessary for effective schools.  And there were some three hundred schools that would remain actually isolated under this plan.  And, and if this program had been put in place, we felt that we could still offer high-quality education to those students.  So the unique part of the Chicago Public Schools desegregation plan was that it was realistic about schools remaining racially segregated, but yet promising these kids also a high-quality educational experience.  And had we been able to implement those things, I do believe it could have happened.  And many of the same things that are being talked about today were parts of that plan.  I mean it's, it saddens me really that twenty-three years ago we crafted this plan with some very creative ideas in it.  And today the ideas will be brought up as though it's new stuff, you know, as though it's just being thought of, you know.  So.
Story_ID: 3827
Speaker 1: What were some other challenges of that, that plan?  I mean why, why didn't they--why didn't the plan reach fruition?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think money became a part of it and the willingness to deal with a reallocation of resources.  See Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools had inappropriately used Title I money [Federal government grant for local education].  They used Title I money to support programs all over the city when this money was supposedly reserved for low achieving poor students.  And to get them reallocate the money to do what they were supposed to be doing was challenging.  And the politics of it all, the climate that had been created around Jane Byrne [Mayor of Chicago, 1979-1983].  Just a lot of--, the, the anger in the community about this.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is that, just to make it plainer.  I mean it was plain I think but just anybody watching this, that federal Title I money coming to the City of Chicago from the federal government, supposed to be used to improve conditions in, in lower-income schools, was being scattered all over the city--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In all the schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely it was.
Speaker 1: With no focus on the low-income schools.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Absolutely.  And a lot of what we were talking about involved taking the money back and putting it where it belonged.  And that was not about to happen, given the political dynamics and things in Chicago.  But we gave it a good run.  We really did.  And, and Judge Milton Shadur was the Judge in the case.  I don't know if you knew him.  But, I testified for five straight days about the plan and what the plan could do and so.
Speaker 1: Well, Chicago Public Schools is, was in those days, was virtually all black or were very close to it, about 80 percent black or something in 1980?
Speaker 2: I think it might have been 75 to 80 percent black.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And the majority of the white students in the city were in Catholic schools or Christian schools or other--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --such schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there were some schools that were modestly integrated.  And they're some of the ones that still exists today, Ogden [William B. Ogden Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and Kenwood [Kenwood Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and, you know, some of those schools.  There were a couple on the South Side, a couple on the North Side.  But there were many more that could have been created, many more racially isolated schools that could have been created that were--that could have provided a high-quality education for some of these kids.  So.
Story_ID: 3828
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked in that capacity [Associate Superintendent, Chicago Publi c Schools, Chicago, Illinois] from 1980 until--?
Speaker 2: '85 [1985].  I resigned when Ruth Love's [Superintendent, Chicago Public Schools]  contract wasn't renewed.  I resigned.  I was in that school district because of her.  And I, and what she believed in, and I just felt that if she wasn't going to be there, then I would just go ahead and do something else.
Speaker 1: What's your assessment of the circumstances that made it, you know, hard for Ruth Love to get her agenda across?  Or what made it difficult for her?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, all this is, you know, retrospectively.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think Ruth play-, Ruth played the politics very well.  And, and I think that she missed some signals (chuckle), when I reflect on it.  There was--.  She had gotten a Hispanic Board Chair at the time.  What was his name?  Gosh, he went on to great things.  He's, he was in [U.S. President, Bill] Clinton's administration.  And, oh, I've forgotten his name.  But anyway, I think she missed some political cues and I think if she had been a little more sophisticated politically, she might have been able to survive.  But the politics are harsh politics in, in Chicago.  And--.
Speaker 1: As I recall, she wasn't very popular as she, you know, made her exist from, you know--.
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't. Un-un, no she was not.  And I'm not sure how all of that deteriorated for her.  But she put in a reading program that wasn't well-received by teachers.  I think she had this Mastery Learning program.  And a lot of, for a lot of people she was considered more form than substance, if you will.  So.  But I had come in under her leadership and as much as I, I guess as much as I wanted to maintain that relationship, I also wanted the person coming in to be able to find their own people.  So.
Speaker 1: I think it was like [Theodore] Ted Kimbrough or somebody that came in--.
Speaker 2: I think it was Ted Kimbrough that came, and then Manford Byrd.
Speaker 1: Right, I know there was a lot, lot of community support for Manford Byrd for years.  And--,
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --some, it, you know, which resulted in, finally in him becoming Superintendent.  But in spite of these changes, it seemed the school board was always in trouble, you know.  I mean, of course, it gets a lot of criticism today and even--.
Speaker 2: And you don't hear as much about the schools as you did in those days now.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You really don't, and it's interesting how--and you know the same kinds of things are going on, but you just don't hear much about them any more.  And I don't know if that's because the people who were speaking against them are, all part of it now (laughter).  So.
Speaker 1: Maybe that's it.
Story_ID: 3829
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do next [after working as Associate Superintendent, Chicago Public Schools, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I left there, and I decided to do something entirely different.  I decided to give away money.  I went to work for the Chicago Community Trust.  And was responsible for their education grant making.  And that was just a wonderful respite cause everybody loves you when you're giving away money (laughter) you know.  So, I designed and got approved a multi-million dollar educational initiative.  And that put me in touch with not only the schools, but other organizations that would influence education.  And so that was a good experience for me to do that.  And it was at that time that I was identified by Harold Washington [Mayor of Chicago, 1983-1987].  And Harold called me in one day and asked me if I would serve on the Board of Trustees for the City Colleges of Chicago.  And I decided that I would do that.  And I came onto that board at a time when they were troubled.  I don't know if you remember Salvatore Rotella had been the Chancellor.  And Harold wasn't satisfied with Salvatore Rotella.  And he wanted some people on the board who could get some things done.  And I was one of those people that he asked to do that.  Well, shortly after that, maybe only a few months, somebody made the decision that Salvatore Rotella had to go.  And they asked me if I would serve as Interim Chancellor during that period until they could find a permanent Chancellor.  And I agreed to do that for six months.  And--but with the understanding that they'd have to let me do the job.  I would serve in an interim role, but I wouldn't behave as Interim.  I would be making decisions and doing what needed to be done.  And I had done it for six months when the asked me if I would take the job permanently.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were Chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, the City Coll--.  Chicago has the largest City College system in the country, I believe.
Speaker 2: No, they're third largest--.
Speaker 1: Third largest?
Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.  So, that was quite an experience.  I'll tell you.  I had fun with that job.  I was able to, I think, really make a difference because that was the, that was the seat to be in.  I mean that was the seat, the seat of authority in the district.  So that was a, a good time.  I leaned a lot.  I would never want the job again.  (Laughter)  It, it was one of the most intense experiences that I've ever had, work experiences that I've ever had in my life.  I became--I was the first African American and the only woman who has had that role to date.  There hasn't been a woman.  And I was the youngest person ever to hold the role.  And I was an outsider, per se.  So I had a lot of things going against me.  And those were all the kinds of, of challenges that I faced in that job.  So.
Story_ID: 3830
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from, that period of time [as Chancellor of City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] that you can tell us?  Anything that--?
Speaker 2: That I [with emphasis] can tell you?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you can tell.
Speaker 2: There are a lot of stories.  You got to be a little more specific than that.
Speaker 1: Is there a, a time you can tell us about when you, when you achieved a hard-fought victory or a time when you were, you know, you thought you might want to give up or--?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I think that one of the things that, when I reflect on my experience with City Colleges, there came a time when it was clear to me that they wanted me out.  I had a new Board Chairman, [Ronald] Ron Gidwitz, and a few days after I had, after Ron had taken office, we had a meeting.  And he proceeded to tell me everything that I was doing wrong.  And, and I remember saying to him, I said, "Well Ron, how can you know this?  You've only been around here a few days and you certainly don't have an educational background.  You've got a full baccalaureate from Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island].  But how can you know this?"  And, and I knew at that point that it, it was gonna be a rough ride with, with Mr. Gidwitz.
Speaker 1: He had already been primed about some of the (unclear) I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And his background, he was involved with Revlon [beauty products company] or something--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Helene Curtis  [beauty product company].
Speaker 1: Helene Curtis. Helene Curtis, right.  But I didn't know.  And again, here is where your political naivet that I spoke of with Ruth [Love], here it comes into play for me because, you know, I didn't know the power that this man had in the Republican Party and, and I didn't know the power that his wife had in the Democratic Party.  But, notwithstanding that, I decided that, that I still had to do what I had to do.  And so every, every day it was a challenge in working and trying to get done what I needed to have done.  But there came a point that my contract was up for renewal.  And they offered me a one-year contract.  And they were going to evaluate me every quarter (chuckle).  And my contract stated that I could not leave the district without having had prior permission.  I could not participate in any extra activities, boards or anything without permission from the Board, just unprecedented restrictions.  And I could not accept such a contract, and so I, I did not accept it.  And, and I became very public about it because by this time, if I was going to leave, I wanted to leave with my own integrity in place and, and with the public knowing why I was leaving, and hearing it from me and not from the Board.  So.  But we won a lot of good fights (laughter).  But the one thing I'm most proud of with my experiences at City Colleges was that I was able to bring the City Colleges to public housing in Chicago.  And we did something called the 'Caravan to Knowledge,' and we literally brought the City Colleges of Chicago to the doorsteps of the public housing developments, all nineteen of them, over a period of two or three years.  So I'm very proud about that.  I increased enrollment while I was there.  I balanced the budget.  So I had some, some good terms there.
Speaker 2: Now, City Colleges were also home of Midnight Basketball.  Were you there--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were the site for Midnight Basketball, taking young men off the streets at night and allowing them to play basketball there.  We did that.  That was a part of it.  The, thing that I'm most of proud of I think with City Colleges is that they became known in this city under my tenure.  They were just sort of a little hidden jewel as far as I'm concerned.  A lot of people knew that they existed, but really didn't know what they did and didn't know that they could, they could get any kind of education they needed there, from adult basic education to english as a second language to the first two years of college.  And I educated the public and opened the City Colleges up in a way that they, they hadn't been before and haven't been since.  So.
Story_ID: 3831
Speaker 1: So, what's happened since you left [as Chancellor of City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] in terms of--?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I mean I don't hear very much about the community colleges in the, in the media and all.  I don't really know what's going on .
Speaker 1: You know, it doesn't seem to be the access, well, I don't know, well, on some level that it used to be.  I think maybe some people feel that way anyway.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I, I don't have a sense of it.  I know that I, gave college presidents a lot of authority and power that they hadn't had before.  It was very central under [Chancellors Salvatore] Rotella and [Oscar] Shabbat, but I moved a lot of the power out to the local colleges.  I don't know how much of that still exists or not, but--and I was able to do things, for example, like get the, the television studio and the radio studio built at Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois].  That was a major accomplishment during my era.  And to hire Harold Pates [President, Kennedy-King College].  Made some good hires.  I was responsible for Zerrie Campbell over at Malcolm X [Malcom X College, Chicago, Illinois].  I think I gave Zerrie her first Central Office position.  Then I placed her acting at, at Malcolm X before I left.  So.
Speaker 1: Well, those are the--those two presidents I know provided like community access to those schools (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --president and level and the schools became community centers where they had not before (unclear)--that was, I think, important, to point out.  Malcolm X still--. (unclear)
Speaker 2: Still is, and Malcolm X is, we, were trying to--Malcolm X into a, sort of a health care magnet, if you would.  And, and I think a lot of those programs are doing quite there.  So.
Story_ID: 3832
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do next, when you left City Colleges [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: When I left City Colleges, I sort of played around for a little while and did some independent consulting and then I went to work for Carrington & Carrington [Ltd.], which was an interesting new move for me because it allowed me to work with adults who were highly accomplished adults and placing them in, in strategic positions in corporate America.  So Carrington & Carrington is an executive search firm that specializes in placing minorities and women in senior, very senior-level executive positions in corporate America.  So I came in really just to help the family a little bit and doing, thinking of doing it for a short period of time.  And I just fell in love with the work.  It just--it combined a number of different things that I had done.  It allowed me to do research.  It allowed me to work with people.  It allowed me to sort of use my, my counseling and career-building skills.  And also it paid well.  So I came in and built me a practice.  I built a million dollar business with Carrington over that period of time.  So, I started out specializing in education.  That lasted for about six months.  And I realized that the real money was to be made in corporate America.  So I expanded and opened up and developed a client base, primarily Midwest, had a lot of clients in Minnesota and Ohio, in Michigan, yeah.  So.
Story_ID: 3833
Speaker 1: All right, so, you're at Carrington & Carrington [Ltd.] for, until 2002, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Ten years.
Speaker 1: So you're making a lot of money, in a black corp-
Speaker 2: A lot of money in black-owned company working to place black and minority people in high-level positions that pay lots of money.  I mean what more can you ask for (laughter)?  I mean that was, that was fun.  It was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you leave Carrington & Carrington?
Speaker 2: I just got tired, just tired.  I mean it's a, it's a dreadful life.  I mean it's--the rewards are good, both financially and personally, but I mean you're all over the country.  You're living out of a suitcase.  You're traveling.  It's 24/7.  And I guess by the time I left, the economy had sort of gone south, and it was getting harder and harder and harder to maintain my business.  So I just decided that, hey, I'm, I'm at a, a stage in my life and in my career where I want to sort of downsize and sort of work towards my retirement, and do some things that I really enjoy doing.  And that is the thing that I started out doing; that's teaching.  So--.
Story_ID: 3834
Speaker 1: So you're teaching now at a local college, Trinity Christian College [Palos Heights, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Trinity Christian College is a very small--it's about one thousand undergraduate students, liberal arts college, located out here in Palos Heights [Illinois].  And I am half-time faculty and I'm half-time directing their diversity effort here.  So if you look at my life, it's always been around this issue of equity.  And, and even here that's a good part of what I'll be doing here at Trinity.  So.
Story_ID: 3835
Speaker 1: Okay, now in '99 [1999] you wrote a book.  Well, it was published in '99 [1999].  I don't know how--how long did it take you to write it?  And give us the title.
Speaker 2: The title of the book is 'This Mother's Daughter.'  And, and it comes out of, something that, you know, girlfriends would talk about all the time.  We'd sit around in the beauty shop or wherever, and we'd talk about what our mothers told us about certain things and you'd here these little quips and, and pearls of wisdom that our mothers would share with us.  And I was always say, this went on for about ten years, I'd say, "You know, somebody needs to pull all this stuff together."  And in 1999, it became time for me to do it.  I just--it was almost like I could not not do it.  I had to do it.  It was almost a, spiritual thing that just sort of came over me, that I had to write this book.  And initially, it was going to be just a collection of all of these quotes.  And I set about to do that.  I got on the Internet, and I contacted people all over the world via the Internet and I made postcards.  And I delivered the postcards to churches and women's organizations and any places that women would gather.  And I asked women to pass me on this information.  And as information started to come in, it became clear to me that, that this was too simple.  Women were not just giving me the quotes.  They were telling me stories and they were getting into many, many more serious issues.  And at that point, I had to redirect my effort and decided to go about interviewing a number of these women.  I interviewed women from all the country and had them tell me their daughter story.  And--.
Speaker 1: So, as you traveled for Carrington & Carrington [Ltd.], you would--?
Speaker 2: No, I left.  I took a leave.
Speaker 1: You took a leave?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, took a leave.  And, I then did the book, traveled all over the country and met with women and got their daughter stories.  It was a, a book that's from the prospective of daughters.  And I got daughters of all ages to tell me their daughter story, starting from early childhood and leading up to whatever stage in life they were currently at.  And, and then after I wrote the book, I self published the book and when it got out--when it was, when I initially released it, it came to the attention of a major publisher, and-- no, I, got coverage in 'Publishers Weekly' magazine.  I got a full-page spread because I was doing this really creative marketing of the book, and they noticed it, and, and thereby got notice of the book, and it caught the attention of St. Martin's Press.  And they bought the paper right, paperback books to the book, paperback rights to the book.  And they published the paperback in--I published mine in 2000 and they published the paperback in 2001.  So I took the next year, just traveling around the country with the book, had a wonderful exposure, made all the major magazines and newspapers, and from the 'Chicago Sun-Times' [newspaper] to 'Publishers Weekly.'  So, 'Black Issues Book Review' [magazine], and I'm still--although I'm not actively promoting the book, I still am speaking and, and being--requests to come out and talk about the book and talk about the experiences of these women and what that mother-daughter relationship is all about.
Speaker 1: The audience for the book ['This Mother's Daugher'], are these women that basically recognize in the books, you know, things that, that happen to them or--?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: That most of the people, say would come to a book signing, for your book, are they people that would recognize, you know, some of the statements in the book and some of the situations in the book or are they, are they people who--well, let me put it this way.  It's been said that, by a number of people--I think Reverend Eugene River is one that said this more profoundly than anybody else.  We've got a generation now that doesn't know their mother and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and, that has no instruction.  And they're having and they're raising children almost on the wing--.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And he says in this regard, it's worse than slavery.  I mean--because when we were in slavery we at least had some, you know, connection, but we have the, we have a generation now that's so young.  And they come along, and they don't know where their mother have been, is on drugs or something or maybe in prison or something.  You know--.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the point.  That was what drew me to, to sort of write the book because we've got--mothers are getting younger.  We're separated from our families by geography and everything else.  And what I was saying was that, nobody was transmitting this knowledge base that was coming from grandma, if you will.  And, but what I found--I wanted to write this, this little, nice little book about mothers and daughters and how great it is.  What I found though, as I met women, was that it's not that.  It's not, it's not always this beautiful relationship where there is good stuff to be shared.  And women told me incredible stories about their lives and their relationships with their mothers.  And they're, they're not always warm and nurturing relationships.  They're sometimes very challenging and very complex.  So I think what the book does is that it acknowledges that.  And I think it also calls upon other women to mother some daughter somewhere.  It doesn't have to be your own daughter.  But we have a responsibility to each other, if you will, to nurture these young girls and to tell them what they need to know.  And, and that's really what it's all about because even when, when the mother does exist, she's not always, she's not always what she needs to be or she's not all that she needs to be.  So a lot of interesting things in the book, things about what we do, secrets, things about how mothers keep secrets about who the father is and even in some instances secrets are kept in the family about who the mother is, and what this does, things about our sexuality and how we relate to, to, men to women.  And what our mothers teach us.  It's not always good stuff, what they're teaching us.  They teach us not to trust in our relationships.  They tell us to always keep a stash because you can't always depend on him, you know, so you got to always keep something in your pocket.  Those kinds of things and, and how damaging some of this can be.  And then on the other hand how powerful some of it is, the things that they teach us about family, some of the good things that they teach us about being close and, and supporting one another and so.  So that was another fun thing.  And I did that, and I was amazed that the book did as well as it did the first time out as an author, no training.  I learned about the business and I had a good time.  So.
Story_ID: 3836
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you plan to do in the future?  Are there any more being planned or?
Speaker 2: Nothing planned.  I just want to coast for a little while.  I want to teach and enjoy my students and, and I probably want to do another book that will have to do with this whole notion of what I did in the executive search business and the recruiting business.  I think I want to do something around minorities and their careers, operating title might be something like, 'The Price you Pay for Six-Figure Jobs' (chuckle), something like that.  I don't know.  But that's probably--I'm going to probably do something more scholarly at this point.
Story_ID: 3837
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this a question we always ask.  And so, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Boy, I, guess what I really--I wish we could be a community again.  You know, I don't see much community anymore.  I don't see much activism among us.  I don't see us standing up for things that are going wrong out there.  I mean right now every week you've got murders of children.  And I just don't see our community coming together in the way that we can come together around these issues.  And I recognize that I'm a part of that community.  I recognize that and I guess, you know, the "they aren't doing it," the "they" is now "us."  And I, I think we, in many ways become kind of satisfied and accepting of, of things as they are.  And that's troubling to me because I don't, I don't see where the next generation of leadership is coming from right now, you know.  I don't--.
Speaker 1: Something needs to be done to agitate the community?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I mean we need to get excited about something and be able to stand behind something, you know?  For us, it was basic stuff.  It was the Civil Rights Movement and, and acquiring those rights and privileges.  And it was getting an, an education and all that stuff.  So what is it for this next generation that, that will mobilize them and make it, and make them want to make a difference.  I don't know what that is.
Story_ID: 3838
Speaker 1: Okay, at this juncture, you're still not, you know, finished with public life, I wouldn't think.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Are you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I am.  Yes, I am.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: At this juncture then, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  I am much too modest to think about having a legacy.  I have probably impacted a lot of lives.  I can think of some individual lives that I have impacted and continue to do that.  But it's hard for me to think of myself as having had a legacy.  I've had some wonderful experiences, and I think in every one of those experiences and places that I have been, those places have been better for the black community because I was there.  And that's not, that's in any organization that I have been associated with, that I have done something that has made a very positive difference for other black people who would be coming into that organization or in that place.  And that's what I try to do.  If it's the Minneapolis [Minnesota] Public Schools because of Nelvia Brady, their test scores are public and they are delivered racially because I saw something--they were talking about how great the test scores were for the City of Minneapolis.  And I knew that they weren't great for black kids.  And so I challenged the district to get their test scores out by race and so people could see that and do something about it.  And I can think of those kinds of very simple things in every job that I've had, that I think would be my legacy.  And I haven't been any place where I haven't, have been unable to do that.  And then I always believed that if nothing else, you, you wanted to be able to look at your life and your career and, and be able to show that, as you succeeded, you took someone with you or you made somebody, individually, somebody else's life better.  And so I can look back on my career and point to other individuals whose careers have been made better by my presence.  So I can do that personally.  But I don't know if that represents a legacy.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: What do I want on my tombstone?  (laughter).  Off to another meeting.  (laughter).  Those are tough.  You should have given me some advance time on those.  Oh, gosh.  You know you asked me that--I had a minor stroke the first part of June.  And I had never really thought about not being here until that happened.  And after that I began to think about my life and, what I thought people would be saying about me if I had died instead of, instead of just having the minor stroke.  And, I'm still thinking about that.  I don't really know.  I think I want people to, to think that I was an example of, of someone who came from a relatively poor background, that I'm an example that everybody can make it out here if they really work at it.  And that when you do, you have to give back.
Story_ID: 3839
Speaker 1: Okay, that's one of my favorite college Presidents.  That's Harold Pates, and that's Judge Bernetta Bush.  And Bernetta Bush was on the Board of Trustees of the City Colleges of Chicago (Illinois).  And Harold Pates was the President of Kennedy-King College (Chicago, Illinois).  And we were apparently at one of the college's graduations there.
Speaker 2: Okay, what year was that?  Or if you don't remember, just say (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: It was, that was, that was in, somewhere between '88 [1988] and '90 [1990], '90 [1990].  Um-hum.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady (left) with Kennedy-King College President Harold Pates, and Judge Bernetta Bush attending graduation ceremonies at Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1990.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3840
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh.  That is me.  And I am standing outside the iron fence that,  that surrounded my apartment in the Rockwell Gardens public housing [Chicago, Ilinois].  This picture is in 1961 so I was in the seventh grade, and I'm just sort of laying up against the fence.  I guess I was posing.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady at Rockwell Gardens public housing project, Chicago, Illinois, 1961.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3841
Speaker 1: This is me and this had to be probably about 1960, jumping rope outside of our apartment in the Henry Horner Homes [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady at Henry Horner Homes public housing project, Chicago, Illinois, 1960.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3842
Speaker 1: That's me as a little girl.  I'm seated for my first professional photo, and this--I must have been about three.  So this had to be about 1950 or '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady at age three, ca. 1950-1951.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3843
Speaker 1: That's Nelvia Brady in, in the '60s [1960s].  This was about 1968 or '69 [1969].  This picture was taken when I lived in El Paso, Texas.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady in El Paso, Texas, ca. 1968-1969.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3844
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, the, my senior year in high school.  I graduated from high school in June '66 [1966] so this is, I guess right as I was beginning to go to college.  But this is still at Rockwell Gardens [public housing project, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady at Rockwell Gardens public housing project, Chicago, Illinois, 1966.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3845
Speaker 1: This is July '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, we lived on, in a, a little apartment on West Jackson Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois]. And when it got hot outside, we would go out and put on our bath suits and sit and play in front of fire hydrants.  And that's a picture of apparently pre or post-fire hydrant.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: [Nelvia Brady as a child, Chicago, Illinois, July, 1955.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3846
Speaker 1: That's my high school graduation picture from Crane High School [Richard T. Crane Technical Preparatory Common School, Chicago, Ill.] in 1966.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady's high school graduation picture from Crane Technical Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois, 1966.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3847
Speaker 1: That's a picture taken and the far right is Dr. Robert Green.  He's cut off.  And Robert Green was my advisor when I was working on my dissertation.  The picture taken in his office [at Michigan State University] in East Lansing, Michigan.  And that's oh gosh, I'm drawing a blank. Who is this guy?  Andrew Young [United States Ambassador to the United Nations].  Andrew Young was there speaking and I don't recall who the other gentleman was.  So.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you referenced your office in East Lansing.  Did you give us the year or approximate time frame?  That would have been around 1978,'79 [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: [(L. to R.): Unidentified Man, U.N. Ambassador Andrew Young, Nelvia Brady and Dr. Robert Green at Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, ca. 1978-1980.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3848
Speaker 1: And this was taken in, in 2000.  This was the photograph that was used for my book, 'This Mother's Daughter'.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Nelvia Brady used for her book 'This Mother's Daughter,'  2000.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3849
Speaker 1: Me with my sister, Marian Carrington and we were taking this for a publicity shot for--on sisters, sisters that work together, so like what we were doing with Carrington & Carrington [Ltd.]
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Nelvia Brady (right) with her sister, Marian Carrington, ca. 1994-2002.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3850
Speaker 1: This was in 1988 or '89 [1989] and I'm standing in front of apartment 1309 [at Rockwell Gardens housing project, Chicago, Illinois].  That's the same apartment that shows on those earlier pictures and I had gone back to visit the apartment in my role as Chancellor [City Colleges of Chicago, Ill.].  We were doing some recruiting in public housing.  And I came back to visit the apartment that I had lived in.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady (right) with an unidentified woman in front of her former apartment at Rockwell Gardens public housing project, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1989.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3851
Speaker 1: With Julian Bond.  This was some speaking engagement that he had been invited to at Harold Washington College [Chicago, Illinois] .
Speaker 2: Date, approximate?
Speaker 1: It would be between '88 [1988] and '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady with Julian Bond at Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1992.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3852
Speaker 1: This is when I received my Doctorate Degree from Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] in 1980.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady receiving her doctorate at Michigan State University graduation, East Lansing, Michigan, June 7, 1980.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3853
Speaker 1: This is really a, a collage that made up an invitation to my fiftieth birthday party and it's just various aspects of Nelvia, ranging from when I was a little baby girl to a current picture.  But this, this was put together for my fiftieth birthday in 1998.
Speaker 2: [Collage of photographs of Nelvia Brady through the years compiled for her fiftieth birthday celebration, 1998.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3854
Speaker 1: This is a school picture from Irving School [Washington Irving Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was first grade and I'm on the right-hand side at the, next to the last row, the one with the glasses.
Speaker 2: With the kind of white collar and the--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 2: Stand by, please.
Speaker 1: [Nelvia Brady's (third row, second from right) first grade class photo at Washington Irving Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, 1954-1955.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3855
Speaker 1: I was Chancellor at the time [of the City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois], this would have been in the 1988, '89 [1989] timeframe.  And that's a photo with Ramsey Lewis, had invited Ramsey Lewis in to talk about doing some music programming with the City Colleges of Chicago.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady with pianist, Ramsey Lewis, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1989.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3856
Speaker 1: This is during the period of time when, when I was doing the program with the public housing and bringing the City Colleges [of Chicago, Illinois] to public housing.  And that is [U.S.] Congressman [Charles] Hayes.  And the woman was the head of the CHA [Chicago Housing Association] Advisory Council.  I don't remember her name, but we had all of CHA involved with us in that effort and various other agencies as well.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady (center) with U.S. Congressman Charles Hayes and an unidentified woman, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1992.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3857
Speaker 1: This is a 1990 photo of me with the Dawn Clark Nesh, Netsch--Dawn Clark Netsch.
Speaker 2: Do left to right, if you wouldn't mind, please.
Speaker 1: Left to right, it's Bernie Wong from the Chinese American Service League and myself and the other woman's, her last name is Harris.  And then [Illinois State Senator] Dawn Clark Netsch.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady with other women civic leaders, Chicago, Illinois, 1990; (L. to R.): Bernie Wong, Nelvia Brady, Ms. Harris, and Illinois State Senator, Dawn Clark Netsch, Chicago, Illinois, 1990.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3858
Speaker 1: During my experience at City Colleges of Chicago [Illinois], we tried to coordinate our programs with other public agencies.  And we did a basketball game with City Colleges of Chicago employees, staff and CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] employees and staff. And that is Dr. Carol Adams and myself.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady (right) with Dr. Carol Adams, Chicago, Illinois, 1988-1992.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
Story_ID: 3859
Speaker 1: I didn't mention this.  I was the Chief Operating Officer in '93 [1993] for the Council for Parliament of the World's Religions.
Speaker 2: [Nelvia Brady with Nation of Islam leader, Minister Louis Farrakhan, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Nelvia Brady.]
