Story_ID: 657396
Speaker 1: So, we're gonna slate the interview.  My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and we're gonna have you start out by stating your name and spelling it, including your middle name and your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Dwight Lamar Bush, Sr. [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.].  D-W-I-G-H-T, L-A-M-A-R, B-U-S-H, S-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 4, 1957.
Speaker 1: And the--your place of birth was--
Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date--
Speaker 2: Is March 23, 22nd--
Speaker 1: What is the date?
Speaker 2: Today is--
Speaker 1: I should know that.
Speaker 2: Today is March 22, 2014.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am the U.S. ambassador to the Kingdom of Morocco.
Story_ID: 657397
Speaker 1: So, I--we ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring time.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Casa de Campo [Casa de Campo Resort and Villas] in the Dominican Republic [La Romana, Dominican Republic].
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Pride breeds determination and determination breeds pride.
Speaker 1: That's good. You know, I was going through our favorite phrases and sayings and we have fabulous ones, so that's not, you know, I don't think we have that one, but we have, I mean--
Speaker 2: You might not have it because it's the phrase that I choose, I chose for my high school [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois] graduation in 1975.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 657398
Speaker 1: So, I want to start out by asking about your family background, so can we start with your mother?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My mother's name is Jessie Heavens Bush [Jessie Mae Bush].  She was born in Fairfield, Alabama.  She is still alive.  She lives in East St. Louis, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us about what you know about her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, so her mother's name was Martha [sic. Mary Bell Mitchell].  Her father's name was Doc [Doc Heavens].  They, like many Americans, made the great migration from the South to the Midwest following the jobs, so my mother migrated from Fairfield, Alabama, to Columbus, Mississippi, where she met my father [Charlie W. Bush] and then, from there, she went to St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: So, what, did she share stories of her growing up, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: She has shared stories around how difficult it was growing up.  I think that my mother's family was the first generation that had stepped beyond sharecropper status in Alabama.  She was a part of a family that originally had thirteen children.  I think that two of the children passed away early in time.  So, she was one of eleven who actually lived and grew up in Fairfield, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And did she, her maiden name is, is it Heavens?
Speaker 2: Heavens.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought that was such a cute--I mean, it's an unusual--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is an unusual name and I'm always proud of it and, in fact, whenever I see, I've found that I've interacted only a couple times in life with people who share that name and I have assumed that somehow or another they are relatives of mine.
Speaker 1: So, what do you, how much alike are you, what do you share of your mother's attributes?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question because my mother and I are very close to each other and what I would say that we share most is a real determination.  My mother was hell bent on making sure that our family--me and my siblings--could have access to the best possibilities in life and she was determined and she took risks.  She took, the risk has manifest itself in how she encouraged us to eat different foods, so my mother was a cook as I grew up and it wasn't unusual for my mom to come home and she would bring frog legs, she would bring escargot, she would bring whatever it was that was being prepared at the restaurant that day, and she was doing it, in fact, to encourage us to take risks and to try different things.  Her determination has manifested in her commitment to make sure that my siblings and I had access to all types of things.  We would take long drives.  She would expose us to different types of music, different types of venues, different communities.  She would drive us past the middle and upper class neighborhoods and show us how the rich white folks live.  She was aspirational.  She wanted us to do and achieve as much as we could in life and I think that when I think about myself I think that I'm determined, I think I've made a career by taking risks and I think that I'm aspirational.  I encourage myself to do the best I can do.  I can encourage people around me to do the best they can do every day.
Story_ID: 657399
Speaker 1: And what about your father?  Can you give his name and what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  My father's name is Charlie Walter Bush [Charlie W. Bush].
Speaker 1: And his year of birth?
Speaker 2: His year of birth was 1924.  And he grew up in Columbus, Ohio, and my father was a man who was extraordinarily hard working and committed to his family.  He was not a man who enjoyed formal education, but he had a lot of informal education that was valuable to me over time.  He was an extraordinarily diligent and hard worker.  It was not unusual for my father to work both his day job, if you will, and several other jobs; so, he was a crane operator, he worked at Cerro Copper and Brass [Cerro Copper and Brass Company, East St. Louis, Illinois] for, I think, over fifty years, and he retired from Cerro Copper and Brass--I'm sorry, he worked there for over forty years--he retired from there but he also always had another job or another hustle.  He was the first guy to, you know, take his car and, or his truck and go and run errands and find a way to make an extra buck.  He was very industrious. He also took risks.  He liked to play the cards.  He liked to shoot dice.  He liked to encourage a lot of, of risk taking.  He was as about as committed as a family man as you could be, which is kind of interesting given where I grew up and the procession of where I grew up.  So, I grew up in East St. Louis, Illinois.  The perception today is that this is a town of all sorts of challenges, whether it's drug and substance abuse, or low education attainment or a range of maladies, but the reality is I grew up in an area in East St. Louis in which there were always two working class parents who were doing all they could for their children and for the community around them, and so my father took us to baseball games, took us to get ice cream, took us to do anything that he thought would enrich our lives.
Speaker 1: So as you've said, you know, very aspirational back then when you think about it, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And, it was a different time of day for black people back then.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So now, what attributes do you have from your father?
Speaker 2: I am, again, I am very hard working and industrious.  My mother [Jessie Mae Bush] and my father both shared this risk component.  I am very committed to my family and I got that from my dad and I think that I have a sense of the broader community around me, so my father was the guy who not only took us for ice cream, but he would round up all the other kids in the neighborhood to take them for ice cream as well, to make sure that they could have a shared experience, and I think that for me in my life, I've always tried to reach out broadly to help other people and I know for a fact that that comes from my dad.
Story_ID: 657400
Speaker 1: So, how did your parents meet, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: My parents kind of in a, in the type of typical arranged situation that happened back at that time.  My father and mother were put together, if you will, by family members.
Speaker 1: So they saw, they said this will be a nice person, or we think the two of you belong together?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my parents met in Columbus, Mississippi, and they went separately to St. Louis [Missouri].  My mother [Jessie Mae Bush] moved to St. Louis with her older sister.  My father [Charlie W. Bush] went to St. Louis looking for a job and after they had met in Columbus, Mississippi, they reconnected in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So, you think that there was a pattern of other people from Columbus, Mississippi to St. Louis?  Do you think that, how far apart?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, so the Great Migration had three legs to it.  There was the leg that moved up the East Coast, the leg that went across the West Coast, and the West Coast was towards shipping and lumber jacking and following the agricultural migration to the West and then up the river [Mississippi River] towards industrial America, towards St. Louis, Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], the cities that were involved in the great expansion of the auto industry in this country, and they were looking for laborers and literally hundreds of thousands of people made the migration and my father and mother were both a part of it.
Story_ID: 657401
Speaker 1: So, your siblings.  Can you give their birth order?
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, name their names and birth order.
Speaker 2: Sure.  So, my older brother's name is Ivan Bush, and he was born in 1949.  My sister, Althea Bush was born in 1953.  My brother, Darryl Bush, was born in 1955.  I was born in '59 [1959] and then I have a younger brother, Itez Bush, who was born in 1969 and he was a product of my parents thinking that they could no longer have children and the Lord blessed them with a fifth child.
Speaker 1: So really, there's one girl.
Speaker 2: There's one girl, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A girl.  So, where, and you're the fourth child.  You're the--right--fourth.
Speaker 2: Well, let's just be clear about this.  I'm the baby of my family and I have a younger brother, and if you were to speak to my mother [Jessie Mae Bush], I think that that's what she would say.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) 'Cause you were in that capacity, so he wasn't gonna upset, you had been the baby.
Speaker 2: I had been the baby long enough and I was not moving.  It was my position and I stand by it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So it was a shock from that other, when the other one came, right?
Speaker 2: It was, it was.
Speaker 1: So, you know, I have another thing I want to ask you because you have these interesting names, like your paternal grandfather was named Ice Bush?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, where is that name from?  You got on the mother's side and the father--I mean Doc Heavens and then Ice Bush.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I am not certain about where the name Ice Bush came from.  My sister is currently doing some research into that and my [paternal] grandmother, Martha [Martha Thomas Bush] and Ice Bush were not married at the time when my father [Charlie W. Bush] was born and so it is an area that we're continuing to research, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, have you and your family, have there been family reunions?
Speaker 2: There are family reunions that take place every other year on the Heavens side, and the Bush family holds reunions less frequently, and I must say I've not had the time to be engaged in either over recent years.
Story_ID: 657402
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up was at Christmastime when I was five years old and my father's company [Cerro Copper and Brass Company, East St. Louis, Illinois] was on a strike that year and I remember receiving Christmas gifts that seemed like they weren't new Christmas gifts and my father [Charlie W. Bush] put the best face on in bringing those gifts into the house, and it was interesting because his behavior was different than usual, so I could sense that something was amiss, and as I reflected back on my life and as I've had a conversation with my father subsequent to that time, he shared with me that that's what had happened that year.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So he, I mean, here he is, if, you know, they're on strike and so he has to make the best of what he can.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  But there are five kids too--
Speaker 2: Four kids. There were four kids at that time, yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh four kids, four kids.  Okay.
Story_ID: 657403
Speaker 1: Can you talk about family life?  We do what are called life oral history interviews, so talk about the family life.  What was it growing up in the Bush household?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So it was, it was always a, it was always an emotional mix in the family.  My parents both worked really hard so it was not unusual, so my father's basic shift, if you will, he worked on the night shift.  He worked from eleven o'clock at night until seven o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: That's called the graveyard shift.
Speaker 2: That's called the graveyard shift, and my mom [Jessie Mae Bush] was a cook and my mother typically worked either the morning shift which would have been from about six o'clock until two or three, or she worked, over time, then she worked a later shift which was more of a twelve to eight shift, and so there were often times when neither of our parents were there and we, you know, like a lot of families we benefited from older siblings taking responsibility for things like helping us younger kids to get dressed and ready for school and, and moving forward.  Both of my parents tended to be home on the weekends and unless my father [Charlie W. Bush] had an opportunity to work overtime, which was always--which is what he wanted because he wanted to put as much food on the table as possible.  My siblings and I, so we actually have kind of a two set of siblings at the time; my older brother and sister [Althea Bush] were very close.  My brother Darryl [Darryl Bush] and I were very close and it was really a function of both where we stood in our ages and also who we shared rooms with and the like, and my relationship with my brother Darryl was very close.  He was my good friend, my protector.  We did almost everything together, which was really great.  My older brother was a start athlete.  He played four sports at very high levels.  He was drafted to be a professional basketball player.  He was one of the first people in my family to go to college.  He went to Texas College [Tyler, Texas] and, where he was a very gifted athlete.  My sister, who is the rock of our family, she had a couple of kids when she was younger, in her teens.  The house was, there were often tensions in our house because of things like around--you know, I think as I look back things like having enough money to do what my parents wanted to do, uncertainty about how to raise kids other than how you knew from growing up in the South.  But at the--what was so clear was that they were doing the best that they could with what they had for their kids every single day and that's kind of the commitment that they had.  They has always stuck with me.  We were sports oriented.  All the boys played sports.  I played four sports at different times at different levels.  My brother, Darryl, played sports.  Again, my brother Ivan [Ivan Bush] was a very, very strong athlete.  By the time my youngest brother [Itez Bush] arrived, I was the only one of the kids who was still in the house because my older brother had gone to Texas College and he had gone on his career path.  My sister lived in town.  My brother, Darryl, older than I, he was away at college for--when my young brother was born.  As a family we were very close.  We had extended family, a lot of cousins in the greater St. Louis [Missouri] area, my mom had sisters and brothers in the area.  My dad's family wasn't as present.  They were in Mississippi and in Detroit [Michigan] and in Chicago [Illinois], but we were very close and the home was also filled with neighbors so our community, and again the mis- the misunderstanding of my community kind of astounds me because my community, again, was working class families that were school teachers, nurses, laborers, cooks, laundry workers and factory workers and we ha- there was a real strong sense of neighborhood, so there were always kids in and out of our home and we going to the homes of our, our neighbors as well.
Story_ID: 657404
Speaker 1: So, there's St. Louis [Missouri] and then there's East St. Louis, and you were in East St. Louis--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but East St. Louis, a lot of well known people have come out of East St. Louis and some really around the time, the Hudlin brothers [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin] are, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's just think, I mean, this is a fascinating thing about East St. Louis.  The Hudlin brothers, Miles Davis, Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner, Chuck Berry came through all the time.  [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, who was regarded as one of the greatest dancers of all time, and I'm the second ambassador from East St. Louis.  Donald McHenry [Donald F. McHenry], who was a U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, is from East St. Louis, Illinois.  Kellen Winslow, who is in the Pro Football Hall of Fame [Canton, Ohio], is one of my best friends.  He is from East St. Louis, Illinois.  Jimmy Connors, who for years, would tell people he was from Belleville, Illinois, admitted maybe ten years ago that, in fact, he's not from Belleville, which was the white equivalent working class community.  He has finally acknowledged that he's from East St. Louis, Illinois.  Senator Durbin [Dick Durbin] is from East St. Louis, Illinois.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Al Joyner and the Joyners are, you know, are from East St. Louis, Illinois.
Speaker 1: So this really, there's a lot of talent that is coming into this town and the town--
Story_ID: 657405
Speaker 1: So can you describe which street did you grow up on?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Or did you move around?  Did you move around or were you on the--
Speaker 2: I grew up in the same home from birth.  My family first lived on Trendley Avenue in East St. Louis, Illinois, and then my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] in 1964, bought a home on 23rd Street and I lived there my entire life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the address?
Speaker 2: It was 456 North 23rd Street.
Speaker 1: And so can you talk about what, what the neighborhood was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so East St. Louis is a fascinating place because, so, in East St. Louis you had almost every major industrial business line represented, so East St. Louis was a feeder for the auto industry, so they made paint and glass and chemicals and copper and steel and aluminum; all of these primary materials that went into car production were made in places like East St. Louis, Illinois.  In addition to that, there were huge poultry and meat packing companies in East St. Louis, Illinois.  So, any, it was the type of place where any person interested in being a skilled laborer could get a job.  Now, the other thing about it is East St. Louis was almost created as the side of vice for the area.  So, in St. Louis [Illinois] they had the blue laws, which precluded shops and restaurants for being open after eleven o'clock at night and all these other sort of stringent Christian-related approaches to life, and East St. Louis always had night clubs and gambling and horseracing and, you know, all sorts of activities that were perceived to be on the wrong side of the track.  And so, all of those elements existed as I lived in East St. Louis, Illinois.  One of the fascinating things about my town that a lot of people don't know is that in 1962 [sic. 1959], East St. Louis was named the All American City.  So, every year in the United States, I don't know if they still do it, they would name one city the All American City, and in 1962 East St. Louis was the All American City.
Speaker 1: You know, because my father [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] had a much smaller place but I remember making a trip to East St. Louis because he was stationed, I think, wasn't there a base near--there's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's Scott Air Force Base [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Scott Air Force Base.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And so we made a visit to family and friends there, you know, when we were young.  And then, my father grew up in a town in Pennsylvania that was sort of a wild, wild west kind of town, you know, where gambling and, you know, and people get off the mills and, you know, spend their, their hard earnings.
Story_ID: 657406
Speaker 1: I want, though, I want to ask you to tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You can take any sense.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, the sound that I remember most is the sound of the railroad train, because at all hours of day and night there were materials moving through the city [East St. Louis, Illinois] to the great industrial cities in the Midwest.  I'll never forget the train, the sound of the train.  The smell that I remember the most is the extraordinary range of smells wafting from my mother's kitchen.  My mother [Jessie Mae Bush] is an extraordinary cook and, again, she, you know, we had, despite how much work my parents had my father [Charlie W. Bush] was also a good cook.  We had three meals at home every day and three real meals at home every day, so all of our biscuits were from scratch. (Laughter) You know, all of our food, my father made extraordinary salmon croquettes and okra and all types of great food.  So, my smell memory is first from the kitchen at my house and then secondly from all the industrial businesses around; so, this is the era before we have a very strong EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] and so when you walk outside, you smell the smokestacks.  If you go to certain parts of my neighborhood, you could smell the chemicals.  You could smell ammonia from different facilities and you could go down to the, to the slaughterhouses and you would smell the, you know, the fragrances there if you want, that came from the slaughter of animals.  So, those were the three smells that I remember, and in terms of the colors that I saw, the most important color that I saw was red because I grew up a St. Louis Cardinal [sic. St. Louis Cardinals] baseball fan, as was my father, and we, you know, he would take us to baseball games whenever he could and so I am a diehard St. Louis Cardinal fan.
Speaker 1: As you said, sports were very important to you, and you were a young boy too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I think that, you know, there were a lot of unspoken messages in my house and I think the messages, I think that my parents because they were so focused on education, they were thinking that there were two ways that we would get out and get a good education; either by becoming exceptional athletes and getting a scholarship or by, in my case, by being a good student and, perhaps, getting a scholarship.  So, the sports, they thought it was a catalyst to success.
Story_ID: 657407
Speaker 1: I mean, you know when you were talking about the a- the cooking, you know, think about that with their schedule, how they even were able to do that.  I mean, when--
Speaker 2: My parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] did some, they did, they did extraordinary things for us.  The commitment that they had to us was, is just so abundantly clear, and I always tell people if I could be half the parents to my kids [Dwight Bush Jr. and Jacqueline Bush] that my parents were for me, I'd exceed all expectations.
Speaker 1: So, what are you, when you said that things were hard, is it just there are issues around money?  You know, money or scheduling or the raising of kids, and how, what kids should be doing, not doing, you know.
Speaker 2: There were, I think it was really about things like money and scheduling and, you know, again, my dad, now I know he used to like to play the horses and he used to like to gamble and I can see a scenario in which my father got paid on a Friday and he went down to the bar and he probably shot some craps and sometimes he didn't win.  And, I would think that that would create some tension in our house.  So, it was those types of things but with respect to us, there wasn't, you know, I think that in hindsight they felt very confident that from a values perspective and from a principle perspective that they were doing the right things for us.
Story_ID: 657408
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I was asking about religion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we were, we were inconsistent churchgoers for the most part and I don't--and I think it was as much a function of time for my parents as anything else.  There were years when we went to church every Sunday.  There were long periods of time when we didn't.  But my mother [Jessie Mae Bush] was very firm in her commitment to her faith and she read the Bible as did my father [Charlie W. Bush] and they could, they both could quote scripture and so they were religious people.  But, if there was an opportunity to either work overtime on Sunday or go to church, my father would go to church.
Speaker 1: At this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, he would go to work.
Story_ID: 657409
Speaker 1: And you know, that concept, because I re- I can hear it too, about the working overtime because that meant a chance, you could--you got paid double sometimes, you know, or time and a half, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, that was the money that allowed parents like mine to do extra things for their children, right?  And so that's what my family would do and I'll give you an example, that is, that has always stayed with me.  I was about ten years old and a good friend of ours got a new bike and the kid was riding it down the street, riding around the block nonstop and my father [Charlie W. Bush] comes home and he sees on the face of my brother Darryl [Darryl Bush] and me, how we wanted a bike like them.  And, my father then went and worked probably two shifts for the next two weeks and on the Friday he picked us up and he said, "We're gonna go up to the Schwinn bicycle store."  And we went to the Schwinn bicycle store and my father bought two bikes and said, "Now, you kids ride home."  And it was the time and a half and the double time that allowed parents like mine to do extra things for their kids.
Speaker 1: So you, you are, you know what--that's okay, I'm crying, I was crying today during our--
Story_ID: 657410
Speaker 1: You know, you are, you're the baby though and so what is the difference in the, the parenting and are you like the bab- you know, are you, are you really the baby in that way and where does that fit?  Like, you could, the youngest gets away with more things.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's no doubt that I got away with a whole lot of things.  Some would say I was mischievous.  I think my siblings would say that and some would say that I was treated unfairly, that I was treated preferentially, that other family members beyond my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush], so uncles and aunts and others made investments in me that they didn't make in my other siblings, so I was often invited to go places that my siblings weren't invited to go.  Neighbors took me and exposed me to things that my siblings didn't get exposed to and I don't--I guess, I guess they saw something in me that I wasn't fully aware of at the time, but there was a big investment made in me from a very early age.
Speaker 1: Now, why do you think that?  Was it your personality, was it the, I mean why is that?
Speaker 2: I think that, so now that I'm a grown up and I read things, I think that there's something about birth order and about expectations and about younger siblings doing things to be perceived as being important and so, you know, I was always outgoing and I was always trying to create some comedy or something around the household and make people laugh when things should have been serious.  I also had a, I think I was born very curious and so when I was a young kid, we only had, we had two sets of books in our house.  We had an encyclopedia and we had a medical encyclopedia and I read them nonstop over and over and over again, because those were the only books that we really had in the house, and so I was curious and so I tended to ask people a lot of questions and I think that I was asking some questions that were a little bit mature for my age, and I think that older people liked me and I've also always been attracted to older people, so whether it was a local precinct committeemen, or businessmen or schoolteacher, I, I was just naturally attracted to those people and I think that they liked seeing that in a kid.
Speaker 1: So you were precocious in some respects?
Speaker 2: A little bit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 657411
Speaker 1: So, what--so school, you, you attended--is it D- D--
Speaker 2: I went to Park Elementary School [East St. Louis, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Park.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Clark Junior High School [George Rogers Clark Junior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], and then I went to East St. Louis Senior High School [East St. Louis, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how far is your elementary school away from the house?  Are you walking to school?
Speaker 2: It was, we were walking to school every day.  I grew up on 23rd Street off of Ridge Avenue, and the school was on 29th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, the difference, it was Darryl [Darryl Bush].  He's--
Speaker 2: He's about two years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two years.  So, are you going to school together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: Now, was he gifted, did he like sports too?
Speaker 2: He did like sports.  He was a, he was a really good athlete, and he ended up playing football at the high school level and basketball at the high school level, and then he went to Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois] for about a year and a half and it didn't work out for him.
Speaker 1: So you, with you Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], what are you, are you, what are the teachers, like is your school an integrated school and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so one other piece about East St. Louis, Illinois that you have to know so when my brother, my older brother, Ivan [Ivan Bush], graduated from East St. Louis Senior High School in 1969.  It was 80 percent white and 20 percent black.  When I graduated in 1975, it was 85 percent black and 15 percent white.  The combination of the riots, of the building of this highway system that disintermediated my community and a decline in industrial America resulted in a real shift in the demographics in the schools, but in the, before the educators, my teachers, were a diverse group.  I mean, they were white and black and young and old and the whole range of educators.
Speaker 1: When you think about that, that is huge white flight that happened--I mean, that's huge.
Speaker 2: Less than ten years.
Speaker 1: Less than ten years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For it to be changed like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And, so what does the, in school is there a teacher like, do you remember any teachers that were influential either in elementary or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, so I was, some would say I was a teacher's pet but I wouldn't say that.  I was always close with the teachers so my kindergarten teacher, Ms. Schidderlind [ph.], was, I was very close to her.  My third grade teacher, Ms. Jefferson [ph.] who was twenty-three years old, was the first crush I ever had in my whole lifetime.  She was a young teacher just out of college and African American and she was beautiful, and I was just absolutely in love with her.  My sixth grade teacher, Ms. Mason [ph.], was a phenomenal educator, and she was, I was very close to her as well, and I always, you know, I was a valedictorian of my class in the sixth grade, so there was obviously something that the teachers liked about me and that kind of continued through junior high and high school.
Story_ID: 657412
Speaker 1: So, I, I want to ask about your other siblings.  Did anyone do as well academically as you, if you look at things (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you were, it was those encyclopedias and then teacher encouragement and--
Speaker 2: Teacher encourage- it was encyclopedias, it was a teacher encouragement, it was, I just had this whole community that was supporting me.  I had an uncle who was in Topeka, Kansas, who was a lawyer and they would bring me away to Topeka, Kansas.  I had a funeral director, Mr. Russell [Lee Russell], two streets away.  He would take me on trips with his family, again, people who were exposing me to different things and encouraging to do different things.
Speaker 1: Well, you know what, what this was typical in the community that if they saw a young person they would raise them up and try to really, you know, applaud their efforts and things like that and help.  So, now I, are you athletic as a kid, are you more, are you nerdy?
Speaker 2: I'm both, so that's, so I played three sports a year and I was also into the books and I also worked.  I worked when I was sixteen years old.  I was playing basketball.  I was working twenty-five hours a week in a kitchen and I was one of the best students in my class.
Speaker 1: Whoa.  So, are, are there other, by the time you're, is that when you were in high school [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois]?  You said you were one of the best students in your class at sixteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what are you thinking you want to do at that point?  You've had two brothers go off to school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what are you thinking you want to do?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking that I want to be lawyer because people are telling me that that's what I should do.
Speaker 1: And you have this uncle.
Speaker 2: And I have this uncle, yeah.  And so when I went to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], I had assumed that I was going to be an attorney.
Story_ID: 657413
Speaker 1: Now how does the, how do you end up at Cornell?  No one else in your family is, you know, has--one has gone south, one has gone Midwest, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And my sister [Althea Bush] hadn't gone at that time, although my sister has subsequently gone to the university and has completed her master's degree.  And my younger brother [Itez Bush] went to the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].  He didn't complete.  So, what happened with me in college is that again I had, I was doing well academically and I was still a good student athlete and so--
Speaker 1: And you played--
Speaker 2: I played basketball and I ran track, and I played football at one time and I played baseball at another time.  I was playing a sport.  And so, I took, I took an exam when I was in the sixth grade [at Park Elementary School, East St. Louis, Illinois] that, that I got a good score on and I started to get the attention of some colleges that were investing in young people from black communities, and then I took an exam in the tenth grade; I guess it was the PSATs, and I did exceptionally well for my school [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], so there were not many kids in my school who had scored like that, and so I started to received solicitations from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and schools in the state.  And then there was a coach, Roosevelt Wilson, who was the track coach, who had a friend at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], who was the basketball coach and he, one day, stopped me in the hallway and said, "Look, you're going to get into Northwestern, you're going to get into the University of Illinois, but I think that you're the type of kid who can go to an Ivy League school," and I said, "Well, what's an Ivy League school," because there was not the, in our school if you got into the University of Illinois, you had done as much as you possibly could.  I went to visit these schools and I got to Cornell and when I went to, when I went up to New Haven [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], it was--New Haven at the time, I found fascinating because this school had invested in the community around me and it looked a lot like the community that I was growing up in, which to this day, fascinates me, and when I went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], it was twenty degrees below zero, and when I got to Ithaca it was fifteen degrees, and it was balmy, fifteen degrees in Ithaca, New York, and so I came, I had a conversation with my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] about these schools and they, you know, they kind of paused because of, not just because of how far they were away, but they were kind of an unknown quantity to them and, but our parents really gave us a lot of this whole concept of risk, room to make decisions and so I decided I want to go to Cornell and that's where I went.
Speaker 1: You know, I, so when you go off how many in your class, you know, because at this point in time you know, you say the school is 90 percent?
Speaker 2: About 85 percent African American.
Speaker 1: African American (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how many kids, how many students in your class are going off Ivy League schools or quote good schools?
Speaker 2: So my class is almost a thousand students.  It was a really big school by that point, right?  And I was the only student who went to an Ivy League school.  There were some great student athletes who went to schools like Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana] and University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], University of Illinois, Eastern Illinois [Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] and schools like that, but to the best of my knowledge I was the only one who went to an Ivy League school.
Story_ID: 657414
Speaker 1: And did you--were you, what other activities were you involved with?  Did you, were you able to show a lot of, I mean what were you involved with in school beside--
Speaker 2: So, I was, again, I played--
Speaker 1: You played sports (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always played sports, so I lettered in sports.  I was involved in the biology club, I was involved in the language club, I was, I ran for class president, you know, and I was engaged in an election in which a lot of the ballots were found stuffed in a trash can.  I was involved in (laughter), I was involved in--
Speaker 1: That sounds like Chicago [Illinois] politics.
Speaker 2: It was.  It was really close.  And I was involved in the yearbook organization, and I did all this while I worked like--
Speaker 1: Those twenty-five hours.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were working, you said, at--
Speaker 2: I was a dishwasher at the Stouffer's restaurant [Stouffer's Riverfront Inn], downtown St. Louis [Missouri] and I would--my day was to go to school [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois] and then after school I'd go to sports practice, and then my shift would start at about 6:30 and I'd work until about 1:30 in the morning and I'd get up the next day and do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Now you were working to help with the family, or you were working to make money?  I mean, that's awful.  I thought you had, I didn't think you were working those kinds of hours.  I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah that's when I was in, yes, that's in the ninth and tenth grade time frame, and in the eleventh and twelfth grade, I worked at a drug store [Uptown Drug Store, St. Louis, Missouri] and I had better hours by that time.
Speaker 1: Wait, ninth and tenth grade you were working like that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was this common?  Were other of your family members working like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother Darryl [Darryl Bush] and I were working at the same restaurant, so I started when I was fifteen, and Darryl was over sixteen, almost seventeen.
Speaker 1: So, that gave you extra money, but were you having to contribute it to the household?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So it just gave you extra money, but still when you think about that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it was also, it was a mindset thing, you know, I think that my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] were trying to prepare me for life and for different avenues that life could take me, right?  So, fundamentally you had to have a work ethic, right?  And so, the work ethic was manifested in sports or in a job.  And so, that's what we were doing and so no, it wasn't a situation where my mother was saying you gotta go to work and you've gotta give us fifty dollars.  That wasn't it.  It was, as I think back on it, it was actually pretty interesting that they were never saying you have to work to provide for the family.  They were saying you should work as a, as a core value (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Value.  So you can be productive.
Speaker 2: You could be productive.
Story_ID: 657415
Speaker 1: So, you know there was one person I didn't ask you about.  I asked about your teachers, but what about Mr. Cleo Davis [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, so Mr. Davis was the precinct committeeman who lived across the street from us.  He was a local businessman and he was a mover and shaker in the political world, and he was one of those people who embraced me early along as well.  He was my, I got my first patronage job from him.  He was the man who made us go and hand out flyers whenever there was an election coming up.  He would always want me to come over when I was at college to talk about what I'm doing, to give his ideas about, you know, where life could take me.  He was a good guy.
Speaker 1: So, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], the other thing I--
Speaker 2: I want to note Cleo--Dupree Davis, and Dupree Davis was the precinct man, Cleo Davis was his relative and they both were very influential (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, so they were both, okay, were they brothers [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  So they were very active.
Story_ID: 657416
Speaker 1: Now, who are you, what are you aware of?  I know you're a Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] fan, so that's sports but what are you aware of, because these--a lot of activity is happening, you know, in the 1960s, that you're coming of age.  So, how are you aware of it in the household and, you know, in school and, you know, and what are you hearing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of, you know what's going on and what discussions are you part of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we are, again, you are, we were very aware of it because we were in 1968 and '69 [1969], we were hearing the sirens every night and you were seeing the transformation of downtown East St. Louis [Illinois] and State Street, which was a major thoroughfare, basically, being, being burnt out and we are aware that people like Mr. Davis, Dupree Davis, is involved in organizing and you're hearing, you know, you're reading the newspaper and you're seeing what's gone on every day up close and personal.  You have, my brother did not get drafted, my older brother Ivan [Ivan Bush], but many of his friends have gone away to Vietnam and they're coming back and they are, they are in a range of psychological states.  You see where one neighbor has gone down and shot up the police station when he's come back, because he clearly has been affected by the war [Vietnam War].  You see people engaged in protest movements in junior high school; people outside of my brother's, older brother's age telling us to come out of the school because the schools don't support us, they don't support our interests.  You are seeing people thrown in jail who you know who are friends, again, of my brother's because they're cohorts, a little bit older than I am.  It was, there was no way you could miss what was going on around us at that time.
Speaker 1: And this, so the period you were talking about is the time really of tremendous change and we're sort of a product of that, you know, that period (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, but there's also great hope, you know, in terms of opportunity and things like that.  Now--
Story_ID: 657417
Speaker 1: You know, it says that you, so you before you were working in the, the restaurant, was it the restaurant [Stouffer's Riverfront Inn, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You, you had, you worked, you had your job as a lawn mower, you know, first and then you were talking about being a dishwasher and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so one of the things, I like to talk about how my father [Charlie W. Bush] and mother [Jessie Mae Bush] talk about industry.  One Christmas the gift to my brother, Darryl [Darryl Bush] and me was a lawn mower.  That was our Christmas gift, and we proceeded to (laughter) to engage as many of the people in our neighborhood as possible to cut their grass, so we're twelve and thirteen years old and by this time we've got several lawn mowers and we are cutting everybody's gas and we're, grass, and we're making money and it was just part and parcel to how the industrial element in our family was manifesting itself.
Speaker 1: Now, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], when you graduate [from East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], what are you doing the summer before you go off to school [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]?  Are you, and then what is the expectation because at this point has your, has your oth- brother, your brother, oh he has born, he's born.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, my brother, yeah.  Itez [Bush's younger brother, Itez Bush] is not, he's just starting kindergarten or something like that.  I'm leaving the house.  I'm working at the drug store, Uptown Drug Store [St. Louis, Missouri] forty hours a week, making as much money as I can to, so that I can go away to college.  You asked about the summer time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh the summer.
Speaker 2: So in the summer I am working as much as I can trying to be able to finance my education.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 657418
Speaker 1: So, do you remember your, when you arrived on Cornell's [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] campus?
Speaker 2: I do remember, so--
Speaker 1: And this is, this is 19--
Speaker 2: This is August the 15th, 1975, and so I was put on a flight, TWA [Trans World Airlines] flight from St. Louis [Missouri] to Syracuse, New York, by myself and I get off the flight and I get on a bus from Syracuse to Ithaca, New York, and I show up in Ithaca and I, which was it, it was a classically stunningly beautiful day in Ithaca, New York.
Speaker 1: And Cornell has a beautiful campus, so I'm told, right?
Speaker 2: I may be biased but I think it's the most beautiful college campus in the world.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know, I've heard that it's really--
Speaker 2: It's just a gorgeous place and I arrive and I had, at one point they had sent a letter asking if I wanted to select a roommate and I had declined and so I show up in Ithaca and I walk into my dorm room and there is a Chinese American with hair down his back, sitting on a top bunk, eating dried cuttlefish and playing a guitar, and I had had no experience with people like this and I just come in and introduce myself and we became really good friends.  He was the first generation Chinese American from Hawaii and we become really good friends.  His name is Donald Wang [ph.].  He is to this day, one of the kindest, most open minded people I've ever met.  We were as different as you could be.  Cornell at the time was a really interesting place.  It was very diverse, so Donald and I lived in one room, next door to us was a guy who was a fifth generation military person from South Carolina.  His roommate was a WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] from Greenwich, Connecticut.  Next door to them was a prince in line to be, potentially be the king of Uganda.  His roommate was a Jewish guy from Westchester, New York.  Next to them was a guy from Mexico.  His roommate was a son of a San Francisco [California] hotel family, and you went all around the floor with this extraordinarily mosaic of young people with different backgrounds and different life experiences to date, and it was a fabulous place to be.
Story_ID: 657419
Speaker 1: You get to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and there is this wonderful grouping of people and very eclectic and very, very different from what you have been, you know, you've been exposed to because, wasn't, East St. Louis [Illinois] was more black than white, right?  Or am I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, no, it was--again--in my formative years it was much more black than white and it certainly wasn't a group of highly educationally aspiring people and totally the reverse at Cornell when I got there.  At Cornell, it was hard for me at first because it was the first time in my life when I felt deficient because there were so many really smart people who had had different educational experiences than I had.  I had some raw talent, but these young people were really smart, and I'll never forget first semester, I'm taking a course and I'm having difficulty and I go next door to one of my colleagues and I ask for help and he says to me, "Are you kidding me?  We did this in the eleventh grade at my school."  That was his response to me.  And, I just went back to my room and I cried.  I just felt like everything that I had thought about myself, right, it was just being blown away and so I recaptured, you know, I pulled myself together and I got focused, but it was, Cornell is a very difficult place and it, all the difficulty is magnified by how many really smart young people are in a school like that.
Speaker 1: And plus, the other thing is that, you know, you've been really in a segregated school system that you were at the top, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But then, you're competing on a larger stage, but you start out, so how long is it rocky for you, that that part, when you're like, whoa, this?
Speaker 2: Actually it's kind of interesting because--less than a semester--because I felt that failure was not an option and that I couldn't call my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] and say I'm not making it, and so I just doubled up and worked as hard as I could.
Story_ID: 657420
Speaker 1: So you have the native intelligence, yeah.  You just need to be in--so, so what--you're--what are you thinking you want to be when you start in that, because you said a lawyer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in fact that's what you were saying, that you wanted to be a lawyer so what, where, what do you start out majoring in [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: I majored in government economics, but what really happened was that I got exposure for the first time in my life to different things than just the silos of either you're gonna be a teacher or a lawyer or, you know, you could be a doctor if you were from our community and you were doing well academically.  All of a sudden, I started reading philosophy and history and art history and all these things that I absolutely loved and so my--between the combination of the people I was spending time with and what I was taking in to my schedule, my world kind of shifted and opened up in a really big way, and I started to think that there were other things that I could do so that by the time I was a senior I had really thought about whether I really should go to law school or do something else, and I was thinking about going to law school and my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] said, "Why don't you work a couple of years before you make that type of commitment?" And that was, first of all that support was good to hear, and so then I start to look around and I was increasingly attracted to finance because of the economics and I was reading The Wall Street Journal and all these publications every day and started to look at the banking industry.
Story_ID: 657421
Speaker 1: Now, I, I also want to talk about the time, because I'm more convinced that mid-'60s [1960s] and mid-'80s [1980s] are really productive.  It's a special time for the black community. And, and business, people are looking at Corporate America, you know, in these ways now, I do want to ask you, though, what were you doing summers and, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.  So, let's start with during the academic year, so during the academic year I was working thirty-five hours a week, so I was trying to be competitive academically and I was working.
Speaker 1: At school [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  So I worked at the student union and then I quickly became involved in residential housing, so first I was an RA [residential advisor], and I worked as an RA and I worked at the student union, and then when I was a senior, I was the only undergraduate who was a head resident, which meant that I was responsible for a staff and a full building, and the reason I did that was because not only was my housing free but I also got a stipend, so that was the good side of it.  The challenging side of it was trying to help people who are my peers deal with some really difficult life decisions and so when I was a senior in high school [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois], I helped people deal with everything from depression to unwanted pregnancies to, you know, your classic boyfriend and girlfriend challenges to people who were failing academically and helping them to deal with how their, their conversations with their parents.  So, I was working all the time while I was in college and in the summers, the first summer I went home and I worked at the drug store [Uptown Drug Store, St. Louis, Missouri].  The second summer, I stayed on campus and did research with the law school professor because I was still interested, I thought, in law.  My junior year I stayed and I was a resident advisor and I took some courses and so I was, this was before the, the banks had really started the tracking that actually started to occur in the '80s [1980s] when they were reaching down and taking young African Americans and putting them in these great training programs.
Story_ID: 657422
Speaker 1: And so, what else would you consider significant about your experience at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and who would we know that, you know, was there at the same time.
Speaker 2: So, my good friend, Ronald McCray [Ronald D. McCray], who you may know who was at Kimberly-Clark [Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Irving, Texas] and then went to Harvard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He went to Nike [Nike, Inc.], he went to Nike right?
Speaker 2: He went to Nike.  He went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Julieanna Cornish [ph.], who was the senior executive of AT&T [AT&T Inc.] for a long time.  She actually ran the western part of the United States for them and then went into private business of her own.  Who else was there?  Tom Jones [Thomas W. Jones] had graduated from Cornell a couple years before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he's no--
Speaker 2: His notoriety is being the first person to be, have weapons on a college campus in America.  Who else?  I'll think of some names for you.  But, it was an interesting time because the U.S., another thing that was going on, remember was South Africa and all this discussion about apartheid and also how the African American movement was actually moving to Africa, and you had the involvement of people like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] coming to campuses like Cornell and trying to get the students engaged in the broader challenges to the rights of African American people.  So, that was going on on campus at the time that I was there as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 657423
Speaker 1: And when did you start, I mean, did you say your degree was business and economics--
Speaker 2: I double majored in government and economics (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Government, okay. Eco- so economics is hard in and of itself.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Aren't there, because it's quan- this is through talking to someone--don't you have to take statistics?  No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You take statistics and you have to take some, a lot of math and yeah, it's a quantitative program.
Speaker 1: So, you found that you have a knack for those things.  Were those courses hard because I--
Speaker 2: The courses were hard, but you know what I felt was that I, I really thought that Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] in college was just a transformational opportunity for me and so I took a broad range of subjects--I was just fascinated to be there and to be in this environment in which you were taking all these different courses and you could just be free to think.  And so, the economics and the government kind of dovetailed for me and so when I had enough credits to qualify for majoring in both, I did that.
Speaker 1: So, what made you, were you thinking, what were you thinking you wanted to be, though, at this point, because you've changed your majors and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what I was looking for was, I mean it sounds corny, I was looking for an opportunity to keep growing and so when I was about to graduate, there were the different banks coming to campus to recruit and other organizations that were campus to recruit as well and I was offered a job at the Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.], which, and I also got offers from Bankers Trust and City Corp [National City Corporation] and some others as well, but what was unique about Chase was that you would go through this training program and then I could become an analyst in the international department.  Most of the junior analyst jobs, you basically go through training and you spend all of your time in New York City [New York, New York], working until two o'clock in the morning and that was your existence.  Here, I had a chance to grow and to spend time in the bigger world, so when I was having this last interview and trying to make this recruiter think that they should pay me a little bit more money, I'm biting my tongue because she's saying, "Once you're done with the program you're likely to go to Brazil and work with some projects and then go to Tokyo [Japan] and then maybe to Saudi Arabia and then, of course, you'll go to London [England] and you'll go to Paris [France] and you'll go to Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and maybe you'll go to Chile and these will be your development opportunities," right?  And so I'm literally biting through my tongue trying to have my best poker face on because this is bigger than anything in my imagination, so I take that job at the bank and the other thing that was interesting about it, again, when you grow up like I grew up you're always thinking about how do you make and save some money.  So, I realized that in a job like this where I would be travelling 80 percent of the time, I'd be spending my money 20 percent of the time, which meant that I could start to save some money and, you know, to deal with that kind of insecurity that we have when we grow up like I grew up, and it was, again, a transformational opportunity.  You go from being a landlocked boy like me from East St. Louis, Illinois, to flying first class to Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] for three months to work on these really interesting corporate finance transactions, and then you go back to New York for a month and then they would send you to Tokyo for two months and so it was, it was a really, really great opportunity and once I got into it and I, I realized how interesting banking was, there was no turning back for me towards the law.
Story_ID: 657424
Speaker 1: So, who was it, how large, how many people were in your program, in that program [at Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.]?
Speaker 2: That's, that's also interesting.  So my class was about a hundred people and it was split 50 percent M.B.A.s and 50 percent B.A.s, and what they didn't tell us at the time, and I don't know if, they certainly couldn't get away with this today, is that they didn't tell us that probably about one half to two thirds of us wouldn't be standing at the end of it, that as many as one half of us would be looking for new employment within less than a year, and so of our class, I think I'm right about this, about sixty of us, about 60 percent made it through and of the sixty, about thirty-five or forty were B.A.s, and about twenty or twenty-five were M.B.A.s.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  How did you find those stats later? How did--
Speaker 2: Because you knew, you knew, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Speaker 2: --the programs started in August and next August you knew who was still around.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  So, and the people, so there was no differentiation?  What about salary wise?
Speaker 2: The salaries were different.  They were paid more money and the accounting portion of the training was shorter for the M.B.A.s than for the B.A.s.
Speaker 1: And so this is really, I mean this is an amazing experience for someone of that, I mean, right now with M.B.A. training, they're doing more international, but this sounds like, you know, you're not paying them.  They're paying you and you're getting the same--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what are you, I mean you have not had any of this, so do you remember your first--
Story_ID: 657425
Speaker 1: Before we go there--do you remember graduation [from Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], your parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush], can you talk about the day of your graduation, I'm sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh sure.  It was, it was a really--it was a beautiful day.  It was seventy degrees outside.  My parents, my s- I think I'm right about this, all of my siblings were there and a couple of extended family members were there as well, and we had a really great celebration and because I knew that my parents had all saved to come there, you know, I ended up financing most of the dinner afterwards which was great, and it was a really good two days or so.
Speaker 1: So for them to sort of see their son, I mean because at this point you're sort of the, I mean you've gone where they could only have thought possible in that way.
Speaker 2: I would, yeah, for them to think it possible would have been a stretch--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because I think in their minds, again, to go to a university in the state would have--
Speaker 1: Been the, been the thing, that's right.
Story_ID: 657426
Speaker 1: So you're in this amazing program and are you, what about language training and things like that, is that part of the program, what--
Speaker 2: So, no, I had, I had studied Spanish in college and had a pretty good grasp of Spanish and I learned a little Portuguese along the way so I had, and I had, again, part of the beautiful mosaic of Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] with a number of primary Spanish speakers who were there from New York City [New York, New York], and I had some of those as friends and they helped me develop those skills.
Speaker 1: And so do you, what are you learning in these years?  These are young jobs, though, you're bound to, because you're travelling, like, describe what you're doing.
Speaker 2: Right, so, what we're doing is let's say, and again, it's interesting how the world of finance has grown so much and become so much more sophisticated than it was at the time.  You have to remember that when I was going through this program, we didn't have computers and we didn't have calculators, right?  (Laughter) And so we used a slide rule to do calculations and you would, what we principally did is there was, let's say that the bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] was about to make a commitment to finance the expansion of Pan American Airlines [Pan American World Airways] beyond the United States and Latin America, and they're looking to make a commitment of $300 million and then we know that if Pan Am is going to take that type of commitment, then the American industry as a whole might be looking to make that type of commitment, so the head of the aerospace department would ask the young person like myself to do an assessment of the airline, the U.S. airline industry, and make a recommendation about not just what we should do with Pan Am, but how much capital we should commit to the industry overall, and I would spend weeks putting together this analysis, which was literally handwriting spread sheets, and it forced you to be disciplined in your thinking because, again, it's not with computers where you hit one button and you correct everything.  If you change one assumption, you're changing hundreds of lines of work that you have to do over.  So, it made you be really critical thinkers before you started to write stuff down, so we would do that type of analysis, or they would say go to Japan.  There are these Japanese trading companies that we're thinking about financing.  I want you to go and I want you to assess how much we're doing with them today and how much we should do with them in the future.  Or go to Saudi Arabia for a month.  We're thinking of committing capital to this new oil and gas drilling activities in the western part of Saudi Arabia.  You can go out there and work with our colleagues there and you do some analysis.  And then, I want you to go to Paris [France] from there and I want you to look at our, how much business we're doing with the French insurance companies or the French pharmaceutical companies, and write an assessment, and by the way you have to come back and you need to support and make a presentation about what you're doing.  And, by the way there's somebody in the room who has a vested interest in doing this business because they're the relationship person who gets paid a lot of money if, in fact, we go forward and that person is going to be really critical of you because you're affecting their life, and so that is how we would spend our time.
Speaker 1: So what is, so the year, so how long was the training period?
Speaker 2: The training was for a full year--
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and then two years I spent going around different parts of the world, making these types of analyses.
Story_ID: 657427
Speaker 1: And then, what happens after?  What's your progression?
Speaker 2: And so then what happens after that is I was still thinking of going to business school and I tell my boss I'm going to apply to business school.  I've received some positive, you know in the old days you could speak to a Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or a University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] and they'll tell you that they're inclined to accept you.  And so, I had indications that I would be accepted at some business schools, and I went to my boss and I said, "I think I need to quit because I want to go to business school," and he said, "Before you do that, I want you to take another trip.  I want you to go down to Puerto Rico, where I want you to be one of the senior people in the corporate banking group in Puerto Rico, and if everything goes well, you'll probably run the operation within a couple of years."  So I'm twenty-five years old and I go to Puerto Rico and on the way to the office, they stop by this condominium on the water and take me inside to this four bedroom apartment with a cook and a maid and say, "This is where you will be staying if you accept this job," and so (laughter) and so it was hard for me to say no.  And while I was in Puerto Rico, my real business skills had come to a head and I started making money, and at that time, at that time it was just as the banks were really starting to evolve quickly and the difference between investment banks and commercial banks were starting to shrink, so Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] was one of the first banks that was getting ready to start doing private equity investing.  I was asked to come back and join one of those groups that was starting that activity and my career in banking took off from there.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So who was significant at Chase at this point and, you know, period.  I mean, who is your boss, who is helping--
Speaker 2: So it's not, it's really interesting.  I had a couple of people who took interest in me at the bank.  One was Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.], who was on the board of the bank at the time, one was a guy named Doug Anderson, who became the second senior vice president, black senior vice president at the bank, and then there were just, there were a group of what I call progressive white people who were helping me along and helping me to, to move through the organization, but the real thing was that the group that I joined was a money maker and they couldn't deny what we were doing and it served--the fact that we were part of the emerging business of the bank and we were doing really well kind of helped me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is really very heavily M and A [mergers and acquisitions] kind of work, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's M and A, it's restructuring work, it's leveraged buyouts, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.  Which was becoming, you know, it would be increasingly becoming more and more of things, growth through acquisitions, okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And, how many other, of those one hundred, how many were African American in your group?  That's what I'm trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Oh so, in the hundred that came through that time frame, there were about six or seven.
Speaker 1: Six or seven, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and four made it through that process and then I was one of two who went into the corporate part of the bank.  There were others that went into the traditional consumer and commercial part of the bank.
Speaker 1: Do we know the names of those four, or are they still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can get that for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I'll have to--I'll get--yeah.
Story_ID: 657428
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So but that, okay, so you have, I mean this is like an unbelievable career move and you, you're in Puerto Rico, how long are you in Puerto Rico?
Speaker 1: I'm in Puerto Rico for three years, about two and a half years or so, almost three, and then I come back and join this group called the chemicals and healthcare group, and we started doing these leveraged buyouts including, for example, my group created John Huntsman Sr.'s big chemical business [Huntsman Chemical Corporation; Huntsman Corporation].  A lot of companies were starting to shed assets and do a lot of different things, so Union Carbide [Union Carbide Corporation] was a client, W.R. Grace [W.R. Grace and Company] was a client, Monsanto [Monsanto Company] was a client.  These--Dow Chemical [Dow Chemical Company] was a client and these companies were going through change and we were positioned well with them to start helping them to sell assets and finding investors to buy those businesses from them.
Speaker 2: So, when you, in this period of time, well, let me ask you, what are you learning about yourself and about business in that time period in Puerto Rico, because that--okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the period leading up, what I'm learning are a couple things.  The first thing I'm learning is how important it is to think independently, because before I took this job and started to see the world, I assumed that everything that I saw on '60 Minutes' or read in The New York Times was right, right?  And all of a sudden you are in Brazil and you're hearing on the ground what's going on there and you're comparing it to what you're receiving back in the United States, and there's no real connection, or you're in a place like Saudi Arabia where you, at that time, you would hear very little about the country, so the first thing I was learning was to be skeptical about anything that I was being told.  The second thing I was learning was that I had a core set of both analytical and social skills that were on par with the people that I thought were always superior to me, and that I could be competitive with them and so that was a second thing I learned, and the third thing, again, I come back to the concept of risk, but that I needed, some people could play it safe in life and get by, but for me I had to take risks to have this kind of trajectory, because at the time black people didn't have, most of us were afraid to take risks and I noticed that those who tended to take a little bit more risk were the ones who were on a trajectory like this as opposed to like this.  So, I wanted to, I wanted to just skip levels in the bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and to do that I had to take some risk and try to do things a little differently.
Speaker 2: I mean, but very young, I'm saying this, you're young at this point.  I mean that--so in Puerto Rico you were managing people?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  So when, were those assignments typical two to three years, they were typical assignments.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, when you come back, what, you said you're involved in another group that's actually doing more restructurings--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And is that, did you say it was a corporate finance?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was called the primary industries group and it was where the bank housed its relationships with basically Fortune 200 companies who were in the chemicals, healthcare, power, water industries, and, and also entrepreneurs who were looking to buy those businesses.
Story_ID: 657429
Speaker 1: So, when you come back, you come back to the New York [New York] office?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And are--who, who has joined, who is now on the scene in New York?  Young, black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who of my friends?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Who are your friends, but who also is coming into the--
Speaker 2: Again, Doug Anderson is a big player at this time.  Gary Taylor, who is now the chief financial officer of CIT finance [CIT Financial Corporation; CIT Group Inc., New York, New York], he's on the scene.  Who else is, who, African American.  There's just not a lot of us.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, was Fred Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]?
Speaker 2: So Fred is not at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  Fred is--
Speaker 1: At Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG].
Speaker 2: Oh but if you asked who's in the community--
Speaker 1: Who's in the community, that's what I was trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, so it's Fred, it's Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], it's Jimmy Haddon [James F. Haddon], it's Chris Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams]--
Speaker 1: Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire]?
Speaker 2: Ray McGuire.  It's, who else is around at the time?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Bernard Beal around?
Speaker 2: Bernard Beal, but they were in a different business.  Oh, what's his name, I will give you some more names, but there was a whole group of us that were evolving at around the same time.  There were people at Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], Credit Suisse, Morgan, Bankers Trust, my brother, Mercer Cook [Mercer Cook III] and Janice Cook Roberts were at Bankers Trust and people were transitioning back to business school.  There was a good group of people who all knew each other.
Speaker 1: This is the new burgeoning financial elite.  I mean, you know, coming up because everybody's coming (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Everybody's coming to--we're all coming at the same time.
Speaker 1: But how many of you, that's what I'm wondering, how many are M.B.A.s versus--aren't more M.B.A.s than non-M.B.A.s?
Speaker 2: Most were M.B.A.s.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 657430
Speaker 1: I mean and you have, you've learned your work ethic.  I mean, you came, you didn't, you left East St. Louis [Illinois] with your work e- work ethic.  I'm just saying those jobs are not for the faint of heart or spirit, because it's very heavily work oriented--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) very heavily; you know, lots of hours, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We, it was very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're doing analyses, but by this time you're not doing the, you know, the analyses that you first do when you get--
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm now--
Speaker 1: The number crunching.
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm now starting to handle relationships with these Fortune 200 type companies or these what we call sponsors, which were, again, entrepreneurs and investors who were looking to buy subsidiaries or businesses of these companies, so I'm interacting at a very high level within these corporations.
Speaker 1: So, this is honestly, I don't want to belabor it, but this was like a, a total change from where you originally came.  I mean, it's, the culture, everything.  You've got to learn the culture.  You've got to learn not only the culture of the people who are the white community, but you have to, it's the business culture and it's the M and A [merger and acquisitions] culture.  I mean, those are all their own cultures, and so what, why were you good at what you did?  Was it you had a facility for numbers or detailed?
Speaker 2: I think that, I think that what really happened for me was that, and this is, this will come across a little bit awkward, but for some of the people who came into our industry, they had difficulty transitioning to a predominantly white environment in which the behaviors were different, and they had a little bit of a chip about how do you make that transition and, and still be black?  All right?  And I really didn't worry a whole lot about that, and I don't know how this happened but I, you know, I thought about my college experience where my friends were black and white and I wasn't, you know, at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] there were a lot of kids who came from New York [New York], African Americans and Latinos who came and they tried to take the Bronx [New York] and put it in Ithaca to create safety for them.  I wasn't looking to bring East St. Louis to Ithaca, New York.  I was trying to figure out to get as much of it as I could so that it could take me to the next level, and so by the time I got to New York City, I had had like a range of relationships in college so I felt socially comfortable with different types of people and may even go back as far as, my wife [Antoinette Cook Bush], my mother [Jessie Mae Bush] making me comfortable with different types of food.  I was just, I was just comfortable that I could be around different people and I could engage, and I think I had a strong enough academic foundation and that I had this sort of natural curiosity and when I put the three together, it made it work for me.
Story_ID: 657431
Speaker 1: What, now at what point do you meet Toni [Bush's wife, Antoinette Cook Bush]?  That's what I'm, and is this when you come back--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --into the community?
Speaker 2: I meet Toni in 1988 when I'm back working for the bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] in New York [New York], and I have a very close friend, his name is [HistoryMaker] Paul Mason, one of my best friends in life, who was living and working for ABC News in Miami [Florida] at the time, and I would go and frequently visit with Paul.  Toni, separately, had a client in Miami and the client invited her to Miami to go to a barbecue that this guy, Paul Mason, was having at his home, and so we both were invited to this party, myself by Paul and Toni by her client, and we meet and we have this visceral reaction to each other on sight.  We get into an argument, we're talking about everything from, you know, politics to the Bork [Robert Bork] nominations and we're going at it like this.  At the end of the evening, we exchange pleasantries.  We don't exchange phone calls, numbers, or anything like that.  We just go.  I was actually seeing a woman in Miami at the time. I leave, about four weeks later her cousin, [HistoryMaker] Ann Walker, who had been a really close friend of mine in New York, said, "You should come up to New York this weekend.  There's a guy named Dwight Bush [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], and he's having a barbecue and you should go to his barbecue with me."  Ann is notorious for being late, and so the barbecue was supposed to start at five o'clock, and Toni is very prompt at the time, at 5:01, I open the door.  She's the first person at the door, and I say to myself, I know that I did not invite this woman to my home.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And she comes inside and we've been together ever since.  We laughed and we had a great time and then she comes back and we spend the next couple of weeks going to the U.S. Open tennis tournaments [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] together, and that's where it started and from that point on for the next eighteen months or so that we dated, we saw each other every weekend.
Speaker 1: So, you're, did she know she was coming to your party?
Speaker 2: I think, she kind of, I think she kind of blurred on it.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Because I don't think she was looking forward to seeing me at that time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Were you politically different at that point?  No, you weren't, when you said you were, there was the Bork, so who was, who had--
Speaker 2: I was on the Bork side.  I was on the progressive side (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) On the Republican side is what we--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you become, so were you more Republican back then?
Speaker 2: I don't understand your question.
Speaker 1: No (laughter).  No, I'm saying the Bork, were you on the Bork side seriously?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: You and Jewel (Unclear) [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious]--
Speaker 2: As a conversational piece.  Again, I liked to argue and I loved that about Toni, because Toni, you know, I just that she is very intellectually interesting.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That's one of the qualities that she has that I love the most, and we can disagree about things and, and I love that she could support her position.
Speaker 1: See, and I, I mean that's good on a lot of different levels too, really.  A lot of black men like that are not being challenged.
Story_ID: 657432
Speaker 1: So, the thing that when you--so you get married, though, shortly after you get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we get married in 1990.
Speaker 1: And I can't help but, you may not want to tell this story, but the story of your honeymoon was as pretty, if you would tell that, I mean it, that was an amazing story.
Speaker 2: Sure, so, well again, I was just so in love with Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush] and I wanted us to move forward so the first thing I did was to take her to Italy to propose to her, right?  So, in December, after Christmas in 2009 [sic. 1989], we went to Rome [Italy] and Venice [Italy] and Milan [Italy] and a couple of other cities to propose to her, and then for the honeymoon she actually, for once, I think this is the only time in our relationship she gave me carte blanche to come up with a plan and so we ended up going to Paris [France] and Morocco for our honeymoon, and I told her that what she needed to do was to dress to be prepared to be in some cold weather, where she needed to be elegant and she needed to be able to be in some warm weather, where she needed to be able to travel around and see some different things and not be preoccupied with her hair and her fingernails.  And so, we went to--I should step back and say I had a client at the time who was Moroccan, and when I told him of my plans to go to Paris, he said, "No, no, no, no.  You've been to Paris.  You'll go to Paris again in your life.  You should go to my country for your honeymoon," and so I decided to do that and we went to Paris for a week and then we went to Morocco. And we showed up in Morocco and there was a car in the driveway, "Welcome Mr. and Mrs. Bush," and my friend and client had arranged a driver to take us around the country for a couple of weeks with papers of introduction in every major city where people would host us and then we would have dinners.
Speaker 1: And now, you're gonna back and be the ambassador to that country.
Speaker 2: And now we're going back as the ambassador and Mrs. of the country.
Speaker 1: But there was the other funny story about, you know, the first night of your honeymoon in Paris and there's the meeting of Bush.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So we show up at the George V hotel [Four Seasons Hotel George V] in Paris for our honeymoon and I go to the front desk and I present my itinerary, and the guy at the front desk looks at the paper and he looks up and he looks down and he says, "Excuse me a second," and he goes back to the manager and I can just see them gesturing about, you know, the guy at the counter, and so they come back and they give us the keys to the room, and we get an elevator and we go to the penthouse of the George V hotel and you open the doors and you walk in and there's this beautiful bouquet of flowers and there's a huge (unclear) of champagne and there are two bedrooms and beautiful bath, and you're looking at the Eiffel Tower [Paris, France] in one direction and all of this is going on and Toni walks in and she says, "My god, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], I didn't know we had it like that," and I look at the back of the door and I see the posted price on the back of the door, and Toni goes to the bathroom and I said, "I'll be back.  I have to go downstairs a second."  And I go down to the front desk and I said, "Excuse me sir.  There is a huge problem."  I said, "There is no way that I can afford this room for this night or for any night on our stay," and the man laughed and he said, "Well, sir.  It just so happens that you've arrived at the same time as President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] is in town to go and sign the decree ending the Cold War, and when you showed up, we just first assumed that you were from another part of the family, and we're not gonna give you this suite the next night, but tonight it's yours to enjoy yourselves," and so we stayed there in the presidential suite at the penthouse suite at the George V hotel.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I thought it was such a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 657433
Speaker 1: So you come, you come, so you come back from your honeymoon, and then you continue working.  Now when do you become managing director?
Speaker 2: I become managing director at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] in 1992.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992], which is two--
Speaker 2: Excuse me, in 19--
Speaker 1: Wait I--no, '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I become managing director at Chase in 1994 through '7 [1997] is when--I'm sorry, you're right, in 1994.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that, so you were living in New York [New York] at the beginning, the two of you, right, as newly- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Well, see that's what I'm confused--you're in New York and--
Speaker 2: So, what happens is, again, as I mentioned, once we started dating we would see each other every weekend and when we got married, we continued because Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush] was working on the commerce committee [U.S. Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee], and I was working at the bank and, quite frankly, we were having a good time picking whether we wanted to be in New York for the weekend or Washington, D.C. for the weekend.  And that all worked very well until the time we decided to have a child.  And so, when Toni becomes pregnant with Dwight, Jr. [Dwight Bush, Jr.], we buy and renovate a brownstone in New York City, 50 Hamilton Terrace is the residence, and when Dwight is born, Toni leaves the commerce committee and she starts to look around and she, we then have a home in New York City, and so Toni is there for--and then she joins Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], and she decides, and they were open to Toni being in either New York or in Washington, but we thought it would be better to have a family raised in Washington, D.C., than in New York City, and so we decided to move to Washington, D.C..
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the bank, you know, the bank once again was accommodative to me so they, they allowed me to open an office in Washington and still have people working for me in New York City.
Speaker 1: That's huge, actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, I would, I was asked to handle the bank's relationship with the Export-Import Bank [Export-Import Bank of the United States] and with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and do some quasi-political stuff, but I also had people working for me in New York City, and so my typical day was to start here in Washington, D.C., take the shuttle to New York City right before the lunch hour, be in the office at 1:30, have dinner with a client either in Wash- either in New York City or someplace else, and then either go back to New York or go to Washington, go back to Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 657434
Speaker 1: And so, when Dwight [Dwight Bush, Jr.] was born in, in 1993, in the spring of 1993--the first 100 days of 1994, I had been on 110 flights in the first 100 days because of this cycle, and I'll never forget it.  I was leaving the apartment that we had in Washington [D.C.] because we hadn't bought a home yet, and he was, he was crawling as fast as he could to get to the door to say goodbye to me, and at that moment I knew that I needed to change, and so that's when I left Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and went to Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation] and became the vice president for corporate development.
Speaker 2: Now, when you, was Chase, were they upset to lose you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was, they were--
Speaker 2: Because they have invested in quite a bit, you know.
Speaker 1: They were upset and I thought justifiably so and some of the people who had made investments in me professionally were disappointed as well.  It took Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.] a couple years to speak to me again, because he thought that I could end up as a senior, as like a really senior executive at Chase, but you know what?  I, I had to make a decision and relay it to my family and I thought that this new opportunity could work for me and it did, and again, so I convinced some people that it was, that they should think this was good for me, and those people at Chase remained close to me for a long time afterwards.
Speaker 2: And Bill Coleman, he can be gruff about things, too, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  Well, I think, I marvel at Bill Coleman.  I just think he is, I think he is one of the most exemplary and brilliant Americans across the board.  I mean, he is truly brilliant, he is a pioneer and he, he's tough but he's a great man.
Speaker 2: How did he go about mentoring you? Was, would you consider him a mentor during that time?
Speaker 1: I think I would and the way it would manifest itself is he would ask people about me, so I had been invited to do, when I was early in the bank, they would analysts do some things, you know who they thought had some promise and I was, I participated in the bank's annual shareholders meeting a couple of times, which meant that I got to go to a reception with the directors and he was there and he saw me there, and then I think a couple of people said good things to him about me and I know for a fact that from time to time, he would ask, you know, them to report back on me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And how you were doing, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how I was doing, yeah.
Story_ID: 657435
Speaker 1: So you, so you choose family life, because that was, that--there was going to be no signs of that quitting. And so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you choose family life over a career and that, I mean, not to have that aggressive a schedule, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right, and you know, and I look at, I just know the decisions that some of my contemporaries made at the time in New York [New York] and it's worked very well for them.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we were all the same kind of cohort.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you, so what do you do at that point that you with the--
Speaker 2: Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation]?
Speaker 1: Sallie Mae, and the head of Sallie Mae is--
Speaker 2: Larry Hough [Lawrence A. Hough].
Speaker 1: Larry Hough.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Who actually ends up, it's--okay, I found that sort of fascinating, so, what is the state of Sallie Mae when you come?
Speaker 2: So, when I come to Sallie Mae, so what happens, this often happens in Washington, D.C., I am at a cocktail party and Larry Hough is there and he's talking about how his company needs to change because most of his officers are people who would be working for the education department [U.S. Department of Education], yet for the fact that they were paid considerably more money working at the company.  So, from a cultural perspective and from a skills perspective, he wanted to shake some things up.  He hired this woman named Denise Boutross McGlone, who was one of the first derivative traders in all of the United States.  She helped to create the derivatives market and she's brilliant, and Denise and I--and Larry says, "I want you to come and meet Denise about coming and joining the company," and I go and meet with Denise and we have a great time, and we're at that point both thinking about how we can shake this company up, and so I go and I become one of the senior team members for Larry Hough.  I get there and what I hadn't paid enough attention to was that there was, in fact, a corporate fight that was going on within the company.  When they named Larry the CEO, they actually told the guy who was the CFO, who was also a contender for the top job, to leave.  His name is Al Lord [Albert Lord], and Al Lord is forced out and Al Lord, from my perspective, continues to maintain relationships within the company and they are giving him information that he uses towards a proxy contest within the company.  What's really interesting, though, is so the day I got there, the stock was trading in about thirty-two dollars a share.  We started to implement a strategy that was really, really powerful and two and a half years later the stock price is about $320 a share, and I had asked for--
Speaker 1: How much?
Speaker 2: Three-twenty.
Speaker 1: No, but, in what period?
Speaker 2: From thirty--
Speaker 1: No, but in what period of time?
Speaker 2: To 320 in two and a half years.  In two and a half years.  And, I had asked for most of my compensation to be in options instead of in salary, and so we end up losing the proxy fight, but it ends up being a very, a very good experience for me.
Speaker 1: Lucrative and financially, wow.  I didn't--so now, the point, what I had read was that you were hired originally to focus on business diversification.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what did that mean to Sallie Mae at that time?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, Sallie Mae was, again, a pure student loan company, right?  But they had these relationships in the colleges and universities that could be leveraged to do other things.  So, one of the things we did was we just, we created a securities company to trade student loan, asset back student loans.  We also created a company called, it was called CyberMark [CyberMark International, Phoenix, Arizona], which was gonna be the equivalent of a credit card, or of a card that on campus you would use for everything from access to buildings to your food service plan to access to the libraries, to purchases and the whole nine yards.  And this proxy group was going at Sallie Mae, because they thought that was a waste of money because the student loan business was so lucrative and it was also their view, I think, was very shortsighted because what we really had was an opportunity to build Sallie Mae into the equivalent of a competitor to American Express [American Express Company] or the Chase Manhattan Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].
Story_ID: 657436
Speaker 1: You know, what I find, I, I do have a question about that, because isn't Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation] quasi-governmental?
Speaker 2: So one of the other things that we did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And aren't there other certain regulations that you didn't have--
Speaker 2: So one of the things that we did when I was at Sallie Mae, was to transition Sallie Mae from being what's called a government sponsored enterprise to being a free standing corporation, so when you look at what happened to Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] during the financial crisis, it is exactly what we were getting Sallie Mae away from, so that it would not have the same exposure as Fannie and Freddie Mae did.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and so I was involved in that transition.
Speaker 1: I see, I see, okay. That's--and so, you, so you did that and you did M and A [mergers and acquisitions] work, which was, and then also credit and business investment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my responsibilities changed significantly after I was there for about six or nine months or so.  I was doing the corporate development, and then I was asked to be the chief credit officer, and then I was asked to run the M and A sort of transitional pieces that we were putting together in the company, as I guess Larry [Lawrence A. Hough] concluded that I was valuable to him and the company.
Speaker 1: So, you really developed a very strong working relationship with him.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact when the proxy contest occurs and we say thank you very much, you can have it, we go together and we start Stuart Mill Capital [Stuart Mill Capital, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia], which is a private equity leverage buy out organization.
Speaker 1: So that, I mean, even to have the CEO come and you're all, you know, you're all working--so who are the other team members as part of that, that start Stuart Mill?  There's Larry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's Larry, myself, Timothy Greene [Timothy G. Greene], who had been the general council of Sallie Mae, and a woman named Jill Felzon [ph.], who had worked for me at Sallie Mae, and a guy named Chip Lubsen, who had been there as well.
Speaker 1: Now, I also had Jeff Salinger.
Speaker 2: And Jeff Salinger as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how do you, when people are starting, so what is the impetus to start this investment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time, well again, it would have, you know, so, I'm not certain about the exact amount of money, but I think that Larry had probably in excess of $150 million over the years in both his direct management and in the exercise of his stock and options at Sallie Mae, so he was very well off.  Tim Green had done very well for himself as well as the lawyer who actually helped to create Sallie Mae, and then had worked there until he left--I think he was there from 1972 through 1997.  Jeff and Chip Lubsin had also been long term employees of Sallie Mae, and they had done pretty well for themselves also, and for Jill and myself, again we had been--
Story_ID: 657437
Speaker 1: So for, and for Jill Felzon [ph.] and myself, I think, we had done well also through the process and we felt that this team had a lot of skills and we could leverage and create some value for ourselves and investors, and so we came together as I, Larry Hough [Lawrence A. Hough] is a brilliant, brilliant engineer, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] trained and he had helped to create the engine behind Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation].  We felt that we could use the same expertise in some other areas, and that's how we came upon Sato Travel [CWTSato Travel].  Sato Travel was, at the time, the seventh largest travel company in the United States.  They principally focused on travel for major U.S. corporations like Lockheed Martin and IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and also government agencies like the [U.S.] Department of State, [U.S.] Department of Defense, interior [U.S. Department of the Interior] and commerce [U.S. Department of Commerce].  They also did all the travel for the former presidents of the United States.  They were owned by a consortium of airlines and there's where they had a problem, because there was a perception that because they were a co-op, they were not pricing to the market as other agencies looking to do their business, and therefore they were perceived to have an unfair advantage, so our goal was to buy Sato Travel and convert it to a for profit organization.
Speaker 2: And so were you successful on that?
Speaker 1: We were hugely successful and the timing was extraordinary, so we bought Sato Travel in 1999, for $13 million and we sold it in June 2001, for $55 million, and it's really important the timing because we sold it in June and 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened three months later and had we not sold it when we sold it, we probably would have lost all of our investment because, if you remember, the whole airline and travel businesses just went down, and so we were very fortunate.
Speaker 2: Wow, that's an amazing story.  Okay.  I didn't know, I mean I knew it was Sato Tra- I remember seeing Sato--
Story_ID: 657438
Speaker 1: So during this period of time, I am a principal of Stuart Mill Capital [Stuart Mill Capital, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia], but I am also the chief financial officer of Sato Travel [CWTSato Travel], and one of my responsibilities was restructuring the back office and the financial infrastructure to become more efficient so that we could be competitive as we moved away from the shielding of being a cooperative organization.
Speaker 2: Now, I want to ask this.  How many investments did your company--
Speaker 1: At Stuart Mill Capital?
Speaker 2: Stuart Mill Capital.
Speaker 1: We made three or four, but I spent most of my time on the Sato Travel.
Speaker 2: On Sato Travel.  Okay.  Were there other investments where you got as involved in the managing or the restructuring?
Speaker 1: Not for Sato.  Not in this capacity but, I mean, as you can tell, I've worn a lot of different hats at different times of my life because I was also working independently.  I had created D.L. Bush and Associates [D.L. Bush and Associates, LLC, Washington, D.C.] the first time around, and at that juncture, I'm starting to represent also some companies on my own behalf, so that's when I started, for example, working with Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] and trying to restructure their broadcasting business.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were trying to restructure their broadcasting business, at what point are they?
Speaker 1: So, this is in, this is before they've acquired additional broadcast facilities in different cities.
Speaker 2: So they haven't gone, they're not out.  Because they ended up, were they in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or am I getting that confused with--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Because they--
Speaker 1: When I became involved, they had two radio stations in New York City [New York, New York].  They were in San Francisco [California].  They also had operations in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they had operations in one other city that I'm not remembering right now.  They had the opportunity to purchase two radio clusters; one in Carolina and one in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did you help them in locating financing to do that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now, this is a different business then.  Or did business, did it matter the kind of business it was?  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a good question because what I had been trained to do was to work with companies that generate cash as opposed to companies, when you say you venture capital transactions where people invest in businesses and it may take a long time before they generate cash to support their operations, I don't know how to do that.  But what I do know how to do, is to help companies with brick and mortar and people and systems to figure out how to get themselves positioned to maximize their returns, and so whether it's a radio broadcasting company or a manufacturing company, or a service company like Sato Travel, my skill set allows me to help those companies.
Speaker 2: Now, was that so, was the, the radio company was no different then, or was it different?  The radio company, so inner city didn't, did it present any unique opportunities, because it ended up their finance--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It ended up in an unfortunate situation, because what happened was after they acquired these businesses, they were highly leveraged--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then the radio broadcast business went through some changes and with how the metering works and how to analyze the, your client base, your customer base, et cetera and unfortunately the company was, found itself in financial difficulty and could not move fast enough to make changes.
Speaker 2: Right. And if you think about it, Sato Travel, not could have been there, but it was, you wouldn't have, because there could have been that economic downturn so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --this is the whole thing, sometimes.
Speaker 1: Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't.
Speaker 2: Just luck of the draw, really, and not anything you can--
Speaker 1: Yeah, if we had sold Sato Travel three months later, it would have been bankrupt.  If we had held on it for three more months, it probably would have minimum had to go through a significant restructuring and a dilution of our ownership interest, or it might have ended up in bankruptcy and somebody else would have owned it.
Speaker 2: You know, Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.], when you have that kind of success, I mean, 'cause that is, now wait a minute.  So there was also that, what went was thirty-two dollars a share, and then it went to 320?  That, that's not Sato, is it?
Speaker 1: No, that's Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation].
Speaker 2: That's Sallie Mae--
Story_ID: 657439
Speaker 1: So you have these two--I was just trying to remember okay--these two things back to back that have tremendous up- upside, well realized upside potential, I mean tremendous, tenfold (laughter) or more.  And so, after that what do you, what do you do after that because that's, that's--
Speaker 2: So, after Sato [Sato Travel; CWTSato Travel], I always have been interested in owning my own bank, because I felt that urban consumers still weren't fully participating in the banking system and therefore they weren't creating the sort of wealth that other families were creating, and so at that point, I have the capacity to start to think about acquiring a bank and so I left Stuart Mill Capital [Stuart Mill Capital, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia] in two thousand- the latter in 2003, yeah, and I spent my time on my advisory work [D.L. Bush & Associates, LLC, Washington, D.C.] and also trying to identify a bank to purchase and Independence Federal in Washington, D.C. was in financial trouble and I was interested in buying Independence Federal, and as I was looking at it myself, it's announced that Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] is interested in buying Independence Federal Savings and Loan [Independence Federal Savings and Association; Independence Federal Savings Bank, Washington, D.C.], and I had known Bob for probably about eight years at that point, both through my wife, Toni's [Antoinette Cook Bush] engagement as his lawyer on certain transactions, and socially around Washington, D.C., and so I called Bob and I said, "Bob, we should talk because I'm interested in buying Independence." And he said, "That's great.  We should talk, because I don't know what we would do with it, but I do think that this bank has historically served the needs of African Americans in this community and if we can get a hold of it, we can use that as a platform to support this community more broadly," and so we got together and we talked about buying Independence, and for a variety of reasons, we could not find a way to acquire it, but in the process of considering Independence, we concluded that there was a space for a nationwide African American controlled financial institution that would be looking to meet the core financial service needs of urban based consumers, whether in Washington, D.C., or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Detroit [Michigan] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California], because people need access to credit, people need the process of having access to credit which is having things like bank accounts, et cetera.  We know that homeowners, if you own a home, your net worth in America is about three hundred thousand dollars.  If you don't, your net worth is about thirty-five thousand dollars in America and a disproportionate part of our population was not making that wealth creation effort.
Story_ID: 657440
Speaker 1: So then we decided that we wanted to buy a bank and there was a bank in Orlando, Florida, that we identified and that we bought and we renamed it Urban Trust Bank [Axiom Bank], and I became the chairman and CEO of that bank and started its operation.  After we started the operations, interestingly enough, I was on the plane one day and I saw an article that said that Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] wants to open banks in inner cities and I got off the plane and I said, "Bob [Robert L. Johnson], you should see this article because it's interesting because Walmart is saying they want to open banks in inner cities and what they're really doing, this is one of the stakes that they're putting in the ground to get access to these urban markets, probably to put more Walmarts in cities."  I said, "It probably would make sense for them, instead of trying to own their own banks, because they'll never get approval for that, to have an urban partner," and so I went to Walmart and I cut a deal to put Urban Trust Banks in their branches, first in Florida they committed to allowing us to put branches in their stores across central Florida and we would have then started to expand up the East Coast to places like Atlanta [Georgia] and Charlotte [North Carolina], and then we probably would have started to acquire other banks to execute this, this nationwide strategy.  But, the potential of the Walmart opportunity would have slowed the rest of the expansion considerably.  So, that's what we started to work on.
Speaker 2: So then, what happened with that?
Speaker 1: Okay, so we started Urban Trust Bank and our timing was not the best timing.  So it's 2006, 2007 timeframe, just before the world is going crazy, right?  And it was a situation in which we realized that the expansion that we had wanted to happen was not going to happen and that we should hunker down and be a Florida based consumer bank with stores in Walmarts and as one of the things that's important about me is I know what I know, I know what I don't know, I know what my skills are, and I am comfortable knowing what my skills are not, and I am not a consumer banker day to day asking people to put in five thousand dollar deposits, and so we got a new CEO to run that bank portfolio, and I remained an investor in the bank and stepped down from running day to day operations.
Speaker 2: So you would have been running, like any of the other black banks that exists in the United States--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when this was going to be an attempt to nationalize a black banking operation.
Speaker 1: A black banking (unclear) from coast to coast (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now were your plans to do it through an acquisition, you know, the COA [cost of acquisition], the ones--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't want to name any names.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: But, what I do know is that we were one of the few investor groups that had access to enough capital to build the first nationwide organization focused on urban--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --consumers.
Story_ID: 657441
Speaker 1: Tell me what you found, though, about that, that marketplace.  Can you share some of the things, what you found, because it's not clear.  There has been some attrition, you know, there's been a loss of some banks, but then the other banks, and there's been some acquisition, small acquisitions, but can you share some of the numbers that you found?
Speaker 2: Well, here's what I know, and here's what is, it's challenging.  Most of the existing black banks were very much tied to the communities in which they emerged, so they were, they established themselves to be community banks and service their specific communities.  There are a lot of issues with that, because you have things like concentration risk, you do things that are in your community that you probably shouldn't do, so there are a lot of loan standards that are probably not the best if you're really trying to create value for your investors, and I think that they, they do a good job within the scope of what they're trying to do, but I don't, I don't think they really have either the talent or the access to capital to build these banks broadly.  I mean, it is really difficult to get investors to invest in black owned companies and specifically with black owned financial institutions, and it's because Bob [Robert L. Johnson] had a brand from being successful and that I was perceived as having both the expertise and a modicum of success that we were able to attract capital.  And so, then you've got the regulatory piece.  I continue to believe that the regulators treat the African American control banks as if they're children.  The behaviors towards them, I think, are paternalistic and they actually stop these companies from growing.
Speaker 1: I see
Speaker 2: And so, when you look at that sort of environment, I think it's hard for these smaller institutions to really grow.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Do you think that there's a chance in the future for the concept of urban, you know--
Speaker 2: Of what we're trying to do?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You do?  You still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Now, both there's an opportunity and a need, because if you just think of the density of bank branches that you see in downtown Washington, D.C., or downtown Chicago [Illinois], and in Washington, D.C. if I go three miles east toward 8th [Street], you've got a bank branch every ten blocks or every twenty blocks, when here they're almost door to door.  You have to, people have to have credit in this country to really be successful.  There's just no way around it.  And, there's a financial literacy piece that has to take place, so many urban consumers don't have a simple bank account.  They pay exorbitant fees and it's fascinating because there are people who have the economic wherewithal to own a home who don't believe they can get through the process because of how they're treated when they go to deal with the bank.  My first client, when we start Urban Trust Bank [Axiom Bank], was a woman who had been the assistant of an African American CEO for twenty years.  She was making probably a six, six figure income, and she didn't own a house and she didn't believe she could own a house.  And, I told this person that, "Give us your financials, and we will get you into a house.  We will work with you."  You know, she may have had a couple of credit blips, you know, people have issues.  You know, your family member gets sick, somebody--you could lose a job for a short period of time, and unless you go and really look at that person's situation, you may conclude that they have bad credit, but when you sit and you talk to a person like that and realize what their history is, you find out that there is this person who is committed to meeting their financial obligations.  That was 2006.  Now it's 2014, and she's been in her home for eight years.  She has refinanced her mortgage twice.  She's created equity in her home and she is typical of what we find in urban communities.
Story_ID: 657442
Speaker 1: That's so, so you think that that--it has the potential of being there? What's, didn't the Resolution Trust Corporation, wasn't it vibrant during, no, no, no.  I'm thinking of the wrong thing.  The reinvestment act.  The reinvestment that required, because some of those major banks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So you're thinking of the Community Reinvestment Act [Community Reinvestment Act of 1977].
Speaker 1: Act. Okay I'm sorry, I knew it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we could spend a lot of time talking about the Community Reinvestment Act, because it was partially responsible for why we have the financial debacle that we had.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Every time banks merge, they're required to make commitments to what's called the Community Reinvestment Act, and so when Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and Chemical Bank merged in New York City [New York, New York], they had to make billions of dollars of commitments to, you know, low income housing or finding, literally finding investment opportunities in different communities around the city.  And, what you do is to meet that requirement, you tend to take increasing risk, so you take a little bit more risk to meet your CRA requirement.  And that was, so then you invest in things that lead to subprime loans.  So, you go from requiring 20 percent down to 5 percent down, and we'll allow you to have a couple of credit blips and these type of things, but then your other regulator says well wait a minute.  You can't have all those bad loans on your book, so you need to get rid of them.  And that's when banks started to securitize loans and sell them, and that's how we got to where we got.  So, the CRA was, was and is a mixed blessing.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  But the CRA wasn't tied at all--because CRA also was tied to investments in those communities, and a lot of those banks have pulled up.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: They didn't, they don't, after the financial crisis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The financial crisis, right.
Speaker 1: They pulled up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because either they, either the regulators said oops, we don't want you to have to do that anymore because we know what that looks like, or they met the requirements and they no longer have a requirement to fulfill, so they don't continue to invest.
Speaker 1: But then that leaves one last institution there, you know, as a, as a banking operation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --even though--
Story_ID: 657443
Speaker 1: So, what, I want to, around this time, though, you also go on the board.  (Unclear) Oh earlier, sorry.  In 2001, you go on the board of your alma mater.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how does that come about?  That's, I mean that's somewhat huge, you know, to be so, that sound not so correct--you know, you go on the board of your, so how does that come into being (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that was, that was an extraordinary honor for me.  I, you know, when I think about my success, I think of three institutions, my family, right?  Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], and Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  They are a foundation for much of who I am today, and I was asked to go on the board of Cornell in 2001, and I ended up being a member of the Executive Committee at Cornell and also the chairman of the Audit Committee.  So, within the board there is a subset of people who, let's just say have a more active voice in how things get resolved and I was asked to do that.
Speaker 1: So you're still on the board, right?
Speaker 2: I am now an emeritus trustee--
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: --and a presidential counselor, yes.
Speaker 1: So did, okay, so let me, during the time that you had that role on the board, what is happening, what are the issues that the university is dealing with, because this is seeing it from up here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, when you--so, what are you finding about higher education and--
Speaker 2: First of all, it's a fascinating world and so Cornell is about a three, if you think about it from a corporate perspective, it's an over $3 billion a year enterprise, which just the scale of it is fairly significant.  We've got our main branch, main location, Ithaca, New York.  We have a medical school [Weill Cornell Medicine] in New York City [New York, New York].  We have a medical school in Qatar [Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar], we, so that the challenges are how do you, for a research institution, how do you continue to have access to the capital to invest in science and the arts or whatever, while we are maintaining a reasonable cost of entry for America's families and how do you make sure that the students have a fulfilling experience that leads to opportunities afterwards, and that's the puzzle that you're trying to figure out, and it's really difficult.  You know, colleges and universities are the only organizations in the country that have grown by two times inflation for the last thirty years, two times inflation.  Nothing else grows like that.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And so, we were dealing with managing the growth, the cost of education, getting access to NIH [National Institutes of Health] and NSF [National Science Foundation], and other places where you need the research dollars to support critical science, and making sure that we had a diverse population of students who could realize the beauty and fullness of Cornell.
Speaker 1: But when you talk about two times, you're talking about the cost of tuition.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Tuition has grown by two times inflation for--until I think the, the curve kind of slowed down when we hit this financial crisis.
Story_ID: 657444
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about that.  This is a little departure, but do you think that's sus- I mean we'll be sus-, where is it going to--
Speaker 2: It is not sustainable and I think that the financial crisis in some respects was good for colleges and universities because it made all of them, certainly made Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] that I was affiliated with, really step back and think about its cost structure, and think about the product itself and think about how you compete in ways that make sense as opposed to those that don't.  If you go to, pick any of the top thirty schools in the country and you look at their fiscal plan and infrastructure, it is remarkably different than what it was when we were there.  The dorm rooms, the eating facilities that, the health facilities are on par with professional sports teams and all of this was really around trying to make sure that you distinguish yourself among the best and brightest student families, and I say families because it, there's this kind of, there's this kind of race that's going on between families to have your children identified with what they perceive to be the strongest institutions.  So, there's a gap between where, you know, most students could get a good experience for the cost and how families think that they need to be in a certain cohort to have a good experience, life experience for their kids.  And, I think that, I think that higher education is going to be really affected by technology over the next ten to twenty years, and it's going to be interesting to see how many survive in their current form.  I think, I would hate to be the number seventy-five small liberal college in America right now.  I don't know how you'd survive.  I think that families are going to be more and more attuned to using technology, to drive education opportunities.  I think, I think that the job market is going to force more towards practical training instead of what some of these colleges and universities provide, and I think that the cost is just going to be unbearable for some and if you don't have an endowment, I think you're in a very tough situation.
Speaker 1: It's true.  We were just talking, I was just talking about that, that, because I, I mean the, it's just, it's, it's gone up so high, you, I mean you have to be either wealthy, or the school has to be wealthy enough that they can help finance--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 657445
Speaker 1: So that was an eye opening experience.  How did that add, that experience, add to your toolbox, or your experience box, you know, in a way, because--
Speaker 2: So there, so the other thing that happens is, again, I've been kind of on this path of gaining more tools for my toolbox, and one of the things that was really helpful for me about Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and being on the board was the interaction at the highest level in a prominent institution like that, where the board is, is occupied by people who are very successful, very passionate about Cornell, and very, and very experienced in the workings of the corporate board room, and I was privileged to be a part first as a member of the board, and then on the executive committee to see how all of these interactions work together.
Speaker 1: Now, was your father-in-law, or stepfather-in-law, I mean was he helpful in that at all, I mean in understanding that or helping advise it in any way?
Speaker 2: With respect to Cornell? Well
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I mean, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], was he helpful at all in any aspects, because, no, no.
Speaker 2: Vernon is helpful with everything.
Speaker 1: I know (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: So, Vernon, I describe Vernon as the, as both the conscience and the compass of a lot of things that are possible.  When I have a question about something that is significant in my life and I go and talk to Vernon, when I think about changing a job or pursuing an opportunity like being an ambassador, Vernon is an extraordinary compass, helping you to think through whether you're directing your needle the right way with respect to what you aspire for and your skill set is, and being willing to tell you yes and no, good idea, bad idea in a way that resonates that is unique, and he's the conscience, so I think that one of the reasons that Vernon has been so successful is that there are titans of industry and titans of government and titans of the nonprofit world for whom he represents the conscience when they make, conscience when they make decisions about everything from hiring practices to product orientation, to how to interact with others.  He has a very extraordinary and unique skill base.  So, when I went on the board of Cornell, I would speak to him about it and, of course, he inevitably knows somebody affiliated with every organization that you ever want to speak to in any line of business or endeavor, and he's, so he's got a perspective on it and he will tell you what you should be thinking about and if he likes what you're thinking about, he says, "That's a good idea," and if he doesn't it's, "Umph, that's interesting."  So, he is just a phenomenal resource for me to have.
Speaker 1: So when, were there other African Americans on the board of Cornell?
Speaker 2: So, Tom Jones [Thomas W. Jones] had been on the board for a while, Joe Holland [Joseph H. Holland] was on the board.  There have been some, Ron McCray [Ronald D. McCray] is on the board right now.  Lisa Skeete Tatum is on the board right now.  I'd like to say I was helpful in getting some Americ- African Americans more closely associated with Cornell.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: And we have other members as well, and we have had other members.
Story_ID: 657446
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Xavier for, I want to talk about Xavier, I want to talk about your appointment and I have a few--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did the opportunity with Xavier come, because you have two, you have HBCU [historically black college and university]--
Speaker 2: To Ivy League, right?  So, Xavier was an interesting situation.  Tim Francis [HistoryMaker Timothy Francis], who is the son of Dr. Norman Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis], who is the longest reigning college or university president in the United States, since 1968, I believe.  Tim is a friend of ours, and in the mid-'90s [1990s], Xavier was having some financial difficulties and Tim asked me if I could speak to his father about some of the financial challenges that they have.  And I met with Dr. Francis and I think, well I know that they had some financial success in a very short period of time, so at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], there were three ways you could be on the board.  You have to either be an alum.  Xavier was founded by Katharine Drexel, Saint Katharine Drexel, who was the wealthiest woman at the turn of the 20th century, so you had to be a Catholic or you had to be from the State of Louisiana.  So, you could be Jewish and from the State of Louisiana and you could be a board member as long as you met one of those three buckets and so I didn't fit any of those buckets and evidently the sisters prayed on me and they determined that the Lord would think it was all right for me to be on the board of Xavier, and that's how my experience with Xavier started and it's been fascinating.  So I often compare and contrast my experience with Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and my experience with Xavier, one institution that's very wealthy and clearly it's an outstanding university; Xavier University, of lesser means, but still an outstanding university.  More African Americans from Xavier get into medical school than any college or university in the United States.  So more than from Cornell or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] or Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  From this small liberal arts university in New Orleans [Louisiana] and they work with limited resources every day to do the best they can for those kids.  It is, I think it's one of the most phenomenal success stories in American higher education.
Story_ID: 657447
Speaker 1: And what would you say your, how would you describe Norm Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis]?
Speaker 2: Dr. Norman Francis is a brilliant technician, a brilliant connector of people and points, a brilliant operator, rolls up his sleeves every day and gets down in the trenches, really knows how to leverage his relationships for the benefit of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Is pure in his--he is in his appreciation of Xavier's history and where they're trying to go.  When I first went on the board of Xavier, he went to the top of the library building and he said, "We're gonna have new dormitories over there, a new pharmacy school over here, we'll have a new chapel right here, and if you look way across the way, we'll have an art department and this is what this whole thing will look like."  Everything that he said was gonna happen has happened despite Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], despite the hardship, despite the changes in some of the regulations that relate to student finance.  He has, he has done a phenomenal job of executing this vision that he's had for Xavier and I think, I think part of it, quite frankly, is his support of Katharine Drexel and how she thought this school should operate.  It's a great story.
Speaker 1: Now, I, I wanna, so those, those two experiences really have made you quite knowledgeable about higher education and governance.
Speaker 2: And you take those and Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation], which is the third one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Sal- That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 657448
Speaker 1: So now, you're getting ready to embark up- on a new, a new, new (laughter) I mean a new, well a new career, I mean really, essentially, as the U.S. ambassador to Morocco, and can we talk about what this, I mean, what this means, what the appointment, the process for the appointment, you know, what you're getting ready to go into, and it's international.  It's not like you did not have international experience, either.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, a couple things I would say.  Number one is I have often hoped that I'd have an opportunity to represent our country in some way, whether it was in a position like being the ambassador to the Kingdom of Morocco, or having a significant job in the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], or the education department [U.S. Department of Education]; some place where, in which I could add some value because of what this country has done for me.  And then I have the opportunity to represent President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] internationally and that is an opportunity that I will cherish for the rest of my life.  I think that the president is the manifestation of all of the good things that our country purports to be and the challenges that he has represents to some extent, many of the things that continue to harm us, and so to be able to represent him and our country in a place where I've been in which I understand is, for me, a great, great opportunity.  It's also significant for what it's, the validation of everything my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] did.  For me to reach this level and to realize our goals is just, I'm sorry I get teary, but to do this for them means a lot to me.
Speaker 1: And your mother, see, she still--
Speaker 2: My mom and my dad.  My dad's no longer with us but, as I said in my hearing, I know for a fact that he's looking down and happy with his progeny.
Speaker 1: I mean it's really, it's quite, I mean it's the quintessential American story, you know, I mean but to go from there to representing the country in that way, so--talk about your duties, you know, as an ambassador because they're, this is, there are two ways to ambassador-hood, right?  I mean, there's the appointment and then there's the rising--
Speaker 2: You can come, you can be in a career, a foreign service person, or you can be what's called a political appointee, and I am a political appointee, which means that the president looked at my credentials and what we need in this country, and thought that there was a good fit, that I could add value for him and for our country and, you know, I really believe that I have a very unique set of experiences that allow me to do this.  You know, there's always a question about political appointees and their qualifications for this, and, and I would say some political appointees come with a skill set that makes it difficult for them to discharge their duties, but also that career people often have limited scope in their backgrounds and don't have all the dimensions that I think are required to operate at this type, at this high level and, in fact, being around the state department [U.S. Department of State], I've come to realize that sometimes the host countries have difficulty with either because they don't think that, their experiences aren't broad enough at this level to do what you need to do, which is to serve as the representative of the United States in this country and to execute our policies and to protect American interests and to forge relationships that have value for both sides and, again I, when I think of the combination of my education, my travel experience, my, you know we didn't speak about Gavi, the Gavi Alliance [Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance], but Gavi is an organization that is in seventy-five countries around the world and represents billions of dollars related to healthcare, and we operate at a very high diplomatic level as if we at, as an NGO [nongovernmental organizations] quasi-United Nations type of organization.  So, I mean I feel that I am uniquely qualified and I don't feel at all that any hesitation about whether I am appropriate for the, the task at hand.
Story_ID: 657449
Speaker 1: So the appointment is until the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] serves, right?  At the end of the term.  How long is the appointment?
Speaker 2: So, your, your appointment is--two things happen.  You serve at the pleasure of the president and typically what you would do is you will serve until the end of the term.  If the party in power continues in power, you remain in your position until either you choose to leave or the new administration chooses to replace you.  If there's a change in the party of the president, you submit your resignation on Inauguration Day, and they determine whether they want to keep you around or not, and, again there are situations in which you are asked to continue until they find a replacement, or you could, you stay longer.  But, what I am prepared to do is to be in this position for the next three and a half years and do all I can to make sure that our relationship with the Moroccans is to our mutual benefit and that the mission and the vision and the values of our president are manifested in my behaviors every day.
Speaker 1: It's a country with a lot of, you know, very rich history, topography--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there is a lot going on in neighboring countries.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  So, many people ask me the question, "Well did you choose Morocco?"  And, the answer is unequivocally yes.  It was my first choice and it was my first choice for several reasons.  Number one, I wanted to be in a place where I could have an impact and where there are important things, significant things going on.  So, Morocco has been, Morocco was the first country to recognize the United States in 1777.  Morocco is the furthest point west that the Roman Empire went.  When you think of history and the trade routes, there were two trade routes from Africa to Europe, either through Carthage, Tunisia, or through Morocco.  Morocco has a progressive Islamic government.  When the Jews left Spain to come to Morocco, it was a large, one of the largest groups of Jewish people any place.  In fact, Morocco represents the third largest point of movement of Jewish people to Israel after Poland and Russia.  Morocco was the third.  It has a history of inclusiveness unlike, and progressiveness, that you don't see in many neighboring countries.  It is a beautiful country with a beautiful history with beautiful people and I'm looking forward to serving them.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  Oh, congratulations on that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 657450
Speaker 1: And I just, so, I have a few more questions.  I want to ask about your, your children, because, you know, you have Dwight, Jr. [Dwight Bush, Jr.], who is,  who is going to, I mean, he's a legacy at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and I think he would in his--
Speaker 2: Dwight's a junior right now.
Speaker 1: Junior (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So yeah, I've been, Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush] and I have been blessed with two absolutely wonderful kids.
Speaker 1: And then you have Jackie who is going to be joining you in Morocco.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They are truly, they are just wonderful kids.  They are their own person.  They grew up in the same house but they are themselves, which I like.  Dwight is a junior at Cornell.  Jacqueline [Jacqueline Bush] is headed to Lafayette College [Easton, Pennsylvania] in the fall.  She took this year off from going to college to be with me.  She's actually been the biggest loser, if you will, in this process of getting confirmed because we thought we'd be there in October, and she would spend this whole year.  But now, we'll go there and she'll enjoy the rest of it and she'll have a chance to come back and visit from time to time.
Story_ID: 657451
Speaker 1: So, (cough) I want to ask you when you look over the course of your life's journey and you think of being the youngest, youngest (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not the youngest.  I'm the baby (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The baby, right, yeah younges- yeah, the youngest but not the baby--
Speaker 2: No.  I am the baby, not the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay the baby, not the youngest (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of the family, and what do you, how would you describe your life's journey and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, as I tell people all the time and I mean this not in a corny way, but from my heart.  I think that I am one of the most fortunate people that I know.  I think that I've had a unique collection of life experience from my family to my education, to my close family with my wife and my two kids [Dwight Bush, Jr. and Jacqueline Bush], to my extended family with my new extended family through Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush] and to, you know, Mercer [Mercer Cook III] and Janice [Janice Cook Roberts] and Richard [Richard Roberts] and Barry [ph.] and Vickee [Vickee Jordan Adams], and to Ann [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan] and Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and to the gazillion cousins that Toni has, I've had that extension of family.  I have had extraordinary business opportunities, I've had extraordinary opportunities to meet people around the world, to have impact on communities, to have some fun and have some good friends, to have, you know, been somewhat successful financially.  I don't think I have a whole lot to be mad about, and I know that I've been blessed and I know that my life could have gone in a lot of different directions, but this has worked out well for me.
Speaker 1: Would you have ever changed anything?
Speaker 2: Not much, no.
Story_ID: 657452
Speaker 1: And then, the thing that you have, you know, there have been times that you've talked to me about your concern about black boys and black men, and the, that, that issue that still pervades our society.  I want to, you've never, you've never let go of your roots, which is, you know, you, so what are your hopes and concerns about the black community--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --or just in your community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know how to let go of my roots.  I just don't know how you do that. So, I think this is a function of the hard work my parents [Jessie Mae Bush and Charlie W. Bush] did.  What concerns me, what concerns me is that not enough people, not enough African Americans, particularly not enough African American males are being given the chance to participate fully, and it's everything from this overly aggressive criminal system to the preconceptions in the education community, to the portrayals that either people make of us in the arts, or that we make of ourselves in the arts.  When you take all these things and put 'em together, it creates a lot of barriers for success and what concerns me is that there is not enough investment to help people realize that they can make a breakthrough and get to the other side, and that they have, they will then realize their full potential.  You know, if you look at the arts and if you look at athletics, you can see it, that when we've been given the opportunity and when we can--we can excel.  And, I think that we can do the same in the sciences and in education and in medicine and in other areas, but there is a lot of, there is a lot of things deep rooted, longstanding negativity towards African American males in our culture that are hard to break.  You know, one of the things about the work with going to Morocco and being in some of these parts of the world where there are histories that are thousands of years old, you see how long it takes for perceptions to change in those places, and what I don't want is for America, with its short history, to be stuck and that we don't create space for things to happen on a different time frame.  That's what bothers me.
Speaker 1: Your hopes, what about your hopes?
Speaker 2: My hopes are that we are in a period of extraordinary transition, that the things that my kids [Dwight Bush, Jr. and Jacqueline Bush] think about and the things that they do, and the, some of the issues and obviously because they're kids from privileged backgrounds, some of the things that they're able to do and the way they experience the world are fundamentally different than the way most young African Americans experience the world, and my hope is that because of what's happening with technology, because of the evolution I think is gonna happen in education, because of things like what the attorney general [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] is pushing on, which is to change this, I think, totally regressive jailing system, current (unclear) system that there's gonna be a breakthrough and that a lot of people that currently don't think they've got a shot are gonna find themselves on the other side and living extraordinary lives.  And that's what I would hope could happen.
Story_ID: 657453
Speaker 1: And what do you think our legac- the legacy of our generation is.  You know, we know the legacy of the generation, our parents' generation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but what do you think at the end of the day when we are judged?  What will be said about the children of affirmative, you know, the beneficiaries of affirmative action?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I have difficulty with people who don't understand what affirmative action has meant for this country.  The child of two sharecropper families is about to be the ambassador to the, Morocco from the United States of America, right.  I know for a fact that along the way when I was at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] or other times in my life, that I was given a chance to do something, and we've always given chances to other people, so I don't think that there is anything inherently wrong with it.  I think that when we look back, our generation will be identified for having had some successes and having moved the ball forward.  You can't think about our generation and I think about the fact that the first African American president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] happened on our dime, if you will, that we have an attorney general [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] and a president of the United States at the same time who are African Americans.  I think that when I think about the Ken Chenaults [Kenneth Chenault] and the Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] of the world, I think about Clarence Otis [Clarence Otis, Jr.] and I think about Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], and I think about Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] and I think about all these other successes.  I think about my wife [Antoinette Cook Bush], you know, who was, been both in government, been a partner in a law firm and now has forged a new relationship as a corporate executive.  I think that there is no denying that we would have left an imprint on our country and on our people.
Story_ID: 657454
Speaker 1: You know, you and, you--you and Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush] have a wonderful marriage and I remember being in your house when I was discussing this project and you were talking about how home and children were so important, you know, and this was at a time when people sometimes would choos-, they were making other choices, let me put it that way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, can you talk about that, because, I mean your partnership as husband wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The other thing I know for a fact is I would not be here today if it weren't for the support and encouragement and love that I get from Toni every single day.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Let's just start with that.  I think that what's, the real thing that's interesting about us is that at our core, we see the world the same way.  So, from a family perspective, she and I, we never the conversations about whether we should do something for our family.  There is never a conversation like, well, they stayed at the house for two weeks now, should we ask them to go or, you know, this person needs something do we help them?  It is, it is, it is one of the greatest things about us is that at our core we see our place in our families and in our society the same way, and I think that that then manifests itself in the love that we have for each other.
Speaker 1: That's lovely. Okay.  See, they're not relation--all relationships are not created that way.  You've been married how long now?
Speaker 2: We've been married--thank you--I think we got married November 10, 1990, so that is twenty-four years.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Time flies when you're having fun.  It's been twenty-four years this year and next year will be twenty-five.
Speaker 1: So, you're gonna have a big celebration over there (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah we'll be, we'll be--everybody's coming to Marrakech [Morocco], we'll rock the casbah.
Story_ID: 657455
Speaker 1: So, I want to ask you, so our, our last question is always, you know, on legacy, so, I've asked you our generation's legacy.  I want to ask your personal legacy.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I'd want my, I want people to say that he was a good person who had a good sense of self, a good sense of where he sits in the universe, a person who loves his family and his community, knows how to have a little fun, knows how to keep a little balance, and at the end of the day, added value to his community.
Speaker 1: And I have one last question and that is what would you, if someone were to describe you, what would they is quintessentially Dwight Bush [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: That he really cares.  He cares, he wants to be constructive and he's--and he will, he will do the best that he can with what he's got.
