Story_ID: 443793
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Mary Ellen Butler.
Speaker 1: And, your maiden name was Rose, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 8, 1940, Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired journalist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April--
Speaker 1: Oh, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 13th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Concord, California.
Story_ID: 443794
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Fruit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yosemite National Park [California].
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You got me--keep on keeping on.
Story_ID: 443795
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history now.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side [Joshua Rose], but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Virginia Craft Rose, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, middle name, C-R-A-F-T, last name, R-O-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 6, 1913, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  First of all, how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: My brother [Richard Rose] has traced my mother's side of the family back to an original slave woman, whose name is unknown, who bore a child of a master in Macon, Georgia named Smith [James Smith].  The master's last name was Smith.  I don't recall his first name at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what year would this be?
Speaker 2: If I can refer, I'd have to refer to the family tree, which I have a copy of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But maybe you can give us a little, just a (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I would say, the--oh, boy, I'm guessing now, the very early 1800s.
Speaker 1: Okay, circa 1800, okay, all right.  Now, so, is there anything known about this Mr. Smith?
Speaker 2: Yes, that he was a plantation owner in Macon, Georgia.  And the woman whom he pregnated- impregnated, was named Maria.  She had a daughter named Ellen [Ellen Smith Craft].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ellen lived in the house of the master, and as a child, was given to one of the master's daughters when that daughter got married, and moved to another plantation.  And at that time, Ellen was about eleven years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I may be a year or two off on these figures, but this is the general story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of this in the case of my mother's family has been documented, and is on the record.  That's why I'm hesitant to give you dates because I may not have them exactly correctly.  But Ellen grew up to become Ellen Craft who, with her husband, William [William Craft], escaped from slavery in 1848.  And their story was documented because William later wrote a book called 'Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom' [William Craft and Ellen Craft].  And in that book, he described the escape that he and Ellen made from slavery, and it was quite a dramatic story.
Story_ID: 443796
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is a well-known story for those who know African American history, and if you can just give us a synopsis, so somebody watching this later on can, you know, will have a frame of reference (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Well, the interesting thing about William [William Craft] and Ellen Craft [Ellen Smith Craft] is that they escaped, not on the Underground Railroad--in other words, by hiding and going from place to place--rather, they escaped by real railroad, and also real boats.  They left Macon [Georgia] right around Christmastime when slaves were traditionally allowed to leave the plantation for a day or two to visit relatives.  And they got on a train, which took them from Macon to Savannah, Georgia on the coast.  And then, from Savannah, they took a boat to the next destination.  And to make a long story short, they had several stops up in, up the coast of the Carolinas [North Carolina and South Carolina], and into Virginia.  And they were, they were making their way to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And so, in a series of train and boat travels, they actually got to Philadelphia without being caught, even though the master soon knew that they were missing.  The way they did this, and what makes the story interesting, is that Ellen, who was very fair-skinned, pretended to be a white man.  And she did this by cutting her hair, and putting on a top hat, and a pair of glasses to hide her face.  William masqueraded as her slave.  Now, the way that Ellen got through this charade was by not speaking, so that nobody knew she was a woman.  And she also could not sign papers to take William out of slave territory because she couldn't read or write.  So, when she got to one stop, and it may have been Baltimore [Maryland], the station master wanted her to sign to a paper to allow her to take her slave across a state line.  So, she couldn't write her name, so she hesitated, and didn't know what to do.  And, finally, people in the crowd said, "Oh, let the gentleman go, let this nice young gentleman go.  He has his slave with him.  It's okay, let him go."  So, the station master let her through by the skin of her teeth.  And they went on through Baltimore, and through Delaware, and into Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Now, I've seen the pictures in books where she devises, she devises a sling for her arm actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --to keep the, yeah.
Speaker 2: She also devised a sling for her arm to masquerade--again, the fact that she could not read or write.  And then, to make the, the costume complete, she put a bandage or a poultice around her head and her face, and that way, she didn't have to speak.  And she also pretended that she was deaf (laughter).  So, when people would speak to her on the train, thinking she was a young white gentleman--William, if he were anywhere nearby, would say, "Oh, my master can't speak because he's sick.  I'm taking, I'm going with him to Philadelphia for medical treatment, so he's not able to say anything."  And people would say, "Well, what's this boy doing here, this slave boy?  Why is he standing near this master?"  And other people would say, "Oh, well, he looks like he's okay.  He's not going to do anything.  He's just helping his master."  So, they were able to keep this going until they got to Philadelphia.  And then, from Philadelphia, they went to Boston [Massachusetts], which was a hot bed of abolition and abolitionists.  And in a few weeks or so, the slave catchers came from Georgia to capture them.  And the Boston abolitionists pulled out their rifles and their shotguns, and said, "You're not taking William and Ellen Craft back to slavery."
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Boston had some serious abolitionists in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boston had some--
Speaker 1: They would actually fire on you.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: William Parker and a bunch of them that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, Lewis Hayden, and they were a tough group.
Speaker 2: Many wonderful abolitionists.  And then, to make this story complete, the law was passed at some point that allowed slaves to be recaptured, and returned to the South.  So, William and Ellen Craft then went to England.  And they lived there for some many years, fifteen or twenty years--again, don't quote on me on my exact figures--until the Civil War ended.  And then, they returned with four of the five children that had been born to them during that time.  And they returned to Georgia, where they founded a school for freed slaves [Woodville Co-operative Farm School, Bryan County, Georgia], and that is where they ended their lives.  Their lives ended in Georgia, and in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's, you know, there's also--I think William Craft actually went to Africa, and at some point, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he did.  While they lived in England, William Craft went to Liberia.  And, again, I'm not sure about my facts, but he went to the West Coast of Africa where he asked chieftains to please stop, stop selling their brothers and their, their foes, and the people that they had defeated in, in tribal wars, to stop selling them into slavery.  And he came back and felt that he had done the best he could to try to persuade the chieftains, those who were doing that, to stop doing so.
Story_ID: 443797
Speaker 1: You also have another famous relative on that side--well, a couple more.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also, on my mother's [Virginia Craft Rose] side are James Monroe Trotter, who was an outstanding participant in the Civil War, in the American Civil War.  And his son, William Monroe Trotter, who was a fighter for integration, and an end to segregation in New England, and specifically in Boston [Massachusetts].  James Monroe Trotter was a member of--I believe the 55th Regiment [55th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment] in Massachusetts.  It was raised in Massachusetts.  And this occurred after [President] Abraham Lincoln said that black men, free or freed black men, could join the Civil War, join the Union Army.  He needed manpower, so he broke down and said okay, we'll take black soldiers.  And James Monroe Trotter, and many others, were among the first to volunteer to serve in the Civil War.  And he came out of it as one of the few black officers who were appointed during that time.  There were others as well.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a picture of him that's published that can be seen in many pictorial essays on black history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct. Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: James Monroe Trotter, yeah.
Speaker 2: And my mother is also proud of the fact that James Monroe Trotter also wrote a book called 'Music and Some Musical People' ['Music and Some Highly Musical People,' James M. Trotter].  And, apparently, he was well-versed in music among other things, and wrote this book which is published. And I think I have a copy of it that was all about musical people of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the personalities he wrote about?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I have not read the book (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I have to confess to you, you know, the, the writing style in the Victorian times is exceedingly difficult for me to plow through.  It's a very dense kind of a writing style, and I find that I have trouble reading books that were written at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can imagine maybe James Bland [James A. Bland], I think, was a big black composer and band leader in those days who would have probably been one of the ones he wrote about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's possible.
Speaker 1: But there are others, I guess, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There are--I heard of stories that the song 'Dixie' is written by two brothers in Ohio, you know, who were from Alabama.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, yeah, so that's, so he was sort of a musicologist on some level (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was, yes, which is interesting, because I don't know where he learned that.  I mean, he was born to a woman who had been in slavery--James Monroe Trotter was.  His mother Letitia, again, was owned by a slaveholder in Mississippi.  And James and a sister were born to Letitia.  And at some point, and no one knows for sure, her owner either released her from slavery, or she escaped, and arrived in Ohio.  So, the fact, the, the thinking is that the, the owner had considered Letitia to be his wife--of course, unofficially.  And when the time, came time for him to get married, he had to do something with this slave woman who was regard-, whom he, whom he regarded as his wife.  So, the feeling is that perhaps he released her from slavery, and made it possible for her and her two children to make their way to Ohio because we wonder how else could she have gotten to Ohio from Mississippi--a defenseless woman with two young children?  So, she went to Ohio with her children, and they were raised there.  That's again, James Monroe Trotter.
Speaker 1: And one of those children is James, I guess, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 443798
Speaker 1: You can just maybe just tell us briefly, like how is James Monroe Trotter related?  I mean, is he, on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: To, to my mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: James Monroe Trotter had three children--William Monroe Trotter; Maud [Maude Trotter Steward], M-A-U-D [sic.], a sister; and Elizabeth [Elizabeth "Bessie" Trotter Craft] was the youngest of the three, and her name, throughout her life, was Bessie.  Her given name was Elizabeth, but she was called Bessie.  Bessie grew up and married Henry Kempton, K-E-M-P-T-O-N, Craft [Henry Kempton Craft].  And Bessie and Henry had two daughters.  My mother, Virginia [Virginia Craft Rose], was the old-, the elder daughter, and her sister, Ellen [Ellen Craft Dammond], was the second daughter.  So, that made James Monroe Trotter my mother's grandfather, and William Monroe Trotter, my mother's uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's pretty plain.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, now tell us something about William Monroe Trotter.  Now, he's the Guardian [Boston Guardian] of Boston [Massachusetts]--he's been called (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and it's good that you know so much about him already.  William Monroe Trotter was raised in Boston by James Monroe Trotter and his wife, whom I believe is Virginia Isaacs [Virginia Isaacs Trotter], was her maiden name.  And William Monroe Trotter was raised in a pretty comfortable circumstance.  The family had real estate.  They had property.  And so, he lived pretty comfortably, and went to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and was pretty much a contemporary of William E.B. Du Bois, or Du Bois, W.E.B. Du Bois.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was just behind Du Bois (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a bit behind him.
Speaker 1: --in maybe two or three years behind him in class, yeah.
Speaker 2: Correct.  So, William Monroe, very early, began to agitate for equal rights for black people in the North.  He was a northerner, and not really a southerner.  And he gradually used up his financial backing.  The properties that his parents owned came down to him.  And eventually, he began to sell them off to raise money to publish the Boston Guardian, which was the newspaper that he used to agitate for equal rights for black people everywhere, including in New England, and the Boston area, but also the rest of the country.  So, he was very, very devoted to his cause.  And he married a young woman, Geraldine, I think, Pindell [Geraldine Pindell Trotter].  I'm not sure about the last name.  They did not have children because Geraldine devoted herself to William Monroe's cause as well.  And she died early of tuberculosis.  And he remained a widower and childless for the rest of his life.  And he's remembered as an uncompromising journalist, one who never gave in to any compromises when it came to fighting for equal rights for black people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was, in the beginning one of the harshest critics of Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  He was one of the harshest critics of Booker T. Washington.  And my mother loves to tell a story that her mother told her (laughter), which was that, at one point, let's say, 1906 or thereabouts, Booker T. Washington came to Boston to speak.  And Monroe Trotter prepared for his speech in a hall by giving his little sister, my mother's mother, some rotten eggs, or rotten tomatoes, or some hot peppers, some pepper flakes, or something, and instructed Bessie, "Now when the time comes and I give you the signal, you throw these things at Booker T. Washington (laughter)."  And the, the family legend is that, that happened, and that Monroe Trotter was arrested, and taken down to police station, and reprimanded, and let go.  Maybe he had to spend the night in jail--I'm not sure--but he did this because he wanted people to know that he objected vehemently to Booker T. Washington's policies and beliefs.
Story_ID: 443799
Speaker 1: You know, I didn't know before this interview that he [William Monroe Trotter] was related to the Crafts, but I do know that in terms of the Crafts founding a school in the Carolinas [sic.], that at one point, and there are a lot of sources for this.  There's a guy named Fred Moore, Fred R. Moore, who is sort of a hatchet man for Booker T. Washington, and the Republican Party, whose job it was to whip all the other black leaders in line, you know, to Republican Party, and that a lot of the schools they were rivals to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], were destroyed by Fred R. Moore and newspapers, too.  There's a lot of literature about this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see, um-hm.
Speaker 1: People who don't read a lot of history don't know about it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But this, I just wonder if there's a relationship between the Craft school [Woodville Co-operative Farm School, Bryan County, Georgia] failing and the activities of--
Speaker 2: There--
Speaker 1: --the clandestine activities of Booker T. that, that William Monroe Trotter might have known about.
Speaker 2: Might have know--that's, you know, that's, that's certainly possible because anything is possible.  We don't know a lot about the school, other than that the Crafts, as always, ran out of money.  They, they didn't have enough money to continue the school for very many years.  They were teaching ex-slaves, people who had no money.  And they, themselves, had no, no capital.  So, they were not able to continue the school after some number of years.  And they also were, were older.  And Ellen Craft [Ellen Smith Craft] died first, and William Craft then went to Charleston, South Carolina to live with his son [Charles Craft], who was my grandfather's father, and he died in Charleston.  And his grave is there.  In 1992, we had our first family reunion.  And we went to Charleston, where we were able visit William Craft's grave, but no one knows exactly where Ellen Craft is buried.  We think maybe somewhere in Macon, Georgia.
Story_ID: 443800
Speaker 1: But relationships between the Trotters and the Crafts--the only real coming together was Henry Kempton Craft and Bessie Trotter [Elizabeth "Bessie" Trotter Craft] when they got married.  And I think they were married--let's see, my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] was born in 1913, so I think they were married about 1912 or so.  And so, at that point, the two families didn't really have much of a relationship with each other.  The Crafts were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, that was after Monroe Trotter [William Monroe Trotter] got start with, was in--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was already grown by then, yeah, already grown, yeah.
Speaker 1: Monroe Trotter was, was already active.  And the story my mother likes to tell is that the Charlestonians, the Crafts in Charleston [South Carolina], said to Henry Kempton Craft, their grandson and son, "Well, why are you marrying that northern girl?"  And he said, well, I, I love her, you know, whatever he said.  And that the Bostonians said to Bessie (unclear), Bessie Trotter, "Well, why are you marrying that southern man?  Can't you find yourself a good northerner or a Bostonian to marry?"  And her reply must have been similar to whatever Henry said.  And so, that's kind of one of those little family stories that, in that strata of, of black society, the, the black folks could be just as prejudiced against, you know, people from another region, as anyone else.  They were, they were, they were, you know, puzzled as to why a southern fellow would marry a northern girl, or why would a northern girl want to marry that fellow from the South?  So, it's just one of those little apocryphal stories.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is there a story as to how they met since they--did they meet up north, or in the South there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I've asked my mother that countless times.  Yes, they met in the North because Henry Craft also went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He was sent north by his family to go to prep school.  And if you named it, I could tell you which prep school it was, and I can't think of it now.  But there's a prep school in Boston [Massachusetts] that prepared students to go to Harvard.  And so, they sent him north to get an education because, of course, in Charleston where, as a black man, a black student, he couldn't.  He had very few choices for higher education.  So, he went up north to Boston and, at some point, they met.  And my mother doesn't know how, but what we imagine is they must have been at a tea, or some sort of social affair, and they met.  And he, being a Harvard student, put him in the category of people that Bessie Trotter might, might run across, might, might be acquainted with.
Story_ID: 443801
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Virginia Craft Rose] side?
Speaker 2: Grandparents?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Henry Kempton Craft's father would be my mother's grandmother--grandfather.  His name was Charles Craft, and he was one of William [William Craft] and Ellen Craft's [Ellen Smith Craft] sons.  And Henry Kempton Craft's mother was named, last name Kinloch [Emeline Kinloch Craft], K-I-N-L-O-U-G-H [sic.].  And, again, I may have that spelling incorrect.  But she, too, was a former, if not, a, a slave, she was in that generation of when people were still enslaved, and we don't know much about her family.  We've looked, tried to look her up.  My husband [Donald T. Butler] has tried to look her up on the Internet.  And there's very little, if any, information about any Kinlochs.  But it's a Scottish name, so we can surmise that maybe she was owned by Scots slaveholders, or maybe she was a free woman.  We just don't know.  So, that was my grand-, Henry Kempton Craft's parents.  Bessie Trotter Craft [Elizabeth "Bessie" Trotter Craft], Bessie Trotter's parents were, once again, James Monroe Trotter, and his wife, Virginia Isaacs [Virginia Isaacs Trotter].  And to complicate the story even further, Virginia Isaacs was descended from enslaved people who lived at Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia].  So, that's another whole chapter.  Let's see if I can get that straight.  As I say, we have it all down on a family tree, but I don't have that in front of me.  Virginia Isaacs was, let's see, was related to--let me think of his name--Joe Fossett [Joseph Fossett].  And Joe Fossett may have been sired by Thomas Jefferson.
Story_ID: 443802
Speaker 1: Yeah, and maybe just pan down.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the family tree of [HistoryMaker] Mary Ellen Butler.  And here's, when we get into here, this is where William Monroe Trotter would be, over here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he'd be over here, flagged out over here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he'd be next to--
Speaker 1: --if he was here.  Descended from the Crafts and the Trotters.  And so, that's, you know, that's--I think that's a, you know good--
Speaker 2: Then it goes all the way down to--
Speaker 1: All the way down to where you are.
Story_ID: 443803
Speaker 1: And did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew my mother's [Virginia Craft Rose] grandparents, my mother's parent, my grandparents, Henry Craft [Henry Kempton Craft] and Bessie Trotter Craft [Elizabeth "Bessie" Trotter Craft].  Bessie Trotter Craft died in 1948, so I was only eight years old when she died.  But Gramps, as we called Henry Craft, lived until 1974, so we did get to see him occasionally.  We were in Oakland, California, and he was in New York City [New York, New York].  So, my father [Joshua Rose] and mother drove, drove us three kids, my brother [Richard Rose] and sister [Virginia Rose Niles] and I, across country to see our grandparents in 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was quite remarkable to go across country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, once again, like Henry, that's Henry Kempton Craft who was the--
Speaker 2: Henry Kempton Craft was the--
Speaker 1: --who's the son of William Craft--
Speaker 2: --who, who was the grandson of William [William Craft] and Ellen Craft [Ellen Smith Craft], yeah.
Speaker 1: --grandson of William Craft.  Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: So, there was a direct line--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --directly down to, to us.
Speaker 1: And did he ever tell you any good stories about--
Speaker 2: He never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if, if it hadn't been for my mother and her sister, Ellen Craft Dammond, we wouldn't know any of this because the two of them kept it alive.  They are truly the historians of the family.  And we used to kind of, you know, say, oh, okay, we, we didn't take it too seriously--my brother and sister and I.  But now, as adults, of course, we appreciate knowing all of that history.
Story_ID: 443804
Speaker 1: And the other thing that my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] and aunt [Ellen Craft Dammond] did was that they kept the names in the family.  So, my brother is Richard Craft Rose [Richard Rose].  My sister is Virginia Trotter Rose Niles [Virginia Rose Niles] is her last name.  And then, when I was born, the last of the three, they named me after my father's mother, which was Mary [Mary Charles Rose], and Ellen, which I now know where that came from--Rose [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler].  So, they kept those names in the family.  And I have done the same a little bit by naming my daughter Stephanie Craft Perry [Stephanie Perry].  My second daughter doesn't carry one of those names because her father [Samuel C. Perry] named her, so he gave her a different, a different set of names.  And then Stephanie, my daughter, has named her daughter Jacqueline Craft Perry [Jacqueline Perry-Haig], so some of those names have been kept down through the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They're gonna have to get a Trotter in there some place (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, we should, we should.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right (laughter). Name somebody Trotter Craft (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, my cousin, Peggy [Margaret Dammond Preacely], who lives in Long Beach [California], has a son.  Her son is named Christopher Trotter Day [Christopher Day], so she kept that, kept that Trotter going.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's some-, it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, and then know, we have a grandson, my daughter, Allegra [Allegra Perry Aldridge], named her grand-, her son, Noah Monroe Aldridge [Noah Aldridge].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, he's got the Monroe in there.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 443805
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up and what it was like growing up?  Did she grow up in Boston [Massachusetts] or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in a variety of cities--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because Henry Kempton Craft was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] secretary, so he was moved from city to city.  So, my mother, Virginia [Virginia Craft Rose], and her sister, Ellen [Ellen Craft Dammond], were raised in Chicago [Illinois]; Gary, Indiana; Washington, D.C.; St. Louis, Missouri; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and then, when my mother married my father [Joshua Rose], they were married in New York City [New York, New York] because by that time, Henry Kempton Craft had become director of the famous Harlem YMCA [New York, New York] (laughter) on 135th Street.
Speaker 1: Now, but about what year would that be when he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would have been mid-'30s [1930s] because mother and dad were married in 1934.  And Henry Craft, known as Mr. Craft, to legions of Harlemites, was director of the Harlem YMCA.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, you know, when we came in, we were discussing some of the other people that they claimed committed suicide, and we're not really sure.  William Monroe Trotter is one that, that they say committed suicide.  He fell off a building, but we don't know what the circumstances were (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Another we talked about was Willis Huggins [Willis Nathaniel Huggins], the founder of the Harlem History Club--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which was founded by the Harlem Y, so all these things seemed like--are connected.
Speaker 2: The--you know, the connections are unbelievable.
Speaker 1: John Henrik Clarke, John G. Jackson, Willis Huggins, Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg]--they all met with the Harlem History Club at the Harlem Y--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from 1930 to about 1937.
Speaker 2: And that would have been the Harlem Renaissance--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and all of that going on, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: It, it's amazing.  I mean, black history, American black history is just truly amazing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It is, it is.  There are so many connections that we're really not aware of but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that we dig a little deeper, there they are.  So, that's quite a, that's the story.  And now, when did Henry Kempton Craft die?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I believe '74 [1974] or, yeah, '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, do you remember Channing Tobias, Dr. Channing Tobias [Channing H. Tobias]?
Speaker 2: He was a very good friend of my mother and, and grandparents, yes.  Channing Tobias is a name that I remember very much from my upbringing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was an official at the Harlem Y, and was a director at one time, and then became head of something else in the Y, then joined Ralph Bunche's staff at the UN [United Nations].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was the uncle of John G. Jackson--
Speaker 2: Oh. Okay.
Speaker 1: --who was another one of the Harlem History Club people.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From there, they were from Aiken, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it's interesting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all this stuff.
Speaker 2: Channing Tobias is, is a name that's very familiar to me.  Even though we were in Oakland [California], and that was kind of like, a far enough from the East Coast.  Mother, especially, and, and my father, to, to a great extent also, kept us apprised of what, what was going on in the East because their friends were there, their families, so we kind of grew up with the sense of East/West Coast connections.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother talk about growing up, what it was like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: She did.  Mostly, funny stories about her, her parents, and she and her sister, and how they moved around and lived in different places.  And she talked about high school in St. Louis.  And then, when her dad was moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to run the Y there, she started going to college at the tender age of sixteen at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 443806
Speaker 1: My father, in the meantime, and his story is, is quite different, but just as interesting, had come to live in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he and his mother, and his sister [Edith Rose], from Lexington, Virginia.  And we might want to move it a little bit into his story.  He was--
Speaker 2: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, Joshua Richard Rose [Joshua Rose].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: September 11th, 1906--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in Lexington, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on his side?
Speaker 1: Not a great deal (laughter).  We don't know a lot.  Again, my brother, Richard [Richard Rose], has done as much genealogical research, and has--as, as had my husband, Don, Donald T. Butler--on my dad's family.  His mother's name was Mary Charles [Mary Charles Rose].  Charles was her maiden name.  And we do not know who my father's biological father was.  Mary Charles became pregnant, and my father was born.  She named him Joshua, and then at some point, a few years later, not too long, maybe two or three years later, she married a man named George Rose.  And George Rose became my dad's stepfather, and gave him his last name.  So, we don't know any more about George Rose, other than that he died sometime before 1930.  In the meantime, my--Mary Rose, my father's mother, moved him and his sister to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania where she had relatives.  There were, there was a man named Al Charles [ph.] who ran a mortuary in Pittsburgh.  And there were other Charles', so they were apparently merchants and business owners in Pittsburgh.  But we have not been able to, to locate much information on the Charles'.  So, my dad was a poor country boy (laughter) when he got to Pittsburgh at the age of about eight.  And he liked to tell the story that when he entered school in Pittsburgh, he was so far behind that he was put in something like the first grade, or something like that.  And he quickly caught up, and then was put into the right grade for his age.  He was a very ambitious young man, very smart, and determined to, to climb up, truly pulling himself up by his own boot straps.  So, as a young man, he went to work at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on--I think it's the, there's a Schenley--well, can't remember the name of the street, but he went to Schenley High School in Pittsburgh, and then went to work at the YMCA where Henry Craft [Henry Kempton Craft] was the director (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is the same Schenley the liquor Schenleys that have--
Speaker 1: Schenley High School, I don't know if it's the same as--
Speaker 2: I know they're big in Pennsylvania, the Schenley liquor company [Schenley Import Corporation; Schenley Industries, Inc.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that I don't know.
Speaker 2: --distribution and so.  Okay.
Story_ID: 443807
Speaker 1: So, my dad [Joshua Rose] was about twenty-two when he met my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] who was about sixteen.  And he was very enamored with my mother who was, of course, the boss' daughter (laughter).  So, he was an up and coming young man, but he had to prove himself to Virginia's dad, Henry Craft [Henry Kempton Craft], who wasn't, you know, going to let him just sweep in and sweep my mother off her feet.  So, they had a long courtship because she was so young.  But, finally, by the time she turned twenty, the story goes that my father said, "Well, if you will not marry me, I'll just go away and never come back."  And so, at that point, my grandfather gave my mother permission--the story goes--to get married.  And so, at age twenty-one, she was just very, very young, and he was twenty-seven, so she may have even been twenty and he was twenty-seven, they were married in New York City [New York, New York] because in the meantime, Henry Kempton Craft had gone on to become director of the Harlem YMCA [New York, New York].  So, they had a lovely wedding in New York City in 1934, June 30th, 1934.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's how they came together (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Story_ID: 443808
Speaker 1: I'm just thinking about Henry Kempton Craft.  He was in Chicago [Illinois].  Was he head of the Chicago Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]?
Speaker 2: At that time, no.
Speaker 1: I mean, back in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Way back when my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] was born?  No, he was actually a--he had majored in something like engineering at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And he was teaching something like mechanical drafting, or mechanical drawing, or something like that in Chicago.  When, according to the family story, he decided that he would prefer to work with people, and that's how he got into YMCA work.  And there, again, at that time, the YMCA was one of the few places where black professional people could work.  There weren't, there weren't--he--there weren't too many other places where he could work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there seems to have been a movement in the major cities to put a Y in the black communities, in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  There would be the, the colored Y.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, they needed colored folks to run the colored Y.  And so, that was how he got into YMCA work.
Story_ID: 443809
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother [Virginia Craft Rose], although I hope I have some of my father's [Joshua Rose] traits as well.  I think I talk like my father, and I didn't realize that for many years until I heard his voice on tape, even though he was still alive, and I talked to him every day.  One day, I heard a taped speech or talk that he had given.  And I said, you know, I sound just like Dad, and I think what he had was an Appalachian twang because he was born in Lexington, Virginia, which is in the eastern part of--I guess it's in the southeastern part of Virginia.  It's not on the coast, and so, he had that kind of a nasal twang to his voice and I could hear myself in that twang.  So, I think I've, you know, inherited his speech pattern, but I probably, personality-wise, am more like my mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who's very outgoing, and likes to be in control, and kind of run things and, and influence what happens with members of the family.  And these are all things that I've learned to realize, as I've gotten more mature, that I probably do the same thing.  In fact, my husband [Donald T. Butler] will remind me of that (laughter) when, if I begin to get too involved with what, what someone else is about to do, he'll say, "Now, back away, back off."  So, that would be probably my mother (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 443810
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually about the earliest childhood memory I have is actually when I was eight years old, which is pretty late to be remembering things.  But it's the, the clearest memory I have is of that trip I mentioned before, the auto trip from Oakland [California] to New York City [New York, New York] in 19-, in the summer of 1948.  I remember that pretty clearly because we stopped off at various places along the way to see the sights.  And I remember being in New York City, and how exciting it was to be there.  So, I'd have to say that's about my earliest clear memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from that trip that you remember, any--
Speaker 2: Well, we stopped in Wilberforce, Ohio, where my dad [Joshua Rose] went to a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] conference, so that must have been the reason for the trip, is that he was going to go to this conference.  And then, I guess we went on from there to New York City, where we got a chance to be with our cousins who were raised in New York City.  These would be my Aunt Ellen's [Ellen Craft Dammond] two children [Margaret Dammond Preacely and Henry Dammond], and see the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York], and all the things you, you do when you're in New York City.  They lived in the Riverton apartments [Riverton Houses, New York, New York], which were well-known at that time as housing for, integrated housing for blacks and whites because my uncle, Ellen's husband, Donald Dammond, worked for Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.  And they had built these new post-war apartment structures, which were integrated, and that was a very big deal.  And it was at 35 East 145th Street, or 45 East 135th Street, one or the other.  And you could cross 135th Street, and you were right in the heart of Harlem [New York, New York], so that those are some of the memories I have of that, of that trip.
Story_ID: 443811
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in when you--was it one place, or several different places (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, one place, Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we grew up in the same house, one house, had a very stable upbringing.  Oakland, of course, was a mecca during World War II [WWII], and after World War II, for African Americans from throughout the country, the reason being that the shipyards, and the other defense industries during World War II, the famous Kaiser Shipyards where ships were being built, were in Oakland, and a nearby city near Oakland called Richmond, California.  And there was such a need for wartime workers that Kaiser and other wartime suppliers recruited black people from throughout the country.  And in 1939, the year before the war broke out, my father [Joshua Rose] had been recruited by the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to come to Oakland, and raise money to build a colored YMCA.  They didn't call it that, but that's essentially what it was.  It was a branch YMCA to be constructed in the neighborhood where many African Americans were living, and coming to live.  So, he and my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] drove out from New York City [New York, New York] to Oakland in 1939.  And so, we were raised right in, in the neighborhood.  At that time, it was a mixed neighborhood of black people, Portuguese immigrants, white people, Asian people, all kinds of people lived there.
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood called?
Speaker 2: Well, it was called North Oakland [Oakland, California].  Now, due to changes in the town, it's now referred to as West Oakland [Oakland, California] because demographics have changed, and housing has changed.  A lot of the old housing was torn down, and so on and so forth.  So, for a variety of reasons, it's now referred to as West Oakland.  But be that as it may, it was a working class neighborhood, very well-racially integrated, although as time went by, the real estate industries busted those blocks, and scared the white folks by saying, "Uh-oh, you got a black family moving in next door.  You better sell now and get out while you can," so gradually the neighborhood became mostly black.
Speaker 1: About how long did it take it to do that?
Speaker 2: Hm, probably twenty years or so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the other thing that happened was that after World War II, and the arrival of so many black people in Oakland, housing patterns changed.  From a time before the war when housing discrimination ruled, you couldn't live in certain parts of Oakland if you were black, to post-World War II, when those patterns broke down, because black folks said, "Hey, we want to live wherever we can afford to buy."  And so, through agitation and social action, the black activists were able to break down housing discrimination in Oakland, which meant that many families then chose to move out of the old neighborhood, and into more affluent neighborhoods, quite naturally.
Story_ID: 443812
Speaker 1: I want to ask you, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up--hm, let me close my eyes and think back.  Well, one of the wonderful things was that everything was within a few blocks of our house.  Our church was about six blocks away.
Speaker 1: What church did you go to?
Speaker 2: St. Augustine's or St. Augustine's, we call it St. Augustine's Episcopal Church [Oakland, California].  For example, we lived on 32nd Street, and the church was on 29th [Street]--make that 28th Street [sic.] so--
Speaker 1: Six blocks.
Speaker 2: --five or six blocks.  So, our church was there.  We walked to church, of course, back and forth.  Our grammar school [Durant Elementary School, Oakland, California] was even closer, maybe five blocks away.  And my father's [Joshua Rose] Y, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], was about two blocks away.  And our junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California] was about one block away (laughter).  So, we walked everywhere and, of course, as I'm sure many people (laughter) have told you, we did not necessarily lock our doors.  The kids could--we kids could go back and forth, up and down, in the neighborhood.  I could go around the corner to the junior high school that we attended, and play on the playground.  And my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] could literally stand at the back door, and call to me that it was time to come home for dinner.  And I could hear her from the playground at the junior high school that I attended.  So, there was such a feeling of security and community.  We had friends that lived nearby--not relatives because, there again, our relatives were, were back in New York [New York].  But friends of the family--our families were friends and, of course, you know, people knew you as a child.  And if you walked down the street, they knew exactly who you were, and who your parents were.  And this tended to make sure that you didn't do anything too outrageous because any one of them could tell you that they would inform your parents the minute they had an opportunity, or they would say, "We--aren't, aren't you Josh Rose's daughter?  Well, where are you going," that kind of thing.  And so, there was a tremendous sense of, of security, I think, of, of belonging in that neighborhood.  What else do I remember?  Riding the bus when, by the time we got to high school, our high school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California] was farther away, maybe five, six, seven miles away, so we rode the bus.  I rode three different buses to get to my high school and, you know, no, no big deal.  Our church was very active.  I sang in the choir as a teenager.  We had teas, and even had a basketball league at the Y, which included teams from our church.  Everything was, was connected, was integrated.  Now, we're talking mostly black kids by that time.  I mean, there, there were, there were white families still in the neighborhood, but our upbringing was 99 percent with other black people.  Dances at the church and at the Y, fully chaperoned (laughter).  So, you had a sense that, not only your family cared about you, but all the other adults cared about you, too.  The teachers were the same.  Trying to think of other sights and sounds.
Story_ID: 438299
Speaker 1: We were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes, I'm trying to think of--well, this is an odd one.  But I remember lying in bed at night, and the train yards were on 40th Street, and we lived on 32nd [Street], so that was about eight blocks away.  And I remember loving the sound of those train whistles.  And I imagine it was the same reason why people used to love the, the sound of the train whistle because it evoked going somewhere, you know, or being far away, or traveling, or moving.  And I can remember, you know, going to sleep, and hearing those train whistles.  And I think, to this day, I love trains (laughter).  I've not traveled on them very often, but there's something about trains that I love.  And I, I, again, I guess it's the notion of going someplace, and traveling, and being in motion.  And Oakland [California] was quite a center, or quite a terminus for several railroads at that time.  They couldn't (laughter), they couldn't get to San Francisco [California] across the bay so they, they came to Oakland.  And then, freight was carried across the bay to San Francisco.  But that's one of the sounds that I recall from my childhood.
Story_ID: 438300
Speaker 1: Another is that we had the Pacific Coast baseball league in those days before the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] came to California.  And I was a bit of a tomboy.  And, in fact, I liked to play with boys more than I liked to play with girls because boys got to have more fun.  They got to play ball, and softball, and kickball, and all that kind of thing.  So, I was a fan of the Pacific Coast League team in Oakland [California] called the Oakland Oaks (laughter).  And the Oakland Oaks ball field was also within walking distance of our house.  And I can remember my dad [Joshua Rose] taking my brother [Richard Rose] and I.  I don't think my sister [Virginia Rose Niles] liked baseball as much as I did, so probably it was my brother and I, to the ballgame.  We walked and went to the Oakland Oaks, and then walked back home.  And so, I remember listening to the games at night on the radio.  And, in fact, the announcer's name was Bud Foster.  And I still love the radio, and I still love listening to the Oakland Athletics on the radio.  I can forego the television.  I don't need the TV.  I, I'd just as soon hear them on the radio.
Speaker 2: Now, the--am I right or wrong?  Wasn't Joe DiMaggio, an Oakland Oak at one point?
Speaker 1: Not Joe, but one of his brothers.
Speaker 2: Dom DiMaggio--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --was on the Oakland Oaks for a little while.  Joe DiMaggio played for the San Francisco Seals--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as in the animal, the Seals (laughter).  And he had two brothers, Dom DiMaggio and [Vince DiMaggio]--
Speaker 2: Oh, may have been the other one, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and another brother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so one of them have played for the Oakland Oaks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Casey Stengel was a manager for the Oakland Oaks at one point in time.  So, again, that was one of the sounds, that's one of the sounds I remember of--
Speaker 2: Now, did they have the black players on the Oaks in those days?
Speaker 1: No, at one point, the--long about 1949 or so, '50 [1950], relatively late in the day, they hired one black player.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he played for the Oaks for a season or so.  And I, I--
Speaker 2: That's three years after Jackie Robinson--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --integrated the Major Leagues?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and then, of course, once the Giants [San Francisco Giants] came to San Francisco, the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And the, some years later, the Athletics came from Kansas City [Missouri], I think, to Oakland.  And, of course, by that time, the Major Leagues were, were integrated.  And the Pacific Coast League went away.  It died, sad to say.  Now, there are farm teams here in, in California.  The minor league teams are still run by the Major League teams.  And there's one in Sacramento [California], but they're--it's not one in Oakland.  It doesn't need to be because we have the Oakland A's.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the A's, they came around in what--'68 [1968] or so, '67 [1967], '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds right.
Speaker 2: Charlie Finley [Charles O. Finley] moved over from Kansas City--I think, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's correct, yeah, they came--
Speaker 2: And I was in high school when he did it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, they came later after the Giants and the Dodgers, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, do you remember Willie Mays?  Is he a hero of yours (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I do, I remember Willie Mays as--when he was in New York [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants].  And I, as I say, I was a tomboy, and I wanted to be a baseball player.  And I thought, well, I don't know why girls can't be baseball players.  And so, I was going to be Willie Mays.  I was going to play centerfield (laughter).
Speaker 2: Lose your hat and everything?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), catch the ball.  So, yes, he was, he was definitely a hero, but now, I'm not so much a Giants fan as I am an A's fan because I'm loyal to Oakland.
Story_ID: 438301
Speaker 1: Oakland [California] is one of the cities in the country, along with--when you think about the black cities in the country--Detroit [Michigan] or, you think about Oakland.
Speaker 2: Yes, you do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a--
Speaker 2: It's had a long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oakland is what--about 44 percent black maybe or--
Speaker 2: It used to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it's more, like about 34 percent black.  And I understand that the white population is about 34 percent and, oh, maybe 15 percent Asian, and 20 percent Latino, so it's very, very diverse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But black folks still play a leadership part in the governance of Oakland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At one time, there was a--well, maybe a few times--
Speaker 2: At one time--
Speaker 1: --maybe, a few times, there were black mayors of Oakland.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And we currently have [HistoryMaker] Ronald Dellums.  Ron Dellums is--I shouldn't say we 'cause I live in Concord [California], but Oakland has Ron Dellums now as its mayor.  Ron Dellums is the former congressman from, from Berkeley [California] and Oakland who was, had quite a distinguished career in [U.S.] Congress from about 1964 [sic. 1971].  I think it was twenty-seven years, so whatever that adds up to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Ron Dellums was one of the premiere black congressmen--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --and one of the most dynamic--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, of them all when he was in Congress, one of the leaders in Congressional Black Caucus and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: So, he was elected mayor, let's see, we're in 2007, was 2000-, November of 2006, so he's our brand new mayor in Oakland.
Story_ID: 438302
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to school first?  What's the name of your first elementary school?
Speaker 2: Durant Elementary School [Oakland, California] was my elementary school.
Speaker 1: Now, who is Durant Elementary School named after?
Speaker 2: I was going to (laughter), I figured you were going to ask me that.  I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There, there might have been some English philosopher or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I was thinking of Will Durant.  I don't know if maybe it would have been named for him but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Will Durant, no, yes, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Some dead white man (laughter) at the time, but not--
Speaker 1: Well, Will Durant is dead.  He's a white man.  He's gone now, too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I don't know.  He--
Speaker 2: It was not named for a local person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Will Durant was--I think, really from New York [New York], and wrote at least massive history volumes, and so forth.  I mean, he was--I don't think he had a degree, but it's, a lot of people really swear by Will Durant's history.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I don't know if it was or not, but that's, yeah, you know, that's what came to mind when I heard Durant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, probably art (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And recess (laughter).  But I always loved to read and write, and I think that had a direct bearing on my becoming a journalist.  Was not so hot in, in math, but I liked reading and I liked writing.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have favorite books in those days?  What were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite books were not the classics, except for maybe 'The Black Stallion' by Walter Farley.  There's a series of children's books, or young adult books called 'The Black Stallion.'  And I liked the series called 'Freddy the Pig' [Walter R. Brooks] which was about some animals in the barnyard (laughter), but I was not well-read as far as the classics went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those may be become classic sometime.  I mean, 'Freddy' (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Perhaps so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact, my grandchildren, I, I urge them to read 'The Black Stallion,' so it's, it's still around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Black Stallion' is considered a classic now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but 'Freddy the Pig' I don't know yet--
Speaker 2: Freddy (laughter).
Speaker 1: --but he might have his time, too.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, did you get your books mostly from the library or did--
Speaker 2: Mostly from the library.  I should have mentioned when I was talking about everything being close by.  The library was about six blocks away.  These are in all different directions, of course, but, yes, I would go to the library, and had to pass the burlesque house on my way.  Now, there was a burlesque house on San Pablo Avenue in Oakland [California], and the library was in the next block.  So, I had to pass by the burlesque house, and in the marquee would be the picture of the stripper who was coming next.  And her name was Tempest Storm (laughter).  So, she was on the marquee coming next week (laughter), you know, Tempest Storm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It sounds redundant, doesn't it--Tempest Storm (laughter)?  That's like a--
Speaker 2: And I would go to the library, pick up my five books, and choose my five books, and then walk back home with five new books.
Speaker 1: She had a long career.  I remember her name in the Dayton Daily News.
Speaker 2: You remember her?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: They had ads for the, all the burlesque, so.
Speaker 2: I think she, she must have traveled the circuit, yeah (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did burlesque culture ever spill into the streets--
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I certainly--
Speaker 1: Different time of day, I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: --certainly was never allowed to, to go to that movie house.  And, no, I didn't see anybody going in and out.  I guess it was not open at that time at, at that time of day, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 438303
Speaker 1: So, you had a neighborhood with so many, all, everything that--
Speaker 2: Everything was there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would be like Kids World, is that right?
Speaker 2: The only thing we had to drive to was the, the grocery store.  There was a grocery store, a Safeway [Safeway Inc.], a very early Safeway.  And one of my fondest memories of childhood is that I think my dad would do the shopping quite often.  Mother [Virginia Craft Rose] was at home washing clothes or whatever.  And so, he would do the grocery shopping and he would take me.  And then, when we'd come home with the groceries, we'd come into the backyard.  And we lived on an upper--the, the second story of our house.  So, there was a stairway coming up to the back door.  And I would stand on that landing, and he would toss the groceries up to me, and that was an absolute thrill.  He would toss the, the can goods, and the bread, and whatever else he had in his grocery bag, and I got to catch it.  And since I was a, a tomboy, I enjoyed that a great deal.  And my mother would say, "Oh, Josh [Joshua Rose], don't do that.  She'll drop them, or something will spill."  And he, "Oh, no, she can catch it."  And that, of course, made me feel good.  So, that, that's another memory I have of doing things with my dad, as well as mom.  Dad was very loving to his children, very strict, very demanding, and there were times when he conflicted with my brother [Richard Rose] and sister [Virginia Rose Niles], particularly because they were the older two.  And I think by the time he got to me, I, I got a pass oftentimes.
Speaker 1: So, he sort of mellowed out a little bit.
Speaker 2: He mellowed it or he, he--that happens, I think often with younger children.  The older, the first and second children get the, the brunt of the parents' ambition and, and, and he, he was actually quite hard on them.  And my brother and sister and I talk that today, what that meant to them, and what it meant to me.  And I sometime feel badly that I didn't get as much critical scrutiny as they did.  So, for me, he, he was great.  He, and I was sort of outspoken, and I could joke with him, and he, he let me get, get away with stuff, mostly backtalk, that my brother and sister didn't feel they could do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 438304
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you have a favorite teacher in school?
Speaker 2: In high school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], yes, and interestingly enough, it was my journalism teacher [Crystal Murphy].
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to middle school or was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we went to junior high school in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Herbert Hoover Junior High School [Oakland, California].  And--
Speaker 1: Well, you can tell that was named before the Depression [Great Depression] (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  We know where that name came from, yeah.  And, of course, in those days, you went to--junior high school was seventh, eighth, and ninth grade, whereas now, middle school is sixth, seventh, and eighth grade, but it was different at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, was there, did you have a favorite teacher in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to think--not especially.  I was in the orchestra, so the orchestra teacher was kind of fun, but I would say overall, no.  I don't think I had a, a teacher that stands out.
Speaker 1: So, you played, what instrument did you play (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I played the violin--badly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, and did you still like art?
Speaker 2: I still liked art, but I don't remember having art in junior high school.  I did take art in high school as an elective.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sure we must have had art in junior high school, but I don't recall it.
Speaker 1: Now, were you writing anything as a grade school or middle school child?
Speaker 2: In middle school, the Girls Athletic Association (laughter) started a, a mimeographed newsletter.  And that was my first experience with being a reporter and an editor, and I liked it, I really enjoyed it.  And I think, very early on, I thought, oh, this is something I might like to do is be a reporter, or be a--not so much an editor--be a reporter, you know, write down things that people say and, and compose a little article, and see it published with your name.  And so, that kind of started for me in, in junior high school.
Story_ID: 438305
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, were there leadership opportunities available at, in church [St. Augustine's Episcopal Church, Oakland, California], at all or--
Speaker 2: For, for us youngsters?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Hm, yes, there was the young churchmen's group, you know, every church, regardless of the denomination, has a youth group.  And so, we would be the president or the secretary, or the vice chairman, or something like that.  And, yes, there were those opportunities, and I didn't mind taking minutes or notes, so I was often the secretary, you know.  And in junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California], hm, you know, that's a tough age.  You're not really trying to be a leader.  You're trying to fit in.  You want to be like everybody else.  And even though my parents [Virginia Craft Rose and Joshua Rose] were professional people, and many of the kids I went to junior high school with, were not from professional families, I wanted to be like everybody else.  So, I never wanted to flout my background.  I never wanted to be considered more, more better (laughter), better than anyone else.  And so, I'm sure that, at that time, I didn't go out of my way to talk about myself, or my family, or my background.  But I was well-mannered and so, when the other kids would cuss or swear around me, say a bad word, they would say, "Oh, excuse me, Mary Rose [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler], didn't mean to say that in front of you."  And I would always say, "That's okay," so that even though I didn't cuss or swear, it was okay with me if they cussed or swore if that was where they were coming from.
Speaker 1: Now, did your lightness of color cause any problems in school?
Speaker 2: It did not cause problems, but it was a factor in my life.  It, it meant that I tried, again, very hard to be one of the group.  I did not want to be differentiated.  And I, I feel my sister [Virginia Rose Niles] and brother [Richard Rose]--we feel very strongly to this, to this day, to this very moment about that.  It's something that we had to deal with.  Our peers always accepted us.  Nobody said, oh, you think you're white, or any of that because we were so much a part of the community.  And though our mother is light-complected, our father was brown.  And so, that made it clear to anyone who knew our family that we were Negro.  We were not half-white or, you know, Creole, or any of that.  We were firmly Negro people.  And so, we learned to always let white people know, if they didn't know, that we were Negro.  And most of--many times, white people didn't know that.  And so, if we were in a situation where it became apparent that they didn't realize that we were Negro, then we told them (laughter).  And so, you know, and we just made sure we always let them know.
Story_ID: 438306
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Oakland Technical High School [Oakland, California].
Speaker 1: Now was that like a magnet school or something?  Would you call it that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, at that time, it was not.  It was out of our immediate neighborhood now, mind you.  We were slated to go to McClymonds High School [Oakland, California].  And that's spelled M-C-C-L-Y-M-O-N-D-S.  And McClymonds High School is famous in its own right as the West Oakland [Oakland, California] school that produced a large number of professional baseball players.  And we're talking about, and other professional athletes.  We're talking about Curt Flood, Robinson--what's his first name (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Frank Robinson.
Speaker 2: Frank Robinson.
Speaker 1: Wasn't Vada Pinson there, too?
Speaker 2: Vada Pinson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm a Reds [Cincinnati Reds] fan, that's why (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Joe Morgan went to another high school in Oakland [California].  Joe Morgan did not go to McClymonds.  But also McClymonds produced Bill Russell.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it gives me chills to name these guys because they all came out of this West Oakland school that was, that was populated primarily by African American students, many of whom were poor.  And yet, the school produced, through good coaching and through the opportunity to, to go further.  McClymonds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's amazing--
Speaker 2: --produced--
Speaker 1: --the great players, I mean--
Speaker 2: --the great players.  And there's some others that I can't even think of.
Speaker 1: --and Vada Pinson was a great player now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vada Pinson.
Speaker 1: --who, if he played now, would be a millionaire--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  Frank Robinson, of course, one of the greatest players that ever played baseball--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and a manager to boot.
Speaker 2: And Bill Russell.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bill Russell, some consider the greatest basketball player who ever played.
Speaker 2: That's right.  They all came out of McClymonds during the '50s [1950s] and--
Speaker 1: And Curt Flood, you know, who was--
Speaker 2: Yes, Curt Flood actually started at Oakland Tech, and he actually went to Hoover Junior High School [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California].  And that since I was the tomboy (laughter), I once got to play softball with Curt Flood.  And he (laughter)--this is so silly--and he hit the softball and, of course, it went over the fence.  And so, I ran out of the playground to the street and, and got the softball (laughter).  But he--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Curt Flood changed the face of professional sports--
Speaker 2: He changed the face of professional sports.
Speaker 1: --sacrificed his own career basically.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Now, he started at Tech, but then he switched to McClymonds, and he actually graduated from McClymonds.  And there's some others that I can't think of it--Pumpsie Green, do you remember him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pumpsie Green was the first black ballplayer for the Boston Red Sox.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Pumpsie Green.
Speaker 2: If that, if that is, if that's true, okay.
Speaker 1: That's true, yeah.  Tom Yawkey brought him in.
Speaker 2: So, I, I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we--I was interviewing about him not long ago.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I'm not sure about Pumpsie Green, but it, it could be.  If we could look it up, we would know for sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe he is the first black player for Boston.
Speaker 2: So, so McClymonds was quite the hotbed of achievement.
Story_ID: 438307
Speaker 1: But my dad [Joshua Rose] had sent my older brother [Richard Rose] and sister [Virginia Rose Niles] to Tech, Oakland Tech [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], so he wanted me to go there also.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, why Oakland Tech?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because I think at that point in time, McClymonds [McClymonds High School, Oakland, California] was, was going down a little bit.  The, the, the clientele of the school was less distinguished than it had been before.  And I think that my father felt we would be better off going to Oakland Tech.  And, you know, that's just the way people think and, you know, I'm not sure if I would have done just as well at McClymonds, or if it was better for me to go to Tech, I'll never know.  But I enjoyed going to Tech.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, was Tech more integrated than McClymonds?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that may have been part of my father's thinking.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, what was the percentage of blacks, would you think, offhand, then at Tech?
Speaker 1: At in the city, or at Tech?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Tech, yeah.
Speaker 1: At my, in my day, probably 30, 40 percent in, in that.  That's just a wild guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there was a substantial--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a goodly number.  And this was during the '50s [1950s], and again, this is post-war Oakland [California], so tremendous demographic changes were taking place.  Suburbanization was occurring where we sit now, here in Concord [California], which is a suburb of Oakland.  Suburban tracts were rapidly being constructed, as happened all over the country.  And white families, who have the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and who were able to move out of the central cities, and buy homes in the suburbs, began to flock to the suburbs.  And they call it white flight, but I think it was also an opportunity for G.I.'s and others to buy homes for the first time.  And the homes were much cheaper in the suburbs than they were in the central cities.  So, Oakland lost a large percentage of its white population during the '50s [1950s] after the war [World War II, WWII].  And, of course, these, those folks were replaced by, by blacks, and other minority people.  So, the demographics of the schools were changing at that time.
Story_ID: 438308
Speaker 1: You said you had a favorite teacher in high school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California].  Who was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Mrs. Crystal Murphy was her name, and she was the journalism teacher (laughter).  And in the eleventh grade, you got to choose, you could choose to take regular English, or you could take drama which, you know, is a form of language arts.  You could take speech, or you could take journalism.  Well, I'd already had this pleasant experience in junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California] with the newsletter, so I chose journalism, and I immediately liked it.  Again, and Mrs. Murphy was just kind of, not like most teachers, she was kind of down to earth and jolly.  And she treated us like we were reporters, and her, her, her class was like a lab class where you produce the student newspaper.  So, it was a lot of fun, you know, it was like being a real person, a real adult.  And she was very encouraging to me.  And I, I think I just liked her because, and everybody did.  All the, all the students liked her.  So, if I had to name a, a favorite teacher, it would be, it would--she would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is your senior year?
Speaker 2: Junior--
Speaker 1: Junior year--
Speaker 2: --eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you get a chance to work on a school newspaper for two years or--
Speaker 2: I went from the newspaper to the yearbook the following year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Now, you're speaking about color a minute ago.  Mrs. Murphy said to me one day, "Mary Rose [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler], what are you?  Are you Hawaiian (laughter)?"  And I said, "No, I'm Negro (laughter)."  And she said, "Oh, okay," you know, and that was the end of that.  But throughout life, you know, people would guess at what your ethnic background was and so, in her case, that's what she thought (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I guess--well, yeah, that's, it's interesting if people do have (unclear), 'cause I wonder who, what, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 443813
Speaker 1: So, you worked on the school paper, and then on the--now, did you ever, in high school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], did you have an instance where you came up with a story that was a little bit too sensitive for the school or something or--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't, we didn't, did not have that experience.  Yeah, we were probably pretty tame, you know.  We weren't muckrakers by (laughter), by any means, so, no, we didn't have that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And is there any good stories from your days with the school newspaper or the yearbook?
Speaker 2: Well, the only story I remember is, is kind of silly.  There was another girl there with the first and, same first and last name as mine--Mary Rose.  So, we were both on the yearbook staff.  So, to avoid being, confusing each, each other, or having others confuse us, we started using our middle name.  And that's how I got the byline, Mary Ellen Rose [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler], and she became Mary June Rose [ph.].  So, here we are, we're both working on the yearbook, making sure we don't confuse our names.  And we ended up mis-, (laughter)--what's the word when you put a name under something (laughter)--misidentifying each other's picture at some point in the yearbook, not under our, our high school, you know, photo or, or portrait.  But some place in that yearbook, we got each other's names mixed up, and we were both on the staff.  So, that's the only thing I remember as being a story from those days, but enjoyed working on the yearbook.  And, and, again, it was, it, it--I, I enjoyed working with the language, and the pictures, and the writing, and the reporting.  That whole, that whole thing, I found it very enjoyable.
Story_ID: 443814
Speaker 1: Well, when you were a senior, did--now did they, did they have a big prom at your school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], or that kind of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we had a junior prom and a senior ball.  And I did not make either one (laughter).  As a junior, I wasn't really allowed to date, and so I did not have a date to the junior prom.  You know, the young people now solve that by going in groups.  They don't worry about having a date.  But at that time, you had to have a date, or an escort, and I had neither one.  So, I helped to decorate the gym the day before 'cause I was still enjoying my--into my art stuff, but I didn't go to the, the prom.  And then, in senior year, I did have a boyfriend, who was going to be in the state track meet the next day.  And so, he could not go to the senior ball and so, I didn't go either.  I didn't want to go, so I missed both of those, and I'm still here to tell it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you survived that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so when you were a senior, were you pretty much convinced you wanted to be a journalist when you--
Speaker 2: You know, pretty much.  I, I, I was interested in, in going into that field.  I, I--it was more, it was also a matter of knowing what I did not want to do, and I did not want to be a teacher.  Now, this is 1957, so for black girls, you could be a teacher, you could be a, a social worker, you could be a nurse possibly.  And that were, those were the fields you were, you were, your families were directing you towards.  My dad [Joshua Rose] said I, you know, looking forward to college, "I think you might want to get a teaching credential."  And the neighbors and the friends, and all the families that we grew up with, all said pretty much the same thing, or if you don't want to be a teacher--well, you can be a social worker.  Well, don't want to do that, well, how about nursing?  So, these were fields that black woman could attain.
Speaker 1: Now, did it ever--I know there were, like some black women reporters in popular culture fiction in those days, like Lois Lane, and Brenda Starr, a star reporter and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, yes, there were women reporters, but not black women reporters.
Speaker 1: Right, there were women, right.  There were reporters, but not black woman, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And you're right, they were pretty fictional (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you know, their character.  I think Katharine Hepburn played in one of the movies.  And they had 'His Girl Friday' in the other movie, back in the '30s [sic. 1940].  But you just never thought of black women being a reporter, huh (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and coming out of high school, I don't think I had settled on journalism.  I think I was interested in it, but I wasn't sure that, that's what I was going to do, you know, not having gone into college [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] at that point in time.  But I was interested and, again, it was also a matter of what I wasn't interested in doing.  And that was where my dad would say things like, "Well, you know, you, you think you can do all that?  You'd better go ahead and, girl, you better go get that teaching credential," because he knew that was a safe place to go, where you could get a job.
Story_ID: 443815
Speaker 1: Now, at the time though, too, did, had, did you read a lot of the black papers, like the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: I know they had the Los-, the--wasn't there a paper here in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], black--
Speaker 2: There were papers here in the Bay Area.  The San Francisco Sun Reporter was published and the Oakland Voice [ph.] were the two black weeklies that were published in the Bay Area.  So, yes, we read those papers.  And also, we got the Boston Guardian from time to time in the mail.  And that was one of the reasons why we knew about William Monroe Trotter who, of course, by that time, had died, you know, ten, fifteen years earlier, twenty years earlier, but his sister, Maude Trotter Steward, spelled S-T-E-W-A-R-D, I think, had continued the Guardian after Trotter's death.  So, occasionally, we would get a copy in the mail.  So, yes, we read the, the Guardian, the local black papers, some people sometime would get the Chicago Defender and so--
Speaker 1: What about the Courier, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]?
Speaker 2: Okay, Pittsburgh Courier because of, of my parents' [Virginia Craft Rose and Joshua Rose] background in Pittsburgh, so occasionally, we would see those papers.  And by that time, I was kind of a newspaper nut.  I loved reading the, the local newspapers, and the funny papers and all that.  So, I would, would read those papers with, with interest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 443816
Speaker 1: Now, how did you decide on, on college?  I mean, what was the process?
Speaker 2: Yes, very simple.  At that time, the University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] was very accessible, if I can use that word.  All you needed, coming out of a high school in California was a 3.0 average or better, 3.0, which is a straight B average coming out of high school.  If you had a 3.0 or better, you could qualify for admission to UC Berkeley, which, you know, is amazing when you think about how it is now, some fifty years later.  It, it's so competitive now that kids can't even get it with, you know, 4.3 (laughter) averages.
Speaker 1: I also heard that tuition was very, very cheap or--
Speaker 2: Tuition was very low.
Speaker 1: --and California had the lowest tuition in the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty dollars, fifty dollars a semester, not a unit, or not an hour--a semester.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, that--is that true?  Did California have the lowest tuition in the country in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They might have at that time.  I don't know for sure, but I know it was--and I loved it because I called it the people's university.  And that's what it was meant to be, I felt, and many of us felt.  It was not meant to be some elite college that, you know, that only the very top, top, top tier of students could, could get to.  It was for regular people.
Speaker 1: Now, was it less expensive than UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or Cal--
Speaker 2: I imagine UCLA was about the same because, though, at that time, those were the only two campuses in the UC System.  Now, there are about eight or nine, but in the '50s [1950s], there was Berkeley and UCLA--
Speaker 1: Those were the only two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, and San Francisco [Medical Department of the University of California; University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California], which was a medical school, the University of California, UCSF, they call it, was the medical school, medical college.  So, those were the three campuses.
Speaker 1: So, San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and--
Speaker 2: San Francisco State was part of the state university system [California State University], which is a different system.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: There, there are three, there are three systems in California.
Speaker 1: Why, I didn't realize that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's the University of California with about nine campuses now.  There's the state university system, which has, I would wager, twenty or thirty, a large number of four-year campuses.  And then, there is the community college system [California Community Colleges] which has probably more than one hundred two-year campuses.
Speaker 1: So, the state university system and the University of California System are both all public, they're both public (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.  They, they, they are public universities.  They used to be largely supported by state funds.  Now, state funding has diminished.  And so, that's one of the reason why tuitions have gone up, and expenses have gone up, because now students have to bear more of the expense of going to those two campuses, or two systems.  There's still some state funding, but not nearly as much as there used to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is the University of California the state school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it is a public school.  It's not a private university if that's what you mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't know where that one fit in, if, you know, if it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, no, it's, it's a public university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 443817
Speaker 1: Back to that.  So when I graduated from high school in 1957, I had a 3.0 grade point average coming out of Tech [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], so I barely qualified, but I did qualify.  And that was all it took--pay your fifty dollars and that was it.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: You were in.  And even then, of course, it was considered the finest public university in the, in the nation, but it was so, so much more easily, as I say, more easily accessible to, to students.  So, I'm glad I went at that time.  If I had to go now, I probably would never qualify.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what was it like, or how did you like UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I loved it, I loved it.  Well, first of all, I lived at home because you may know that Oakland [California] and Berkeley [California] are contiguous.  The, the two cities are side by side, so all I had to do was get on the bus, ride up the famous Telegraph Avenue.  You've heard of Telegraph Avenue where all kinds of zany things go on?  And Telegraph Avenue went from Oakland into Berkeley, and straight to the campus.  So, you know, I lived at home, got on the bus, went to college, went to classes, came home at night, and it was very simple.  So I enjoyed it, and I think in my sophomore year, I joined The Daily Californian, which was, was and is the student newspaper.  And that's, again, when I, you know, indulged my interest in, in journalism, and decided to major in journalism.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you kind of gave up the idea of being a teacher?  You thought you--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes, well, I knew I didn't want to be a teacher (laughter).  And, and since that times, there have been one or two times in my life when I have been a teacher.  And I, I had, and I have realized that I was right.  I was not a very good teacher (laughter), did not, did not enjoy it, and wasn't very good at it.  So (laughter), my instinct was right on that.
Story_ID: 443818
Speaker 1: What kind of assignments did you have when you were--
Speaker 2: At The Daily Cal [The Daily Californian]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: We covered speakers who came on to the campus, student government.  Anything that might happen, we, we would cover, but primarily, activities on the campus.  Now, one of the stories I can tell is about the time Malcolm X came to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  And this would have been about, probably 1960.  And he was scheduled, or he was invited, by a student organization, and I don't recall which one, to speak at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  Well, the administration of the school was so frightened of him that they barred him from speaking at Cal.  And most students and, of course, the people on the--us folks on the newspaper thought that was outrageous that he was not allowed to come to the campus and speak.  So, I wrote a story about that for the student newspaper, the fact that he had been barred from coming to campus.  And here was a campus well-known for its radical, liberal, you know, student body, and they would not allow Malcolm X to come on campus.  That, that's just--
Speaker 1: Now, is this after the CBS [sic.] documentary, 'The Hate That Hate Produced' with Mike Wallace and--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: I'd be interested in the--'cause I don't think, I think he was kind of under the radar until then.
Speaker 2: I think in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], he was still a bit under the radar, but he was well-known enough that someone did not want him to be on the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Maybe, whoever watching is watching this in the future might want to check out that chronology to see if it, that it, you know, whether the TV show came out before he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  So, he spoke in the Bay Area, in other locations, but just not at Cal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that, that was unfortunate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get a chance to hear him speak?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we did.  And he--I always say that he was one of those experiences that allowed me to feel better about myself as a light-skinned black person because he said, he talked to black folks and said, stop differentiating yourselves, stop fighting one another over your hair texture and your skin color.  Y'all black, and the man is going to treat you all the same way, so you need to stop making these issues paramount in your lives.  And if you're, if you're, if you're dark, you're fine.  If you're brown, you're fine.  If you're yellow, you're fine.  If you're just not fine in the sense of being beautiful, I don't mean that, but it's okay.  Whatever color you are, it's okay, whatever kind of hair you have, it's okay because we're all in the same boat.  And I was just thoroughly moved by that.
Speaker 1: It's a message of unity to--
Speaker 2: It was a message that I could embrace, and feel like I didn't have to be embarrassed or ever about what I look out 'cause if I'm black, I'm black.  Or if I'm Negro, I'm Negro.  If I'm African American, I'm African American.  And it was, it meant a lot to me.
Speaker 1: Who else came to the campus to speak that you remember then?
Speaker 2: Hm, oh, let's see.  Well--
Speaker 1: Well, Malcolm X didn't get a chance to come to campus, but he was supposed so--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'm trying to remember.  Well, of course, there were lots of famous scientists and, you know, Nobel Prize winners.  And those kind of folks were a dime a dozen at Berkeley at that time.  And I don't mean to say that they weren't important because they were.  But it was an intellectually stimulating place, and so we were able to, to hear and see all kinds of people, like I don't recall anybody else who impacted me as much as Malcolm did.  I don't think Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Berkeley campus.  He spoke in Oakland [California] once or twice so.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to hear him when he was (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did not, no, I never, never saw Martin Luther King in, in person, yeah.  So, I can't think of others who's, who come to mind.
Story_ID: 443819
Speaker 1: But it was a wonderful place to go to school, and to be on the student newspaper [The Daily Californian].  And out of a campus, out of the student body of probably twenty thousand students, there were about a hundred black students.  In fact, we all knew each other.  There was such a tiny number of, of African American students at that time.  So, we were a definite sub-group because we had our fraternities, and sororities, and dances and parties, and social life, and we studied together.  And one of the stories that my husband [Donald T. Butler] and I share is that he was going to Howard University at that time in Washington, of course, D.C.  And I was going to Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and we were both playing whist in the library.  The black students would get together and play bid whist when we were supposed to be studying (laughter).
Speaker 2: So this is, this must be a universal curse or something, you know, bid whist curse?
Speaker 1: Yes, and when, when my husband and I got married, and we're talking about our earlier lives, you know, we discovered that while he was playing bid whist at Howard, I was playing bid whist at Cal (laughter).  And, again, it spoke to the universality of African American culture in the United States.  It didn't matter where you were.  You did some of the same things.  You had some of the same values, and some beliefs, and backgrounds, and it's, it's a wonderful thing.
Story_ID: 443820
Speaker 1: So, what was going on in terms of the Civil Rights Movement in Oakland [California]?  I know there were some local leaders who were really--I've heard, I can't remember some of the names, but I know there were--
Speaker 2: Well, back, when we get to the '60s [1960s], we begin to get the activists who, in Oakland, who are fighting to end housing segregation, as I spoke of before, employment discrimination, and the, some of the activists at that time were attorneys.  They were black attorneys who had gone to school in various places and had settled in Oakland.  Among those were Lionel Wilson who later became Oakland's first black mayor.  Let's see, Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford] was out of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], but he worked closely with the activists in Oakland.  And Byron Rumford later became the first black person elected to the State Assembly [California State Assembly] from Northern California.  And so, he was very active politically.  My dad [Joshua Rose] was not as outspoken as they were, but he opened the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] for them to meet, and congregate, and strategize, and meet, and decide what they were going to do.  So, the Y--it was called the Northwest Branch YMCA [M. Robinson Baker YMCA, Oakland, California]--was a meeting place for a lot of these young men.  And my father was a mentor for them.  So, Clinton White, attorney Clinton White, was another lawyer who was active.  Wiley--no, I'm, I'm giving you the wrong name, no, don't, let's, let's scratch that, that's someone else.  There was another attorney whose name I can't remember, but there's--one of the courthouses in Oakland is now named for that particular attorney whose name I can't recall.  But these gentlemen got together with many others, and took, took, went to court to end racial segregation in housing.  They, they challenged that whole system, broke it down.  And job discrimination, there was a time when department stores would not hire clerks, and this was true country-wide.  So, they got a few black women into the department stores as, as clerks and saleswomen, and gradually began to break the system, break the system of segregation down.  Also, the Oakland School District [Oakland Unified School District] began to hire black teachers.  So, it was quite a, a time of ferment and activity.
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers when you were coming up in Oakland?
Speaker 2: In grammar school [Durant Elementary School, Oakland, California], no.  In junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California], no.  In high school [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], no.  So, never had a black teacher.
Speaker 1: So, Oakland was behind a lot of areas in the country, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, well, the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], too.  Now, the teachers, by the time I was in high school, had begun to be hired, but they were at, you know, I had gone through the system by that time, yeah, okay so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, my mother [Virginia Craft Rose], again, was an early childhood educator.  She worked in the childcare centers that were started during World War II [WWII] to enable women to work in the shipyards.  So, the Oakland School District formed a number of childcare centers, and she was hired as a teacher in one of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she became one of the first black women to be hired as a childcare center direct- teacher.  And she eventually became a director in that system (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 443821
Speaker 1: You were a student at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] until what--
Speaker 2: From '67 [1967] to, I'm sorry, '57 [1957] to '61 [1961] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957] to '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there any other stories about your school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Being at Cal?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Hm, well, I enjoyed the Daily Cal [The Daily Californian].  I enjoyed the camaraderie of the black students.  And then, between my junior and senior years, I went abroad with a group called the Experiment in International Living.  And I don't know if that organization still exists, but what it did was to send young people to countries all around the world for a six-week stay.  And instead of traveling throughout a continent like, say Europe or Africa, you went to one country.  And the idea was to learn something about that country.  So, because I needed monetary help to go on this experiment, the only two countries that were available to me were Poland or Czechoslovakia (laughter).  And so, I chose Poland and so, it was the summer of 1960, and I went with a group of young people to Poland and had a marvelous experience, which I wrote about, and it's in my scrapbooks.  I came back and wrote a series for The Daily Cal.
Speaker 1: So, where did you stay in Poland, did you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, we stayed in, in Warsaw [Poland].  And then, we traveled to three or four other cities in Poland, didn't go outside of Poland, so the idea was, we were supposed to learn about Poland, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, Poland was, what they call in those days behind the Iron Curtain, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --yes, it was a Communist country.  We were supposedly among the first few American young people to, to go in there in 1960.  That was just--what--fifteen years after World War II [WWII].  Well, you know, we were young and blithe.  I mean, we didn't know.  We knew they, that they were run by a Communist government, but the students that we were paired with, were like young people anywhere.  They were friendly and glad to be around Americans.
Speaker 1: Now, 1960 was the year that--I think Adolf Eichmann went on trial in Israel--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I remember seeing it on 'Armstrong Circle Theatre' as a kid.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But did you, were you aware of the concentration camps in Poland (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we went to, we went to Auschwitz if that's the right way to pronounce--we would say Auschwitz (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Auschwitz, we, we can't say it right.  We went to Auschwitz, and saw the concentration camps and, or that particular camp.  And, of course, we had read about them beforehand.  One of the saddest things that happened was that the girl that I was paired with whose, in whose home I stayed, was a very bright young Polish student.  And one day, I was sitting there with her.  And one of the other persons on, in our group was with me, and he was a young Jewish man from Long Island [New York], went to Hofstra University [Hempstead, New York].  His name was Arnie Miller, and so we were buddies on this trip.  And so Arnie was there with me that day talking to my hostess.  And she said, "Oh, well, you know, those Jews."  Now, mind you, there's not nary a Jew left at the--very few Jewish people left in Poland at this point.  "You know, those Jews, they, they run the government."  We said, "What?"  "Oh, yes, why, they even changed their names."  Oh, we said, "How do you know there're Jewish people in the government?"  "Oh, well, some of them even changed their names to Polish names."  And we looked at each other, and now here's this Jewish fellow sitting right here.  And, finally, I said, "Did you know that Arnie is Jewish?"  And so, she kind of started like that--she says, "Well, he doesn't look like it."
Story_ID: 443822
Speaker 1: Yeah, you told the story about experiences--you, we were talking about your experiences in Poland.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, yes, we, we saw the crematoriums, and what was left of them, and the displays that were on display in the camp, and it was extremely sobering.  And, just as you say, my husband and I are, are World War II [WWII]--I don't want to say buffs--but we do a lot of reading about World War II, and the reason being, we know that we were infants at that time, you know.  We were little babies at that time.  And this was all happening since we were alive, and we feel some sort of connection to it.  So, we saw that, and we had a few funny experiences.  One of mine was that one day we were in Warsaw [Poland]--my hostess, Elizabeth [ph.] and I--and we saw three black men going down the street.  And I said, oh, my god, we got to see who these people are.  I hadn't seen any black people since I'd left New York [New York] on the way over there.  So, we rushed to, what turned out to be a TV studio, and they went in the door, like in a back door.  So, we rattled the door, and couldn't get in it, so we ran around to the front, and couldn't get in.  We got in, eventually, but it turned out they were jazz musicians, and they were touring Poland.  So, that was, you know, like ohh, black people.  And then, the other thing was that the Poles didn't know what I was, you know, here we are, go again, some of them asked if I were Jewish, and I said no.  And by this time, the hairstyle that I had started out with on my way to Poland had reverted back to my natural hair (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had a little Afro (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I had a little Afro before Afros were in.  And I had even taken my pressing curl and my pressing comb with me.  I was going to wash and press my hair over in Poland.  Well, I tried it once.  And at this, I had much more hair at that time and much thicker hair than it is now.  So, I was not able to press my hair successfully, so I had to just let it be natural.  So, the only people that Polish people had seen, who looked anything like that, had been Jewish people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the Jews called it a Jewfro now.
Speaker 2: Oh, do they?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a couple comedians that call it that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, they wanted to know if I was Jewish, and I said, no, I'm Negro.  And I said to someone, "How do you say that in Polish?"  And they didn't come up with the word, so the only word I could come up with was (speaking German) Schwarzer, since many Polish people understood German, which I don't speak.  But anyway, the point of the story was I was trying to let them know I was American Schwarzer, you know, some sort of would be way of telling them that I was African American.  And they accepted it.  And then, they said, well, do you know Dizzy Gillespie (laughter)?  And so, they thought oh, okay, you're African American, you must know Dizzy Gillespie.  So, they were quite well-versed on American music and jazz and quite, quite--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting that jazz was such a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --popular music in Poland.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think there's a Polish trumpet player in the tour, Art Blakey, in the '70s [1970s], you know.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: And who learned, you know, how to play from records and stuff.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  So, those were some of the experiences that I can remember.
Story_ID: 443823
Speaker 1: I have to ask you this question.  It may just seem off the wall, but did you ever see the Shrine of the Black Madonna in Poland [Jasna Gora Monastery, Czstochowa, Poland] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Poland, yes, we did, yes, we did.  As a matter of fact, that was on our itinerary.  And I, I always had a little trouble understanding it [Black Madonna of Czstochowa] because it wasn't meant to be a depiction of an African person.  It's the Madonna, but her skin is dark.  And so, I, I must have learned at that time what that meant.  I don't recall what it means now, but it was a revered place.  Do you know the story of it?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a researcher by the name of Runoko Rashidi that's been there.  And he's talked, he's got lots of slides and picture of--not just that one right there--all over Eastern Europe.
Speaker 2: Ohh--
Speaker 1: And they're black, they're painted exactly black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they look, they have black features, too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, yet, the Poles, I think something's been disconnected over the years as to why they do that.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: So, I don't think they know.
Speaker 2: --yes, okay.
Speaker 1: But they give the explanations.  It's kind of--doesn't--when you look at the statue, it doesn't make any sense.
Speaker 2: That's, that's what I'm remembering is I didn't quite understand it.  So, I don't remember what I was told, but, oh, so all over Eastern Europe then?  Oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of places other than just Poland.
Speaker 2: They may know something the rest of us don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or they forgot something that we need to know (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  But, yeah, so I was wondering if I--
Speaker 2: Yes, we did, we did, we did go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you did see one of them, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, can't tell you where it is, but we went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you came back, and you stayed what--over the summer, right, so--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm, came back and resumed my senior year in college [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].
Story_ID: 443824
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated, I mean, did you, what did you have in mind to do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be a newspaper reporter.  But in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], the major newspapers in Oakland [California] and San Francisco [California] were not hiring women, and they were especially not hiring black people.  Now, usually, what they would have is one woman reporter, the San Francisco Chronicle had one woman reporter.  The Tribune [Oakland Tribune] had, I guess, one or two--I don't know, 'cause I never got in the, in the door at the Tribune.  I did get in for an interview at the Chronicle.  And I like to tell people that the editor said to me, "Well, we have a woman reporter."  And (laughter) by this time, I was fresh out of college, but I also had a significant amount of freelance experience because I had been a stringer for the black newspapers in town.  And I had a nice little portfolio.  And so, I had experience, and I could have stepped right into a job, but he said, "Well, we have the one woman reporter."  And I said, "Well, can't you have two?"  He said, "Well, we can't send you out to cover fires, or police actions because you might tear your nylons (laughter)."  And, and at that time, of course, we wore skirts and, and nylons.  Pants weren't in yet.  And so, he told me he couldn't hire me because he didn't want me to tear my nylons.  So, after a few more tries like that, I, I realized that he wasn't going to hire me, though he did hire some of my peers from, from UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] who were graduating at the same time--some of the male peers, they were hired, right out of college.
Speaker 1: Now, were these male peers so much superior at more, and better than, at journalism (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were not, but they were men, they were men, and that's what, what counted.
Story_ID: 443825
Speaker 1: So, I did find work with Blue Cross of Northern California [Anthem, Inc.] in their public relations department.  And even there, I think I probably was the first black person hired other than the custodian.  And the custodian told me that after he and I got to know each other.  He said there was no--he had never seen another black person in that building in that office, that large office, except--before me.  So, this is 1961, and it's--lots of people had that experience of, you know, breaking into something and being the first.  And that's--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you were in charge of PR [public relations] for Blue Cross, or you worked for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was one of the--and, and on that staff, yeah.
Speaker 2: --okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't in, in charge, but a member of that department, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And how long did you do that or--
Speaker 1: Hm, about a year and a half.  And then, I was hired as a business writer by Bank of America world headquarters in San Francisco [California] in a department that wrote, researched, and wrote eight-page small business reports.  And though I had no business background, I knew it was just a matter of researching and reporting, which was my background.  So, when I went to interview with the director of that department, I started right out by saying, "Now, in case you don't realize that, I am Negro."  And he said, "Oh, yes, I know that."  Well, I never knew if he knew that or not, but he, if he didn't, he recovered quickly enough to act like he did.  And he said, "Oh, you know, it's not a problem."  And it wasn't.  He, he hired me, and I enjoyed that job.  It's one of the best jobs I ever had because you had to be very precise.  It, it--newspaper work, okay, you know, if you--you, you want to be accurate, but you don't always have to know down to the last penny what you're talking about.  But in this job, you had to know, down to the last penny, because you were writing about how to start a small business.  So, I was there during the Cuban Missile Crisis, I remember, happened while I was on that job.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in 1963, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, this would have been '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Two [1962], what, '2 [1962], okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963], maybe, sometime in that year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it might have been '62 [1962], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed in November of '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In November of '63 [1963], so this--
Speaker 2: And I don't think it was the same year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it should have been '62 [1962] then.
Story_ID: 443826
Speaker 1: In 1964, I finally got work with a newspaper--in that case, the Berkeley Daily Gazette.   And by this time, the, the Civil Rights Movement was really in full swing.  And some of the elders in Berkeley [California], some of the black spokes-, black--I don't want to say spokespersons, but some of the black activists in Berkeley had gone to this newspaper and said, "Why don't you have any black reporters?  Here's all this news going on about black people and you don't have any black reporters and (simultaneous)--."
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now '63 [1963] was a big--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --time of a lot of real, you know, hardline picketing, and so forth all over the country
Speaker 1: That's right, all over--
Speaker 2: And CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] made a major initiative--I mean a major thrust all over the country, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sitting in and such, you know, in the North.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the March on Washington was in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So, you know, things were really happening.  And of course, the editors told these persons, "Oh, well, we would hire someone, but we just don't have anybody who's qualified, you know, can't find any qualified black reporters."  And they said, "Well, we have one (laughter)."  And, in the meantime, when I had graduated from Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I had applied to the Berkeley Gazette and had a resume, had left my resume and application which they never acted on.  So, when the, the gentleman in Berkeley said, "Well, we know one--you looking for a qualified reporter?  We have one for you."  They gave them my name and, and they called, the paper called me, and said, "Would you like to come in for an interview?"  And I said yes.  And so, they really had no choice, but to hire me.  I was qualified, and I've always said to, to hiring persons--you're not hiring me because I'm black, and you have to hire me, you're hiring me because I'm qualified.
Speaker 2: Now, just to go back a little back to '63 [1963], did you go to the March on Washington, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no.  I was working at the bank [Bank of America].  I also had just gotten married to my first husband [Samuel C. Perry], who is now deceased, so I was right there in Berkeley, living in Berkeley, and working.  So, no, I, I--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --did not travel at all.
Speaker 2: As a reporter, you probably were kind of curious as to what was going on there.
Speaker 1: Yes, no, nobody sent me (laughter).  Well, in '63 [1963], you see, I was still working for the, for the bank.  I wasn't, I wasn't a newspaper reporter at that time.  That, I didn't break in until '64 [1964], as I say.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, how did they treat you at the Gazette (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just fine.  You know, I mean, it's like, people who think they can't be around black people, or black people aren't qualified, or black people can't fit in, they discover that it's no problem.  Once you're on the job, if, you're doing the job, you're just like they are.  So, I was treated just fine.
Story_ID: 443827
Speaker 1: And not long after I started in '64 [1964], the Free Speech Movement broke out at, at Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and I was able to cover parts of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that's the Mario Savio, I think was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, the Mario Savio days, and I wasn't long out of college myself.  So, they sent me up to the campus, which was within walking distance of, of the newspaper, right there in Berkeley [California].  And I was able to go into the crowds of students that were demonstrating because I looked like a student, and with my notepad, and take notes and cover it, as it was happening.  And at that point, the students were, were occupying the administration building.  They were sitting in.  And so, I just went right in with them, and sat down amongst all these students.  And then, I was embarrassed when the police officer came through with the bullhorn and said in-, into the bullhorn, Mary Ellen Perry [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler]--that was my name at the time--and I hunkered down, you know, didn't want anybody around me to know that they were talking to me.  And he repeated my name again.  And I, you know, kind of went, yes.  And they said, "Your editor says, come back to the office right now (laughter)."
Speaker 2: With a bull horn?
Speaker 1: So I, I--my cover was blown (laughter).  So, I sheepishly got up and tiptoed out (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: Now, as I've read, I've heard accounts of people who were there in those days that talk about the police attacking students and physically and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They did.  Now, before I was sent back to the office, I saw the police dragging students out.  First, they would say, "You, you need to leave."  And the students would say, "We don't want to leave, or we're not going to leave."  And after several warnings, the police then said, "Well, we're going to arrest you."  And then, the students would go limp, you know, so as not to cooperate.  And so, I saw the police take the, the male students, and pull them down the stairway because the holding pen for the UC Police Department was in the basement.  So, they took the men and just dragged them down the steps.  And the women--
Speaker 2: So, that hurt, didn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, it did hurt.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the women, some of them, they dragged, too, because they would practice--I've forgotten what it, it's called--passive resistance.  And so, they, they dragged the women down, too.  So, I was able to describe these things--went back to the rewrite man at the office, and, and they got into the paper.  It was part of the, the coverage of the Gazette [Berkeley Daily Gazette], which I was very proud, that I had been an eyewitness to, to that, and was able to, to describe it.  And so, people knew that's what happened so.
Story_ID: 443828
Speaker 1: What was the issue at--
Speaker 2: Well, the issue was (laughter), that student organizations wanted to put tables or stands up on the campus on the big central area of the campus where you first walk in--the plaza, so to speak, or on many campuses, what would be called the quad, I guess.  And they wanted to, they wanted to raise money for the Mississippi Freedom Fighters, all of the civil rights activities that were going on in the South that these students had gone down the previous summer.  And now, they were back in Berkeley [California], and they wanted to raise funds.  They wanted to recruit people to go and work on voting rights, all kinds of activities like that.  And they were told by the administration, you cannot espouse activities that are off-campus activities.  You can only recruit or raise money for campus-affiliated activities, and these are off-campus.  So, you have to go off-campus to, to, to participate in these kinds of activities.  And Mario Savio and the other students said, "No, we have freedom of speech.  We think we should be able to raise these monies, and recruit workers and, and educate students on campus."  And it was just that simple.  And so by the time it was all over, some months later, the campus administration gave students the, the privilege and the, the right to espouse activities and organizations that were off-campus.  But it took, took a long time, you know, to--much, much to do to get to that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And today, if you go to Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and I'm sure any other campus, that's what students do.  They raise money.  They have their booths.  They have their stands.  They have their card tables, you know, and they're raising money, or recruiting students, or signing people up for whatever they want.
Speaker 1: Yeah absolutely.
Story_ID: 443829
Speaker 1: Quite a few important activist figures in the black community likes were around when, in those days.  And I just want to know if you, you know, who were some of the ones?  I know that in '65 [1965], I guess '66 [1966], is about the time the Black Panther Party gets started, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And when I was at the Gazette [Berkeley Daily Gazette], I covered some of their activities.  Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and Bobby Seale and Eldridge Cleaver were the three young men who started the Black Panther Party.  And Huey and Bobby were students at a two-year junior college in Oakland [California] called Merritt College, M-E-R-R-I-T-T.  Eldridge Cleaver, I don't think was a student, but he soon joined the two others.  And they organized and developed the Black Panther Party.  And as a reporter at the Gazette, I was sent to cover some of their press conferences.  I didn't cover any of the police shootings that went on, but when they would have, when they would have something they were announcing, or they were standing out in front of their headquarters, and they were talking about their breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program], or other things that they were doing, I was sent as a reporter to cover those events.  Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] came to town.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was frequently here, right, too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And others came through, who were active in what was becoming the Black Power movement at that point in time after about '64 [1964].  You know, things began to change, and younger people were challenging Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] nonviolence tactics.  And the Panthers were part of that whole phenomenon.  Not only that, my mother's [Virginia Craft Rose] church, the same church I spoke of, St. Augustine's [St. Augustine's Episcopal Church, Oakland, California], later allowed the Panthers to, to hold their, their breakfast programs at the church.  So, that was quite an interesting coming together of a relatively conservative black Episcopalian Church with the Black Panther Party.  So, that's an interesting story.  So, yes, I did cover, cover them, not extensively, but to some extent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was the US Organization [The Organization Us] involved in this area in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) US, I think was more in Southern California.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I knew they were in Los Angeles [California] but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, let's see, I worked at the Gazette until 1968, from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 443830
Speaker 1: By the time the destruction of the Panther Party [Black Panther Party] had begun by government agents, COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] and others, I had left the Gazette [Berkeley Daily Gazette], and gone into a two-year span of teaching journalism at a local junior college.  And that's when I found out, I'm not a real good teacher (laughter).  I was, I was better at doing the journalism than trying to teach the journalism (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, you taught at--which school did you teach at?
Speaker 1: It was called Laney [Laney College, Oakland, California], L-A-N-E-Y.
Speaker 2: I've been there for a conference (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, you have, okay--
Speaker 2: Laney College, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Junior college, right.
Speaker 1: That and Merritt College were the two junior colleges in Oakland [California] at the time.  So, I taught journalism.  And I, I didn't feel that I was real successful, but it was a learning experience (laughter).  I did create a, a class called History of Black Journalism.  Nothing was available like that, so I pulled together as much information as I could find and taught History of Black Journalism.
Speaker 2: Now, the writers in this area were, you know, there are a lot of memorable literary figures in this area in those days.  Carlton Goodlett [Carlton Benjamin Goodlett]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --was a publisher of the San Francisco--
Speaker 1: Of the San Francisco Sun Reporter, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, Sun Reporter.
Speaker 1: And he was the person who enabled me to be a stringer for the Sun Reporter.  When I, when I talked about writing about Malcolm X, that story appeared in the Sun Reporter saying that Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] had refused entry to Malcolm X.  So, Carlton Goodlett was definitely a leader.  I would say he was the most prominent black journalist in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], yeah.
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968], I think, the Bay Area is involved in the development of the first African American studies department in the country, right--at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And friends of ours were also involved in fighting to have an ethnic studies department developed at UC Berkeley, including black studies within that parameter, so there was a lot of activity going on.
Speaker 2: So, who were some of the--did, did, were you familiar with some of the people in the--[HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare and Julie [HistoryMaker Julia Reed Hare] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, Julie, Nathan Hale [sic.].  In fact, I interviewed him once for a magazine that I was the writer for, and his wife.
Speaker 2: Julie Hare, yeah--
Speaker 1: Julie--
Speaker 2: --Robert Chrisman, Robert Allen [Robert L. Allen], stated--
Speaker 1: Yes, well, you know those people.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Didn't know that person--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but Robert Allen and Chrisman were developing a journal, and I think they still publish it.  It's not a moneymaker, so you don't see it around.
Speaker 2: Yeah, The Black Scholar.
Speaker 1: Yes, Black Scholar.
Speaker 2: It was well-known all over the country.
Speaker 1: Yes, and who else?  And I wasn't very literary, you know, as throughout my life, I haven't been particularly literary.  I've been much more the typical reporter, you know, send me out some place, and I'll cover the story, and come back and write it up.  And so, I was not a literary person.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't write literature so, but, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  But Alice Walker, did she do any journalism at all?  Did you know?
Speaker 1: I don't think so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I think she went directly into novel writing, and so on.  [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, there were poets out here who, some of them worked at UC Berkeley from time to time.  So yes, there was a lot of literary stuff going on.  I just wasn't particularly a part of that.
Story_ID: 443831
Speaker 1: In 1968, now you were teach- you taught school in '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --through '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], through '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Through '70 [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: And then I quit because I was expecting my second child [Allegra Perry Aldridge], and took a little break, and for about nine months or so, or maybe--well, nine, yeah, by the time the child was born.  Then I took--stayed out of work for about another nine months, nine or ten months, and then went back to work for the Berkeley Post [sic. Oakland Post], which was, had become a relatively new African American black newspaper that published not daily, but about two or three times a week.  And the publisher was another giant in the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California], a man named Tom Berkley [Thomas L. Berkley].  And his name was spelled with-, without the extra e--B-E-R-K-L-E-Y, so it's a little different from the City of Berkeley [California].  But, again, he was an attorney who had a practice, but he also started a newspaper.  And so, I went to work for him to kind of get back into the--yeah.
Story_ID: 444070
Speaker 1: So, we had you at the Berkeley Post [sic. Oakland Post], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Berkeley Post, and--
Speaker 1: For Tom Berkley [Thomas L. Berkley] himself, right?
Speaker 2: Tom Berkley himself, not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how did he--he react to being Mr. Berkley in Berkeley [California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was interesting.  His family was from San Bernardino [California], so no, no connection with the City of Berkeley.  It was a wonderful job.  I got to cover all kind of black news, after having been at the Gazette [Berkeley Daily Gazette], and having covered regular community news.  This was a lot of fun for me, and I think the outstand-, one of the outstanding memories I have of that stint was--do you remember the shooting of George Jackson in San Quentin Prison [San Quentin State Prison, San Quentin, California]?  Well, as you know, George Jackson was an inmate there, one of the Soledad brothers, and he had written a book.  And he was close with [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, and there was that entire thing going on.  And he was said to have attempted to escape, but he was shot by the guards, and killed.  So, at that time, Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] was in [U.S.] Congress.  And Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], who later became mayor of San Francisco [California], was in the State Assembly [California State Assembly].  So, the two of them came to San Quentin to do an inquiry.  And so, reporters, of course, went to San Quentin, which, from Berkeley and Oakland [California], is across the bay again.  You go across San Francisco Bay to the county north of San Francisco, which is across the Golden Gate Bridge.  And then, there's San Quentin, the notorious prison.  So, I was one of the reporters who went to cover the visit of Ron Dellums and Willie Brown to San Quentin Prison.  And they went late at night, so we all went late at night, something like 8:00 or 9:00 at night.  For some reason, that was when the prison was going to let them in.  So, we were all gathered there at the prison gates.  And it's like being next to some sort of a horrible medieval castle.  It's a very medieval-looking place with these walls and gates, big wooden gates.  And inside, you get a glimpse of the prison buildings, and the search lights, and the--it's just a place you don't want to ever be.  And so, we all gathered, and the door, the gates opened, and Ron Dellums and Willie Brown were ushered inside.  And it was almost like saying, oops, we'll never see them again, you know, it had that kind of a feel.  So, they were in there for a while.  And when they came out, then they told us what they had learned, which was basically what we already knew, which was that the prison was saying that George Jackson had tried to escape, and that he had a gun under his, under a wig that he had on his head.  And so, it was a little hard to believe.  And so, their--the visit by Dellums and Willie Brown led to a study and an inquest.  And as I recall, the results were nebulous.  It was never proven that George Jackson had tried to escape.  On the other hand, the prison was never held responsible for his death.  So, I was able to write about that and, and cover the atmosphere that night, and it was dark and, you know, almost like a dark and stormy night.  And these two men going inside this enormous gate, and we hoped they would come back out (laughter).  It's rather dramatic, and I was glad to have been there to, to witness that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, that was probably the most dramatic thing that I covered during that year and a half.
Story_ID: 444071
Speaker 1: In 1972, you were a Congressional Fellow.  How did that happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my marriage [to Samuel C. Perry] had ended.  I had two young daughters [Stephanie Perry and Allegra Perry Aldridge].  And I saw in the paper a notice about applying for a Congressional Fellowship sponsored by the American Political Science Association in Washington, D.C.  And I was kind of at a low ebb, and I thought, you know what, I'm going to apply for this.  What the heck?  If I don't get it, it's okay, but at least I'll feel a little better if I apply.  So, I did, and lo and behold, I got one of the fellowships.  So, that meant leaving California for nine months with my two very young daughters, and going to Washington, D.C.  But I always think of it as a magic carpet because I got on this magic carpet, and flew away to Washington, D.C., which turned out to be the beginning of a new life for me--and my daughters.  And, once I was there, I fulfilled the requirements of the fellowship, which included working for Alan Cranston, the senator from California at that time, but also working for Shirley Chisholm, of course, the representative from Brooklyn [New York], who had just run for president that same year--1972.  So, I had a chance to work in her office, and meet her staff people, and write some speeches for her, and it was a very, a very wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she--her presidential run was in what, 19--
Speaker 2: Was, was it '72 [1972]?  I think it or--
Speaker 1: I think it was a little later but that, yeah, Shirley Chisholm was--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Seventy [1970]--let's see, when would the presidential election have been?
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972] and--
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970]?
Speaker 1: --well, let's see.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], '76 [1976], yeah, '80 [1980] (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], it would've been '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]?
Speaker 1: And, yeah, yeah, 'cause Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was elected in '68 [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so she had just, she had just finished running for, for president.  I mean, she didn't make it, but it was an exciting time to, to, to meet her, and get to work in her office.  So, I was glad to be in Washington.  It was, it was a new life for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you kind of needed to get away for a while--I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 444072
Speaker 1: What else did you do in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, then after the fellowship [American Political Science Association Congressional Fellowship] is when I was hired by the Washington Star newspaper, and worked there for about five years and--
Speaker 1: Now, when did you--were you an assignment reporter?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  I was a metro reporter, and then a features writer, and had a couple of highlights there (laughter).  One was a national scoop of a story in which the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], which was looking for (laughter) the girl who had gone with the Symbionese Liberation Army--
Speaker 1: Oh, Patty Hearst.
Speaker 2: --Patty Hearst, thank you (laughter).  She had escaped into the underworld, and the FBI was looking for her.  When the FBI got a tip that Patty Hearst was in Alexandria, Virginia right across the Potomac [Potomac River] from Washington, D.C.--well, it turned out, it was not Patty Hearst.  It was just an innocent young woman who looked like Patty Hearst.  And the FBI broke the door down, and arrested this, you know, moved in on this woman, only to find out that it was not Patty Hearst.  So someone called me.  I was covering Alexandria--called the Star with that tip.  And I went out and covered the story, and beat The Washington Post, which was always our dream to be beat The Post, the bigger, more famous newspaper.  So, I beat The Post that day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they didn't know what was going on (laughter)?
Speaker 2: They didn't know about it until the next day when they saw it in the Star (laughter).  And my Post colleague said, "Well, how did you get that story?"  I said, "I don't know," you know, I never told them how I got it (laughter).  But I would say, of the five years I spent at the Star, the other highlight was covering Alex Haley's activities.  And it, this was the period, this was the 'Roots' era from--let's see, '74 [1974] to '78 [1978], '73 [1973] to '78 [1978].  And I think 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley], the book, was published in what--'70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: I think '75 [1975] or '6 [1976], I think, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) five [1975], and the series, the TV series was--
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: --maybe '77 [1977]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this is the anniversary of the TV series and their--it's the thirtieth, well, no.
Speaker 2: Yes, the thirtieth anniversary.
Speaker 1: The thirtieth anniversary, and it's being rebroadcast on TV One right now on cable, right.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, we looked at last week, as a matter--earlier this week.  So, I was able to go to Africa, to the Gambia, with Alex Haley and his, his two brothers [Julius Haley and HistoryMaker George Haley]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when they went to, back to visit the, the village of Jufureh [Gambia].  There were several journalists on that trip from--one from Ebony, one from People magazine.  But once again, the Washington Star scooped The Washington Post (laughter).  And, and I was there for five days.  And Don [Donald T. Butler], now my husband, went with me because I had met him when I went to Washington.  So, he came along on the trip, and took photos, and we have a wonderful scrapbook of, of those photos.  So, that was a definite highlight.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, was he the official photographer on the trip?
Speaker 2: He was my quote official unquote photographer.  There were other photographers there, but he went and paid his own way, so that he could go with me.  So, it--we were, we remember that with great fondness.
Story_ID: 444073
Speaker 1: How was that trip?  Now, do you--how was he, was Alex Haley received at Jufureh [Gambia]--I mean, from, now you were there and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was received with open arms.  The, the people danced.  The women danced for him.  And we, we came down the river from the capital of the Gambia, which is Banjul or Banju.  We went about twenty miles up the Gambia River to the little village of Jufureh, and they knew we were coming.  They knew he was coming with his two brothers.  So, when we got there, they were ready.  They had dancing.  The whole village gathered around, and they kissed and hugged him, and treated him with great joy.  Even though, at that point in time, some of the scholars were doubting some of Haley's work, and saying that he couldn't have established all these facts the way he said he did.  So, there was an undercurrent of controversy about the book ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley].  And he dealt with that by saying, "As I explained, this is a book of faction," he said.  "I know that I don't know exactly what happened."  He said, "I had to create a story and a dialogue and, and so on, and so forth," he said, "but I know the facts that I'm basing it on--the ship when it landed," what his parents, what his grandparents had told him.  And he said, "Oral history is as good as written history, especially among Africans and African Americans."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he defended himself quite nicely.
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Alex Haley?  I mean, did you, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved him (laughter).  However, he was the kind of person who made you feel like you were his best friend.  So, we always joked and said, Alex Haley has a million best friends because everyone he met him, immediately was in love with the guy.  He was so sweet and self-effacing, and he would talk to you.  He'd get in trouble because he would tell one person they could come with him and, in fact, he told one of the journalists that she could come on the trip with him.  And she says, "Well, I want an exclusive."  And he said, "Oh, sure, honey, sure."  And then, when we found out about the trip, we found out through my husband, Don [Donald T. Butler], who knew Alex Haley's brother, Julius [Julius Haley], so that's how we found out that Haley, the Haleys were going to Africa.  So, I called Alex because I'd already written several stories about him, and I said, "Alex, I hear you're going to the Gambia."  He said, "Oh, yeah, honey (laughter)."  I said, "Can I go?"  He said, "Well, yes, sure, come on."  And then, that's the way he was.  So, even though he had given the other woman the impression she was going to have an exclusive, he couldn't say no to anybody.  You were his friend.  So, people just loved him, and it, it didn't matter--man, woman, who you were, you know, whether you were an architect, or an engineer, or a journalist, he, he would treat you the same.
Story_ID: 444074
Speaker 1: Now, you were in, at The Post [The Washington Post] for--I mean, at the, not The Post, I hate to say that (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Star [Washington Star], the Star.
Speaker 1: The Star for five years, you said?
Speaker 2: About five years, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what happened at the end of five years?
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, Don [Donald T. Butler] and I had married, and Don was then recruited to San Francisco [California].  He's a, he was a federal employee, and he was recruited by a fellow Howardite, Howard University [Washington, D.C.] alumni, alumnus, to work at the San Francisco Mint [San Francisco, California], and become production manager there.  So, we left the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area.  By that time, we were living in Columbia, Maryland, and returned to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  Well, for me it was a return.  For Don, it was the first time living out here.  So, we returned here, we came here in 1978, and have been here ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now '78 [1978], now you got, you got to San Francisco in '78 [1978].  This is the time period of the Jim Jones--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Jim Jones' situation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Peoples Temple [Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ].
Speaker 2: The Peoples Temple tragedy and, you know, even before that, the first thing that happened not long after we were here, within days of our arrival, was that Harvey Milk, the first openly gay San Francisco County supervisor, was murdered by a fellow supervisor.
Speaker 1: A guy named White right--
Speaker 2: Dan White--
Speaker 1: Dan White, right.
Speaker 2: --thank you, your memory is excellent.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and the Mayor Moscone--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I've forgotten his first name.
Speaker 1: Joseph Moscone [sic. George Moscone], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Dan White killed those two men in cold blood.  And Dianne Feinstein, who was on the Board of Supervisors, became the mayor.  And, of course, she's now the U.S. Senate, a U.S. senator from California.  But that happened within--I would say within the first two weeks after we got here, and it was horrible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was national news and a big deal and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  And then, Dan White went to prison for a while, and then he, I think, and then I think he came out, and then he killed himself.  He eventually committed suicide.  So that happened not long after we arrived.  And then, as you say, the, the Jonestown [Guyana] tragedy came along during that time.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, in your time in the Bay Area, did you ever meet Jim Jones?
Speaker 2: Not at all, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was actually headquartered in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He had a church in San Francisco, what he called a church in San Francisco.  And so, when you lived in what we call the East Bay area, which is Oakland-Berkeley [California], you don't always have business in San Francisco, so you don't always go to San Francisco.  So, no, I had no connection with him at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, but, well, okay, so there are no stories about Peoples Temple from that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No stories that I, I was involved in, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we followed it, of course, and it was very, very tragic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And lots and lots of Jim Jones' people, the people who had gone to Guyana with him were from Oakland.  Many, many of them were African American.  And so, Oakland suffered a great deal by the deaths of all of those people.  And to this day, once a year, there's a get-together at one of the cemeteries in Oakland where many of the victims are buried.  And their relatives and survivors go to that cemetery and have a service.
Story_ID: 444075
Speaker 1: Now, '78 [1978], '78 [1978], '79 [1979] also marks the return of Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] from captivity, right, from prison (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you may be right, you may be right.
Speaker 1: He comes back into circulation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --around, in the late '70s [1970s] and--
Speaker 2: He had been in prison, but by that time, the Black Panther Party had pretty much been decimated, both in Oakland [California] and Chicago [Illinois], and other areas.  So, he was a shadow of his former self.  Bobby Seale was no longer in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  He'd gone to somewhere, like Connecticut or some place.  So, the Panthers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eldridge Cleaver was gone, too, pretty much.
Speaker 2: --yeah, so the, the Panther Party had pretty much, you know, had been decimated by that time.  And Huey eventually was shot on the street by--in, in a drug deal that went bad.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any thoughts about, you know, people say that he was, had become basically a street drug dealer, or a thug, and wasn't really a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he, he apparently had been physically abusive to some of his companions, some of the people around him.  I think there was a tailor who he was said to have beaten up.  And apparently he was, at that point, into cocaine.  So, he was a, as I say, just kind of a shadow of his former self.  The organization was gone.  He was--had been in prison, so he, he, he was still writ-, I think he was writing.  And he was--there were, there were scholars who were in touch with him, and he was working towards writing about his life, and maybe even had gone back to school--those kinds of things.  But then, as I say, he was shot on a street in West Oakland [Oakland, California] and, and killed.  And at that time, I was an editorial writer at the Oakland Tribune, by the time I had gotten to the Tribune.  And I remember writing an editorial saying that this was, again, a tragic end to his life.
Story_ID: 444076
Speaker 1: --What else what happened when you came back?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I worked very briefly for the Oakland School District [Oakland Unified School District], but then (laughter), a big thing happened for Oakland [California].  And that is that a renowned black journalist by the name of Ron, uh, Robert C. Maynard, also known as Bob Maynard, came to Oakland from Washington, D.C., where he had been at The Washington Post for many years.  And he was appointed editor of the Oakland Tribune, becoming the first black person to edit a major daily newspaper in the country.  Bob Maynard was, and is still, revered by journalists of all colors, and particularly by black journalists.  He was one of the founders of the National Association of Black Journalists, also known as NABJ.  His wife, Nancy Hicks Maynard, also had a distinguished career as a reporter with The New York Times.  And the two of them were partners in developing black journalists, so that newspapers could no longer say, well, we'd hire them, but we can't find them, which was always the newspapers' excuse.  So, the Maynards ran the Oakland Tribune.  He was the editor, and she was, you know, backing him up.  And I had met them when I worked at the Washington Star, so I called up and said, "If you need some help, let me know."  And they said, "Sure, come on down, let's see what we can do."  And so, I was hired there as the features editor (laughter).  And what Maynard did, above and beyond me, was that he hired many minority group journalists, who the white editors had always said they couldn't find.  He found them.  He knew where they were.
Speaker 1: He's a miracle worker, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: And, and that's what they thought, but he knew.  He hired Bill Wong, William Wong, who was a brilliant Chinese American journalist, who had worked for The Wall, The Wall Street Journal.  He hired a number of minority journalists, and I'd have to get you their names if, if I could reel them all off.  He hired nine or ten eminent, eminent journalists.  And so, we revered him for hiring us.  And he ran the Oakland Tribune first as editor, and then as publisher, until he became ill with prostate cancer.  And he finally had to sell the Tribune in about 1992, and shortly thereafter, he died.  And his funeral was held in Oakland, and amongst those attending was Carl Bernstein of Woodward [Bob Woodward] and Bernstein, and other nationally known journalists came out to, to his funeral.  So, that was about the last major change in my (laughter), in this long recital.  But I was at the Tribune for almost fifteen years, and first as features editor, then as an editorial writer, and, finally, as editorial page editor where, as we were saying earlier, I think I was the first African American woman to head an editorial page at a major daily newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it is through 1994?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 2: I finally left the Tribune in 1994, and spent the next ten years freelancing (pause)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and wrote a couple of books so.
Story_ID: 444077
Speaker 1: Do you remember the--it's not too far from here, at the San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News], there's a big discussion about the Iran Contra drug connection and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a big story around here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember it.  I was not--no longer in the newspaper biz, as we like to say, but, yes, I do remember that.  And the fact that when the reporter uncovered that story, and the San Jose Mercury News published it, strangely, some of the other newspapers, like The New York Times and The Washington Post turned on them, and said it was not good journalism.  And I never quite understood why they did that.  I thought it sounded pretty, pretty accurate, you know, pretty well-researched to me, and knowing what our government can be up to, when they want to, I thought it was quite possible that he was accurate about what he was writing.
Speaker 1: Did you know the writer [Gary Webb]?  I can't think of his name now but--
Speaker 2: I did not, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he's passed away since.
Speaker 2: He--some think he committed suicide.  To be repudiated by your fellow journalists must have really been painful for him.  And now, it seems as though some of those facts have been corroborated.
Story_ID: 438336
Speaker 1: We had just finished talking about, oh yeah, San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --that story, that the tragic story there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In the early '90s [1990s], one of the figures in Oakland [California] was, you know, this is another story about somebody really getting big, and all of a sudden, they, you know, they become big, and they could go down (unclear)--MC Hammer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: At one time, he was the most popular entertainer in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what, and he comes from Oakland, that neighborhood is in--what, tell us your--
Speaker 2: That's right.  Well, he came from the Oakland neighborhoods, and a bright young man, very bright, and actually came from a fairly supportive family.  He had uncles who were in business, so he wasn't exactly your, your kid, you know, straight out of the street.  And he developed that dance style that no one else had at the time.  And he was a writer, he wrote songs, wrote his music, and so on.  So, he did get to be very, very big, and he was clean.  It was before the days of the rap stars who denigrate women and use bad language.  So MC Hammer was, was clean enough that he could perform in front of all audiences, children included.  But what happened--I think a couple of things happened, and I'm not an expert 'cause didn't follow music that closely, but I think at least two things happened to cause his downfall.  One was that rap styles changed.  They evolve and changed rapidly.  And he was still in the sort of happy music phrase, or phase, whereas rap was suddenly getting to be more like what we know of it today.  And so, I think, he fell out of fashion.  The other thing is, I think that he took a lot of his money, his, his earnings, and went into horseback, horse racing.  And I think one of his uncles had a stable of racehorses, and I think he got involved in that and, of course, they lost money.  And not only that, MC Hammer had a huge mansion, south of Oakland, in a town called Fremont [California], and had this huge place, and it cost him millions of dollars.  So, when his money began to run short, he, he couldn't keep it up and, you know, he lost that place.
Speaker 1: He seemed to have, like just hundreds of people around him all the time.  I mean, were they all being paid?
Speaker 2: I think he had an entourage, like most stars do, and they probably got to, got to him.  So, I think it was a case of where he didn't know how to manage his career.  I mean he, he got big so fast and so suddenly that he--neither he nor the people around him, knew how to sustain that, you know.  One of the other things that happened with him, before he got to be famous, was that he was a bat boy for the Oakland A's [Oakland Athletics] (laughter), and they gave him the nickname, Hammer, because they said he looked a little bit like [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron in the face.  And so, they called him Hammer, so his nickname was Hammer and when--
Speaker 1: And as in Hammering Hank Aaron.
Speaker 2: Yeah, after Hammering Hank, and when rap first started, they called themselves MC for master of ceremonies.  So, he became MC Hammer.  So, it was kind of a, you know, a burst into the big time, and then a collapse out of the big time.  And I don't know--have you read anything him lately?  It seems like he's maybe trying to develop a new act or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know.  I have no idea now, but he got so big and all of a sudden, he, that he was so popular--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: --wildly popular, and all of a sudden, just--
Speaker 2: And he could really dance.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He could--the dance that he did do, he did well (laughter) but--
Speaker 1: A friend of mine's mother threw her knee out trying to do MC Hammer, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.
Speaker 1: She was sixty something years old.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: She can do it for a minute.  She was really doing it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 438337
Speaker 1: As a freelancer--well, the paper, the Oakland--
Speaker 2: Tribune [Oakland Tribune]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, changed hands at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it changed hands in '93 [1993], I think, or '92 [1992].  And I hung in there 'til '94 [1994], April of '94 [1994].  And my husband [Donald T. Butler] said, well, I, I wasn't happy because of the new ownership.  We didn't see eye-to-eye on editorial policy.  And my husband said, "Well, you can quit."  The kids are grown, you know, we had raised our children--my two daughters [Stephanie Perry and Allegra Perry Aldridge], plus his son [Christian Butler], we had raised three children.  He said, "You don't have to stay."  And I had never considered quitting a job before I'd had all these jobs, and the only reason I'd ever quit a job was to go to another job.  So, it took me a while to, to accept that idea, that I could, could quit, and so, I did.  And, and then started freelancing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a, a lot of fun, too.
Speaker 1: So, what do you like to write about as a freelancer?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm a better reporter of what other people do.  I'm not very good at writing about myself.  I've learned that over the years.  Lots of people can write stories about their own experiences.  I'm not so good at that.  So, I like to write about what other people are doing.  For example, we were telling you about the three sisters that we talked about earlier, who live in this area, and who are each in a non-traditional field.  It's, that's great, I can go out and write all about them, and what they're doing and, and so on because it doesn't involve me, I guess, revealing anything about myself.  So, I like to write about other people.  I'd put it that way.  I'm not a sports writer.  I'm a human interest writer--I suppose would be the best way to put it.
Speaker 1: And I read a piece about Kwanzaa that you wrote.  I think that they send me before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, yeah, you found that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, great, yeah, that's the most recent thing I, I have done.  Lately, in the last year or two, I haven't done a lot of reporting because my husband and I are involved with our five grandchildren (laughter).  So, we're spending a lot of time helping to care for them and also enjoying their company.  So, that's kind of taking precedence over my writing right now, but I figure at some point, I may be able to get back to it, once the grandkids are no longer wanting to be around grandma and grandpa.
Story_ID: 438338
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite story that you've written?
Speaker 2: Ooh.  There have been a lot of, a lot of favorites.  I would say, the series that I wrote--well, I would say all the stories I wrote about Alex Haley are among my favorites.  I covered him in a number of instances.  Yes, I wrote a, I helped to write a series, while at the Washington Star, about how far integration had moved in Washington, D.C. ten years after the death of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  The question was where are we now?  Are we any further along than we were when Dr. King was killed?  Are we any closer to reaching his goals?  And so, several people at the Star contributed to that series, and I did one of the stories in that series.  There have been lots of stories.  It'd be hard to, to pick a favorite, but the scoop (laughter) on Patty Hearst was one of my favorites because nobody had that one in the world, except me and my newspaper.  Those are some of the top ones, I would, I would say, but I enjoyed all the stories I did.  I did a number of interviews with up and coming black women.  And there are lots of black women doing lots of interesting things, and it was always a joy to write about those women.
Speaker 1: Now, it brings me back to the three sisters.  Could you just briefly kind of describe what they--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Most recently, there was a magazine published here in Contra Costa County [California].  That's the county we're in now, that went out of business quickly.  But while it was publishing, I did a story about the three Moore sisters [ph.].  They're all married, so they have married names, but their maiden family name is Moore, and how each of them went into a non-traditional field.  The older, the elder sister became a firefighter at a time when there were not very many women firefighters.  The middle sister became a dentist when there are not very many female dentists.  And the youngest sister became an airline pilot, when today, there are very few female airline pilots.  And I think the statistics that I quoted in the story were that less than 2 percent of firefighters are women in the United States.  About 15 percent of dentists are women, so that's pretty good.  And about 5 percent of airline pilots are women.  And she flies for United [United Airlines], flies to Europe and Asia, Australia.  I mean, she flies one of those big babies, you know, she's a co-pilot.  And so, this was a very interesting story about how each of them happened to go into those fields.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I imagine that in each category, the percentage of black women is even as a way--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --much, much lower than even the--
Speaker 2: Interestingly, in this day and age, thankfully, they said that being African American was not a problem for them.  Their father was, was black, and their mother is white and so, they kind of grew up in both worlds.  And this is the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] (laughter), and so, they, they didn't meet with overt discrimination.  They more often met with anti-female bias being told oh, you're a woman.  You can't fly an airplane, or you're a women, you can't be a firefighter.  And they said, oh, yeah, watch me.
Story_ID: 438339
Speaker 1: Have you considered writing a book?
Speaker 2: I have written some books again, not about myself or my family, but about other figures, primarily a biography of a parks and open space pioneer, who started in Oakland [California], and went on to become National Parks Service [National Park Service] director.  I was asked to write his biography ['Prophet of the Parks: The Story of William Penn Mott, Jr.,' Mary Ellen Butler].
Speaker 1: And who is this?  Was this uh--
Speaker 2: His name was William Penn, P-E-N-N, Mott, M-O-T-T, Jr. [William Penn Mott, Jr.].  And he was active for many years, ending up as National Parks Service director under Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  So, he was a Republican (laughter), but, but he was, more than that a, a conservationist and so, he was a good guy, good man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Another--is there another one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wrote two--one book about the City of Oakland, the history of Oakland.  I wrote that for the Chamber of Commerce [Oakland Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce].
Speaker 1: What's the title of it?
Speaker 2: 'Oakland Welcomes the World' [Mary Ellen Butler].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, anything else?  I mean, we--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've got them stacked up over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They're stacked away (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can show you--
Speaker 1: There's some, quite a few, so they're not, you're not working on a book right now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, unfortunately, I'd love to be, but no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is--
Story_ID: 438340
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to write about that you haven't written about yet?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What I would like to write about, I don't think I, I, I can do.  I don't know.  I've thought about it for years, but I haven't figured out a way to do it.  And that is to write the story of the Trotter Craft connection to, to bring the two families together.  It seems like a natural, but I, I, I'm, it, I'm unable to conceive of doing it.  First of all, the research would need to be extensive, to pull together what actually happened, and when it happened, even though much of it is on the record.  All of the Craft material is on the record.  The Trotter material is on the record.  But the point of the book, the only point in writing this book would be to tell how those two families came together in the persons of my grandfather and grandmother who happened to get married.  Now, my question then becomes, what is the point to the reader?  And that's where I get stymied because I think, oh, it would be interesting to the family, but it seems to me it would have to have a larger meaning for it to be of interest to anybody else.
Speaker 1: Well it probably has some interest as an article, as a, you know, to most people.  I don't know if you, you necessarily need a book with treatment of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, um-hm, that's a thought.
Speaker 1: --but it's of interest to me just as a, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I think other historians would find it interesting.
Speaker 2: Are there places where a non-historian article could be published?  I mean, journals or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, The Journal of Negro History [The Journal of African American History] is still being published.  I think that's one place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh--
Speaker 1: I would try it there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a thought.  And the other thing that has stopped me over the years is my mother's [Virginia Craft Rose] memories of how her parents happened to meet and marry is, is hazy.  I mean, she, they, we don't know exactly.  Now, if I could find a document that said that at a Harvard tea Henry Craft [Henry Kempton Craft] met Bessie Trotter [Elizabeth "Bessie" Trotter Craft] on June 15, '08 [1908], you know, 1912 or something, if I could find a way of documenting that, I guess is what I'm trying to say.
Story_ID: 438341
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, let me think about that for just a second.  My hopes and concerns for the African American community are, first, I think we have to recognize that there isn't just one community, that now that segregation has mostly been defeated, African Americans are now free, or freer, to go outward from what was once a community that was rimmed around by segregation.  That's both good and bad because when all African, most African Americans live together, we had the kind of neighborhoods that we were talking about earlier.  When that broke up and African Americans became more free to move out, and go other places, we lost a lot of that community.  Now, we don't have that as much.  African Americans are everywhere--cities, suburbs, all states, all around the world, so what can we do to maintain our sense of togetherness, our sense of who we are.  We, we, we can communicate.  I can talk to you about playing whist, and you know what I'm talking about.  I hope that we can retain that sense of identity of who we are as, as a group, though we don't live as necessarily as a group any more, as much as we used to.  Now, for young people, we are looking at a change in the meaning of, of race.  In my family alone, and my husband's [Donald T. Butler] family, we have interracial couples amongst the young people, black people in our family marrying white spouses.  Well, we, we're not against that.  We fought for integration.  Now, we have integration, so the mere fact that young people can marry whom they want, and they're not worried about who's black and who's white, is a wonderful thing.  So, my, my hopes and dreams would include that opportunity for young people to go where they can go, do what they can do, marry whom they want, but it means we have to change our concept of who we are, if you know what I'm saying.  I'm looking at our grandchildren who are white and black.  And they ask us, they say to me, "Grandma, are you white?"  And I explain to them, "No, I'm black (laughter)."  And I have, and, and I have to tell them why I'm black 'cause they can't see it readily, and I have to explain what, what the concept is.  Being black is, is a state of mind as much as it is a physical reality.  So, I'm seeing this change going right in my own family.  So, they're struggling with their identity.  They want to be black, even though they, they don't appear to have black ancestry.  I don't know.  That's kind of a roundabout way of saying that, that's what I'm observing now.  And so, it's, it's different.  What are we going to become?  Do we need to remain black and, if so, why?  Because we want to want to be black.  We want to hang on to that heritage, that fabulous history that we have.  So, I, I guess I don't really have a good answer for, for your question.
Speaker 1: Well, those are hopes and concerns.  I--
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.  Now, in a broader context, I've very concerned about black boys as are we all, and the black men in our society.  We all know what, what is going on with some of the struggles and problems that black men and black boys are having.  And, again, I, I look at my own family, and I, I, there are, there are people in my family, young people who are, who I'm very concerned about, who, who happen to be black males.  So, my hope and concern is that I can help--my husband and I can help them to grow up, and become productive members of society, and not fall over the cliff, fall by the wayside.  So, looking at those individuals, and within our own family and extrapolating out to the whole group, that's, I'm hoping, that our black boys and men can survive, and go on to become productive so.
Story_ID: 438342
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Ohh, (laughter), hm.  No, I don't think so.  I didn't always make the best decisions, but I, I also feel like coming from a fairly sheltered environment as, as I describe, I probably learned life lessons by making mistakes as we all do.  And so, I probably wouldn't want that to be different.  I'll, I'll stand by the mistakes I've made.  I don't think I've made a lot of mistakes, but one or two, and then feel like I learned from them how to navigate life a little better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Likewise, what would, what, today, would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What I consider to be what?
Speaker 1: Your legacy today?
Speaker 2: Ohh, okay.  Well, now, legacy to--let's talk about family first, and then society, or let's take it the other way around.  Professionally, it's easier for me to say that I hope my legacy would be that African American women can be good reporters, good editors.  They can navigate through the field of journalism and, and they are.  And I feel like I was one of the first to break that, break down those doors with some help from the folks I mentioned in Berkeley [California] who got me into the newspaper business.  And so, I would hope my legacy would be good reporting, accurate reporting, fair reporting, and good editing, and enjoying the field if you're in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Family-wise, hopefully--well, again, it's hard for me to talk about myself.  I think my daughters [Stephanie Perry and Allegra Perry Aldridge] and my stepson [Christian Butler] feel that I have been a good parent to them.  And I always include my husband [Donald T. Butler] because he's been, he and I have been through this together.
Story_ID: 438343
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your children and your family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  My--I'll start with my stepson who is, whose name is Christian Butler.  He lives in Illinois.  And he married a woman who has three grandsons that she is raising.  So, Christian has become the father figure--in fact, the father to those three boys because he adopted them.  Now, that to me, is really saying a lot about a person's willingness to have compassion for, for someone else.  My older daughter, Stephanie [Stephanie Perry], is now forty, and she's raising two children without a father in the household, so that's difficult.  And I think she's beginning--she and I didn't always see eye to eye, as often happens with one child or another.  But she's beginning to now sort of give back to me some of what I tried to teach her.  A little reluctantly (laughter), she will say, "Well, now I see what you were talking about," you know, or, "Now I find myself telling my kids the same thing you used to tell me."  So, you know, you get that feedback eventually--hopefully.  And our younger daughter [Allegra Perry Aldridge] is doing quite well as a teacher.  And she and her husband are raising three children.  And she's probably a little more like me, so it's easier for me to see and understand and appreciate what she's doing, just as I'm probably more like my mother [Virginia Craft Rose], as we were saying earlier.  So, it's, it's gratifying that, there all of them are mostly productive.  They're taking care of themselves, and we're eternally thankful that they haven't had major problems as some, you know, some parents have to go through real problems.  And we have been fortunate to, that our kids have grown up, and are pretty, pretty self-sustaining so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked that you--we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Hm, I think I've talked a long time (laughter).  I don't want to put you to sleep (laughter).  No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 438344
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is pretty simple.  It's similar to legacy, but phrased a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a happy person pretty much.  I'm usually in a very good mood (laughter).  I don't know if that's genetics or what.  People think I'm too jolly most of the time.  I'd like to be remembered again as a good journalist.  It's, my career has meant a lot to me, and as a good wife and mother, and sibling to my two siblings [Richard Rose and Virginia Rose Niles], and daughter to my mother [Virginia Craft Rose] who is the one surviving parent.  So, that, that would be enough for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much for sharing your time with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're welcome, you're welcome.
Story_ID: 443840
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in October of 1972, the day before I left Berkeley, California to go to Washington, to go and live in Washington, D.C. for nine months.  In the photo are my two daughters.  On the, on one side is Stephanie [Stephanie Perry] who was six years old at that time.  On the other side is Allegra [Allegra Perry Aldridge] who was two years old at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in about 2003 or '04 [2004].  And it's of myself with one of my granddaughters, Jacqueline Perry-Haig, and it was taken for the church directory.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: My husband, Donald T. Butler and myself, were married on March 11, 1978 in Columbia, Maryland.  And it was a chilly day, but we were very happy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm, I can see that.  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: This picture shows the minister of the Methodist Church in Columbia, Maryland where my husband, Donald, and I were married.  And with us are our children, Christian [Christian Butler], Stephanie, and Allegra.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This picture is of my father, Joshua R. Rose [Joshua Rose], who was the first black city council member in the City of Oakland [California].  He was appointed in 1964, and then was re-, was elected, and re-elected for three more terms.  And he's standing at the entrance to the City Council Chambers in the Oakland City Hall.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This photo shows me as the editorial page editor of the Oakland Tribune in the early '90s [1990s] or late '80s [1980s].  It might have been about 1989.  With me is Karen Hotta [ph.] who was the copy editor in the editorial writing department.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This photo shows my mother, Virginia Craft Rose, and myself as a toddler.  It was taken in September of 1941, so I was a little less than a year and a half old.  Father, Joshua Rose, is shown here at age thirty-five in 1942.  He was director of a YMCA [Northwest Branch YMCA; M. Robinson Baker YMCA] in Oakland, California during that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What was the name of that?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: On this day, my family had just come from a birthday party in the park in Oakland.  And so, we were all dressed in our play clothes.  And I didn't enjoy having my picture taken which I think is why I had kind of an aggressive stance in this photo (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Here are the three Rose siblings--Virginia Trotter Rose [Virginia Rose Niles] on the left, Mary Ellen Rose [HistoryMaker Mary Ellen Butler] in the middle, and Richard Craft Rose [Richard Rose] on the right.  This picture was taken in the mid-1940s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: At age thirteen, I tried to look tough (laughter).  And I think that's where this, that expression comes from.  And that was taken in 1953 when I was in junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now while we have it, let's get the one above it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This picture was taken, I think, in an automobile.  And probably I was riding to some errand or something with my mom.  And somebody snapped a photo.  That, ohh, fifty, fifty--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Does it say what year, Larry [Larry Crowe]?
Speaker 1: It, it would on the back.
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], I think.
Speaker 1: No, that's--
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]?
Speaker 1: Cotillion was a couple of years later.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Not '59 [1959] (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Probably '50 [1950].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, this was a cotillion?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a Links [The Links, Incorporated] cotillion.  Larry will recognize The Links 'cause they're a national ladies organization.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm going to say '59 [1959], 1959 Links cotillion, which was held at the Claremont Hotel [Claremont Club and Spa, Berkeley, California] in the Berkeley, Oakland hills.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And that's you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right there in the front, okay.  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Here are some friends of mine that worked on The Daily Californian newspaper with me at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] back in the '50s [1950s], in the late '50s [1950s].  From left to right are Bill Wong [William Wong], Dan Silver [Daniel B. Silver], Janie Semple.  Behind her is her husband, Jim--I'm sorry, Janie Semple Wood, and her husband Jim Wood [James Wood], and myself.  And Bill Wong's wife is on the far right, who did not work on The Daily Cal, but always comes with us when we get together.  Her name is Joyce Wong.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Sorry, 19-, 2006 in Berkeley, California.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This shot shows Herbert DeCosta [HistoryMaker Herbert DeCosta, Jr.], who is my mother's first cousin, and who lives in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This shot was taken in Charleston, South Carolina on the occasion of the Craft 1992 family reunion.  Show here from left to right are Bernice DeCosta Davis, Camille, Camille Espu [ph.], and Virginia Craft Rose.  All three are cousins.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And, and descendants of William [William Craft] and Ellen Craft [Ellen Smith Craft].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that is your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, Virginia Craft Rose is on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This cotillion took place in 1983.  And shown from left--this is, again, The Links cotillion in, that was held in San Francisco [California]--and from left to right are Monique Brotas [ph.], who is a family friend of ours.  And then, next to her is our daughter, Stephanie Perry, followed by myself and husband, Don, and our other daughter, Allegra Perry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Here we are on an island in the middle of the Gambia River on our way to Jufureh [Gambia] in 1977 with Alex Haley, who was going to Jufureh to visit the village, and accompanied by his two brothers.  Let's see--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Julius [Julius Haley] and George [HistoryMaker George Haley], right?
Speaker 1: Julius and George.  On the left are two of the Gambian people who were showing us around.  And then, I'm in front talking to Alex Haley, and there are two other fellow Gambians behind him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Describe this one for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which one are we looking at?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  On the left, we have Hans Massaquoi, who was managing editor of Ebony magazine at the time of this trip in 1977.  I believe next to him might be David Whopper who was the producer of the 'Roots' series, the, the fantastic series that played in 197-,
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Seven [1977] or seventy-
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It was '77 [1977]--
Speaker 1: Okay, '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --yeah.  This was the thirtieth anniversary.  It was '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And also, in front are--is a person, a Gambian person who was in the party that was going to Jufureh.  And myself, and Alex Haley talking, and I'm not sure who the person is on the right.  And then, behind that line of people are other Gambians who were with us that day, as well as Alex's longtime researcher who is in the cap.  He's got a cap on in the back.  And his first name, I believe, was George [George Sims], and I don't recall what his last name was.  But he accompanied Alex in all of his research endeavors, and did a lot of--Alex credited him, George, with a lot of the research that he did.
