Story_ID: 481873
Speaker 1: Our special HistoryMaker guest today is [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley, and we want to, of course, welcome you to The HistoryMakers event today.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Our first question is a very interesting question, something I learned from Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I believe it is the 18th of April 2007.
Speaker 1: Thank you, ma'am, thank you, thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're quite welcome.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your full name?
Speaker 2: It's Arlene Audrey Phoebe Beasley.
Speaker 1: And can you spell it, please?
Speaker 2: A-R-L-E-N-E, A-U-D-R-E-Y, nickname, Phoebe, P-H-O-E-B-E, last name, Beasley, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: That's a mouthful.
Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is that your married name, your maiden name, or what? Is that your professional name?
Speaker 2: That's my maiden name.
Speaker 1: So, professionally, what do you know--you're known as--
Speaker 2: And, actually, my, my professional name is Phoebe Beasley, but it started as a nickname. My sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] tried to say Sweetie and then Pheetie [ph.] when I was born, and, and it turned into Phoebe. So, it's my family name for me, Phoebe, that became my professional name.
Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting. What is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Six, three, forty-three [June 3, 1943].
Speaker 1: June, the (laughter), June 3, 1943, okay?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: And where were you born at?
Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any particular section of Cleveland, Ohio were you born in?
Speaker 2: It's the east side of Cleveland where I would think that 99 percent of the African Americans were born in Cleveland, but I can't remember the hospital where I was born--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or I never knew it.
Speaker 1: So, were, you were born in a hospital? You weren't born, say, at home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By a midwife, no. I was, I was born in a hospital.
Speaker 1: I understand, okay. Now you grew, now you, it was Cleveland you were born at, did you grow up in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did.
Speaker 1: What part, and then you grew up in, in what area of Cleveland specifically?
Speaker 2: I grew up in--well, I started in an area called, Scovill Avenue at 55th [Street] and Scovill Avenue, the projects. And when I was about five years old, we moved to the east side of Cleveland. I didn't know at the time, but we were one of the first African Americans to integrate this particular section of Cleveland. And went to Robert Fulton Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio], John Adams Senior High School [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], Charles Eliot Middle School [Charles W. Eliot Middle School, Cleveland, Ohio], junior high school--I'm getting ahead of the story (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Just a little bit--we'll come back to that in a little bit. But I would like to ask you an important question that I forgot about--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I need to say that--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and that is, did you sign a release form now?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, just want to make sure you did that. And also, where are we located at, at this time? Where are we doing this interview at?
Speaker 2: We are doing it at the M. Hanks Gallery that represents me, and they're located at 3008 Main Street in Santa Monica, California.
Speaker 1: Santa Monica, wonderful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Santa Monica, indeed, okay.
Story_ID: 481874
Speaker 1: One of the things that I understand they like to ask me--I mean, to ask you, is what we call People magazine questions. And this is going to add, just a couple of questions just to get you in, in the groove here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Polska kielbasa (laughter). I'm from Cleveland [Ohio]. We were raised on Polish saus- sausage. Polska kielbasa is my favorite food. My second favorite is probably lamb chops, and from there, steak, but--and chocolate cake.
Speaker 1: Chocolate cake.
Speaker 2: Chocolate cake.
Speaker 1: That Polish sausage, is that with or without gravy?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, you don't need anything on Polska kielbasa (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Why purple?
Speaker 2: Maybe it's that combination of red and blue that, that you can go more to the red, or more to the blue, but purple makes my heart sing.
Speaker 1: Okay. This is a good one. What is your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, the hotter, the better. So, in Los Angeles [California], that could be any year [sic. month], but generally, it's in, in June to, June to September--summer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) June to September, okay. What is your favorite vacation spot 'cause you travel a lot? I know you do.
Speaker 2: I do travel a lot but, you know, the word vacation--I, I mean, I was trying to figure out what that was, but I would say, I like Hawaii. Oh, I like being at home, and not going any place.
Speaker 1: So, you can have a vacation home without going to Hawaii?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And in Hawaii, what island is your favorite island?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like Oahu [Hawaii].
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: I like a little bit of the excitement. And so, you know, it doesn't have to be all that quiet. I like to know that there's this, some activity if you want it, so I like Oahu.
Speaker 1: Well, couldn't bend your arm and go for Maui [Hawaii] by any chance, could we?
Speaker 2: It's okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's okay, it's okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying that you have that really, it really gets you?
Speaker 2: I would say that, that the future is not some place that we're going to. It's not a destination. It's some place that we're dreaming, and that we're making, and that activity changes both the maker and the destination.
Speaker 1: Is that a quote from someone or is that something you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe it, it, and, and, and I'm sure somebody will correct me if I'm wrong. I think I first read it when Stephen Covey [sic. John H. Schaar], perhaps in his book. And I think about it just about every day.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's nice--every day?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 481875
Speaker 1: Now, there's some questions we'd like to ask, as we get into the interview about some, some of your background. Where did you, where did [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley come from?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: We see you sitting here, but we want to know where'd you come from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, goodness.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your mother's name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Annette Penelope Davis Beasley [Annette Davis Beasley], A-N-N-E-T-T-E, Penelope, P-E-N-E-L-O-P-E, Davis, D-A-V-I-S, Beasley, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is she still living?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, deceased, okay. Can you tell me the location of her birth? Where was, where was your mother born at?
Speaker 2: I believe it's Cleveland [Ohio], but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was an Ohio girl?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Do you have the date of birth of your mother?
Speaker 2: I made it up (laughter). My mother died when, when I was about seven. She was about twenty-nine, so there's a lot I don't know. And the family didn't talk much, mainly because they were so traumatized by her passing. So, when you always have to give your mother's date of birth, you know, like at a bank, and that becomes your kind of your pin name, pin number, or when was your mother born, what's your mother's maiden name? So, I made up February 14th.
Speaker 1: That's Valentine's Day, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Interesting, and what year?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: But just February 14th?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Valentine's Day.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. What is your father's name?
Speaker 2: George Author Beasley, Jr. [George Beasley, Jr.], G-E-O-R-G-E, Author, A-U-T-H-O-R, Beasley, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y, Jr.
Speaker 1: Interesting name, Author.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We always thought so.
Speaker 1: Is he still living?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. Where was your father born at?
Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: L.A. [Lower Alabama].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Low Alabama, yes, okay. Can you say, can you tell us what his birthdate is, please?
Speaker 2: April 1, darn it, I want to say 1921, but I'm sure my sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] will correct me.
Speaker 1: Okay. April Fool's Day?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting, okay.
Story_ID: 481876
Speaker 1: Your mother [Annette Davis Beasley] and father [George Beasley, Jr.], they were--what are some of your earliest memories that you have about your mother? You said she, she passed when you were seven?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What are some of the memories you had of your mother?
Speaker 2: The Easter parade, getting dressed on Easter to go to church, and also picking out clothes for Easter. I loved getting dressed up. And so, that was a, a big day in our household, that my mother and father worked at the country club [Manakiki Golf and Country Club; Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio]. So, sometimes they'd both have on white uniforms--some of my earliest memories.
Speaker 1: Some of your earliest--what about Christmas memories you had with them?
Speaker 2: I didn't know it then, but we seem to have an awful lot of stuff (laughter). We, we got a lot of things for Christmas between my grandparents and Santa Claus, and all the relatives. We--the, the tree was packed. We always had a tree that, that Daddy had to cut off because it, it could, it wouldn't stand up in the house or without, would reach to the ceiling. So, and we decorated the house, the outside of the house. And we got to a point every year, where we call it James Funny House [ph.], because we had so many lights, and so, the snowman and all of these characters out front that people would gawk at our house.
Speaker 1: In Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: In Cleveland.
Speaker 1: In Cleveland.
Story_ID: 481877
Speaker 1: You keep saying, you say we. You did--how many brothers and sisters did you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have one of each.
Speaker 1: One brother, one sister?
Speaker 2: One brother and one sister.
Speaker 1: So, where do you, in that, and are you the youngest, oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the middle.
Speaker 1: You're in the middle?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your brother's name?
Speaker 2: George Author Beasley III [George Beasley III].
Speaker 1: A III?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your sister?
Speaker 2: Annette Joyce Beasley [Annette Beasley Coleman].
Speaker 1: Okay. Are they both living?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Your sister, Annette, she lives here in, in what part of town 'cause you--
Speaker 2: No, she lives in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Still in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: And my brother lives in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: So, you see him a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 481878
Speaker 1: But back to your mother [Annette Davis Beasley] again. As you said, the memories, she, unfortunate, the Lord took her at an early age in your life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But those memories that you had of her, can you talk about some of the memories she had when she used to cook for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. Oh, I remember we had a cherry tree in the backyard. And we were having to climb the tree to get as many cherries as possible, so she could make things out of, out of the cherries, or can the cherries. You know, you put up preserves for the winter. And it's interesting the memories you have are not so much of food, but of castor oil and things we had to take when we were ill that you take castor oil. I think we--she gave us castor oil every day, and we had a choice of either ginger ale, or some orange juice that we'd take behind it. And it was years before I liked the taste of ginger ale. So, that was one of your more, you know, the memories you have in the morning, but you always had castor oil. And when we were one of the first families to have television in--I think it was '47 [1947]. So, everybody came to our house to watch this, this little screen, and it was, you know, just during the day. And for many years, I would go home from school, yet school was only a half a day if you were in kindergarten. You got to watch soap operas, so I mean that was just so fascinating but, but actual meals, I can't remember other than that castor oil.
Speaker 1: That castor oil, did she tell you why you had to take that castor oil?
Speaker 2: It would keep you from getting sick.
Speaker 1: That's all she said--just keep you from getting sick?
Speaker 2: Keep you from getting sick (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Didn't care about the taste (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just take it. We didn't ask, you know, you didn't ask a lot of questions when somebody was grown--told you something, too.
Speaker 1: Your father [George Beasley, Jr.], some of the memories that you have of him, early memories of him, what were that like, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. Oh, Daddy usually left the house very early--oh, "I have to go to the country club." And, oh, he didn't work on Monday, so we knew that was always a special day. And we got to see him all day, and we usually went out to dinner on, on that day. So, that was our special day, was, was Monday.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did your father do?
Speaker 2: He actually worked as a locker room attendant at Manakiki Golf and Country Club [Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio], and he ran the locker room, and we used to drive out there. Sometimes we would drive out, and see where he worked. And I had never seen grass that green before, and to see country club grass was just, and the rolling hills and, and the huge country club, and some of the debutantes dancing in the windows of, of when you see the country club life. It was just quite startling.
Story_ID: 481879
Speaker 1: As a young African American at that time in America's history and in Ohio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --what was it like for you and your family at that time?
Speaker 2: We were probably--now that I look back on it, incredibly well-off, not by a whole lot of other standards. But certainly, once we moved to the east side, we had--my sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] and I shared a room. We had our own house. Sometimes you took the bus some place or the street car, but for the most part, we always had a car. My grandparents were incredibly supportive of, of our family, so they were always a part of where we went, either over my mother's [Annette Davis Beasley] family's house, or my father's [George Beasley, Jr.], so we always had grandparents who we couldn't wait to see. And so, it--I only remember it, it not being happy the day my mother died so.
Speaker 1: Of course, of course.
Speaker 2: And it was such an out-sized memory that it, it kind of (laughter), outshines everything else when I think about my childhood.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, going to church every, every week, it was either Cory Methodist [Cory United Methodist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] 'cause my, my mother's family went there, or Mt. Zion Congregational [Mt. Zion Congregational Church; Mt. Zion Congregational Church United Church of Christ, Cleveland, Ohio]. And at the time, I didn't know it, but Mt. Zion--my grandparents [Jessie Beckwith Beasley and George Beasley, Sr.] on my father's side belonged to that church. And what we went to, and it was a church, but it was in a gymnasium. So, there was a basketball net on either end, but I didn't know it at the time. I just thought churches had basketball nets on either end. And it wasn't until we moved into this church that they were building that when we first went into that church, I thought, well, then, where are the basketball nets? Why doesn't the church have--I thought all churches had that, you know (laughter), that I didn't realize it was just the temporary church. So, that memory of having basketball nets is part of my church memories.
Story_ID: 481880
Speaker 1: Take us back to 1943, '44 [1944] for blacks in Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was it like back in those days and what, from what, what you saw and remember?
Speaker 2: I remember, oh, that it seemed as though we all lived in a project, that the projects on Scovill Avenue, and that once you left the projects, you saw more white people or blacks. Generally, that's what the smell of, of--you take your trash to the incinerator, which was kind of in the middle of the projects. And I remember the smell of the incinerator which was, it was--I didn't mind it. It meant, finally, you know, you could get rid of the trash, but it was an unusual smell. But when we moved to the east side, and we didn't have this incinerator, you know, (laughter), you, you did other things with your trash. But you certainly didn't take it outside and burn it, but you waited for the trash man to come and pick it up. And I thought, wow, you don't have to take your trash out to, and the coal man cometh, you know, the (laughter). Am I going back a few years--see, you actually had a coal man. And I remember when we changed to this, this, this furnace, furnace--well, this was radiators. I don't know what they called it. It was a big unit that didn't need coal anymore, so this man was not going to come to your house and, and put coal in the side of the house. And the milkman stopped coming, you know, you could buy it at the store. You didn't have a milkman come to the house and leave bottles of milk, which, you know, is always a surprise, or you could go to his truck and, and get what you wanted if you wanted extra things, you know. And so, those memories of, of the people who used to stop by your house to bring, you know, the milk or the coal, but it's part of my memories.
Speaker 1: It's almost like out of a movie as (unclear) as the way you describe it, almost out of a movie (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I--it, it's almost as though I'm not talking about me.
Story_ID: 481881
Speaker 1: Just want to get back to your mother [Annette Davis Beasley] for just a little bit because-
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --again, mothers, I've--mothers are somebody that's very to me, always very special.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she have, did you have time during the short time that you were with your mother, did she teach you how to cook? Did she teach you some things that you could use in life, some things in life that you could use?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that for me. It may have been because I was the middle child. You know, I was the one that, that, they kind of treated me different from my sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] who was older. And the reason is, you know, when you, when you're, you get to be the tallest one in the family (laughter), and you also have the shock of red hair. Somehow you're different, so you're kind of treated, and, and at the time, my hair was kind of like the color of a carrot. So, you know (laughter), I was, and I was the only one in the family who had, so most of those kind of rudimentary things, you know, that how to cook something, you pass it on to the oldest one, you know. And my sister would kind of be the one to teach me, you know, how to do it. But it wasn't my mother so much who taught us, taught me that--it was kind of my sister.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, my older sister would say, this is how you do it. My mother probably did, but my sister took over the, the job of doing all that. Or I remember her, her telling me more things because, again, once my mother died, Twasy [Beasley's sister, Annette Beasley Coleman] just kind of assumed the mantle of, of, of being in charge, even though (laughter), technically, that wasn't always true (laughter). We listened to her. My brother [George Beasley III] and I kind of listened.
Speaker 1: But those memories that you have of her mother, do you remember being around her holding, maybe rubbing her feet, something like that, something personal?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember kind of going in their bedroom, my mom and dad's [George Beasley, Jr.] bedroom. And I was fascinated that, you know, that, that, you know, I remember both of them smoked. And I thought, oh, wow, I wish I could, you know, the things that grown people did, you know, that I wish I could--when will, when will I be able to smoke? And she had hair curlers and, and I had plaits, you know, so you wanted to--well, when, when do I get to do all this? You know, and this, this is more fun, you know. Your, your room is kind of like a fun room. This is--it has things I don't have (laughter) in it, so it was, it, it was a place of curiosity. And that cold cream, you know, Vaseline, well, Vaseline, we kind of all put that on our knees and also on our shoes. And, and I do remember that was one of my memories of what you do with Vaseline--
Speaker 1: Gosh.
Speaker 2: --but and makeup, you know. When is that, when am I, when can I have red lips (laughter), you know?
Speaker 1: What about her closet? Did you ever go into her closet and look at the dresses (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, indeed. To this day, I, I just absolutely love fancy dresses. I mean, most people say, you know, I'm really comfortable if I'm in casual. I am, I am most comfortable if I'm in a ball gown. If I could wear ball gowns every day, you know (laughter), that would be my comfort level because my mother and father went out a lot, as did my grandparents, you know. In fact, most people that we knew, they went to hear the bands play. Everybody danced. Couples all danced in those days. That was their form of entertainment. And so, everybody knew how to jitterbug. Everybody knew how to foxtrot. And so, going out to dances and cabarets and cafes was just exciting, you know. And, and so, you'd see the fancy dresses, and to this day, I love fancy dresses (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I like the way you said that, "I love fancy (laughter) (simultaneous)."
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I love fancy dresses, yes, indeed. It was all I could do not to wear a fancy dress today (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 481882
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Annette Davis Beasley], she was home, she was a home- a housewife? Did she stay home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, no, for the--some of the time, she was. And then, she started working with my father [George Beasley, Jr.], at the country club. So, she was, she was doing that a few days a week. And I think it was when he needed help at the country club and catering parties 'cause by then, Daddy was getting into catering for some of the people that, that he knew at the country club. So, he was doing more of that.
Speaker 1: I see, country club?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, the country club.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the country club, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Manakiki--
Speaker 1: Manakiki?
Speaker 2: --Golf and Country Club [Manakiki Golf and Country Club; Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio], which at that time, was a private country club. And there was a senator years later, Senator Howard Metzenbaum who found out that country club was actually on--oh, it, it was on fed- it was on public land. And so, they eventually made that country club a public country course, yes.
Story_ID: 481883
Speaker 1: You talk about the country club [Manakiki Golf and Country Club; Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was a place where it was a private club at that time. Predominantly white people, I assume, used to come to the club (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did blacks--were blacks allowed to go there?
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think I ever saw a black person unless they work for my father [George Beasley, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that they had any kind of written policy, but everybody knew the rules. Black people knew that you didn't apply, and white people knew that it wouldn't even be a problem. They would--you wouldn't even think of applying. So, whether it was unwritten or not, that's the way life was. Oh, and you had to be at a certain level. Of course, you had that in your black society, too, you know, whether you, you knew which organizations you could belong to, based on the casting class system of where your parents were. And there were all these kinds of rules, particularly if you were born in the east. You know, it's like, you don't see it as prevalent, maybe you don't see it as prevalent now out here [West Coast], but certainly, you had to, you played by eastern rules which, you know, they had to, and, and a caste system (laughter), so class system.
Speaker 1: Which it has, it has its benefits of sorts.
Speaker 2: It has its--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --well, you know, people like to spend time around the people that mirror their image.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's, that's the way we all are. So, it's not unusual. It's just that somehow we get upset with people with money (laughter), and in power when they do that.
Story_ID: 481884
Speaker 1: Now, your father's [George Beasley, Jr.] mother, your grandmother--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --can you talk about her? Can you tell who, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Jessie, I want to say, Jessie Beckwith Beasley. And she was married to my grandfather, George Author Beasley, Sr. [George Beasley, Sr.]. And we called them Dee Dee [ph.] and Bampa. I'm not real sure--probably my sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] who, again named me, tried to call her Jessie, and it ended up Dee Dee. And so, that's all we knew them as, Dee Dee and Bampa, and we couldn't wait to go over there. And our grandparents, our two sets of grandparents, didn't live that far from each other. So, if you went to one, even though we'd spend 90 percent of the time over at Dee Dee and Bampa, we would end up at some point over, my mother's mother [Eddie Terrell] and father [John Terrell]. Oh, they were quite special. They couldn't wait for us to come over there and to spend the night, oh, to spend the weekend with them. My brother [George Beasley III], oh, my father, my grandfather actually worked at the post office. He was one of the, the, the first, or few African Americans, one of the first to work at the post office. This was the dead letter department, you know, when you don't know what to do with the mail that doesn't go anyplace. And it ends up in, in Bampa's department. And my brother on my grandfather's days off on Saturday or Sunday, he would take him downtown to the Terminal Tower [Cleveland, Ohio], which, by the way, at that point, I think, was the largest building [sic.]. The tallest building in America was the Terminal Tower, and to Fred Harvey's [Harvey House] was a restaurant. And so, that was my brother's bonding day with my grandfather. And my grandfather would have tickets that he would have every year on the fifty-yard line. You know, we were raised on the Cleveland Browns. Good grief, that's all we had. Of course, we had the Cleveland Indians but, you know, you couldn't rely on them. But the Cleveland Browns, so just about everybody I know from Cleveland [Ohio], and for women who grew up in my era, we were raised on Cleveland Brown--Paul Brown; Jim Brown--the world champion Cleveland Browns. And my grandfather used to take us to the games. Sometimes he would take me to the game instead of--my brother was into tennis. I loved the Cleveland Browns, and so I would get to go to the game.
Speaker 1: Gotcha. I didn't get your grandfather's name.
Speaker 2: It was George Author Beasley, Sr. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George, George Author, Author Beasley, Sr. Okay, all righty. That, that's on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: George Author Beasley III [sic.].
Speaker 2: Oh, actually, it was Sr. for my grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sr., Sr.
Speaker 2: --and my, my gran- my father was Jun- Jr.
Speaker 1: Jr.
Story_ID: 481885
Speaker 1: How about on your mother's [Annette Davis Beasley] side? How, who were your grandpar- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my mother's side, her mother was Eddie Terrell, and that's her mother, E-D-D-I-E, Mrs. Eddie Terrell, and--
Speaker 1: Can you spell Terrell, Terrell?
Speaker 2: T-E-R-R-E-L-L. And I don't really know, I only know him as Bampa John [John Terrell], like I, I believe it's my step-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay. Bampa (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd have to look all that up.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bampa?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, in those days, we didn't have to spell it (laughter). You just kind of said it, and everybody knew who you were talking about. B-A-M-P-A, Bampa John.
Speaker 1: Bampa John.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 481886
Speaker 1: Memories, back in those days, family life was so much different then than it is now. Talk about what, what was family life as you remember it as a family, a unit? We'll talk about, we'll come back a little later, and talk about your brother [George Beasley III] and your sister [Annette Beasley Coleman]. But as a unit, mother [Annette Davis Beasley], father [George Beasley, Jr.], three children in the house, what was it like back in those days? (Background noise) And please forgive the airplane around me, as you know, the airport (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right. Oh, my first, oh, goodness, I'm trying to remember that whole unit of, of, of family. And we had a break- breakfast nook in the house on 147th [Street]. And it wasn't, it was the first time I'd seen a place to eat that wasn't a table. So, I was fascinated by the fact that all of you had to slide in to the breakfast nook. And you had to make sure you went in a certain order, you know. My brother was first 'cause he sat at the end and, and Daddy had the chair that was actually on the end of the breakfast nook that didn't fit into the nook with all of us trying to slide in. And, oh, that there were always chores afterwards that everybody kind of knew what their chores were. My sister and I did the dishes. And, you know, my, my brother was--I don't want to use the word spoiled, but he was the--I, I think I was the brother they were looking for when I was born (laughter). And so, my brother probably got out of doing dishes more than any of us, but he had other chores, you know, that we had to mow the lawn. You didn't have people come and do all of those things for you and call somebody. You always had to rake leaves. There was always grass to cut. And, of course, in the winter, you know, you either had to shovel it, or you had to, to de-ice it, or throw the salt down. So, maintaining a house, you begin to understand it. And what our father imparted to us is that how they cleaned at the country club [Manakiki Golf and Country Club; Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio] is how he expected the house to be cleaned. That was his standard. And so, that's how we learned to clean a house--that, you didn't half-do anything. You cleaned in crannies. You moved a table. You didn't clean around a table. You had to move it, you had to move the furniture. So, again, it stood, to this day, you know, now that you have housekeepers, you, you know what to look for because you had learned to clean, as though you were cleaning for a country club. And it was--when I would go in other people's houses, I was almost a little disconcerted that, oh, they must not have been expecting me because the bathrooms weren't clean, you know. And, and we cleaned it almost, you know, to, to pristine fashion. I mean, the president could have walked into our house, and it would have been ready for, for inspection.
Story_ID: 481887
Speaker 1: Sunday mornings, when you had breakfast with the family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, what, what was a Sunday morning like for you--have breakfast, go to church--what was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. Um, it was usually not as relaxed as, as (laughter), as it, as it should have been, mostly because you had so much to do. You had to get ready for church. And then, you had to make sure that you knew everything you were going to do in church, you know, either you had to know your lessons, or you had to, oh, you know, get your money for church, and pack your little envelope, and to put in the collection box. I mean, there was a lot getting ready for church, you know, and have the right hat with the right, oh, and make sure you had your gloves. And your gloves were cleaned, and so, it was, it was quite a, a procedure.
Speaker 1: You didn't participate in the choir or anything like that, did you?
Speaker 2: I did later, participated in the choir, and, the older I got, oh, this was, oh, let's see, we need to get (unclear), oh--
Speaker 1: Hey, would you like to, would you like to--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: Okay. Getting ready for church on Sunday--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) you had the gloves, had money in, in the collection bag.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But can you talk about the Sundays, what happened after church? What did you do after church?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness, after church, we couldn't wait 'cause that meant we were going to our [paternal] grandparents' (laughter). We were, we were going to eat, and we were gonna go spend time with Dee Dee [Jessie Beckwith Beasley] and Bampa [George Beasley, Sr.], and Uncle Perc. Uncle Percy [Percy Beckwith] was my, my, 10216 Westchester [Avenue]. Again, I was on the east side, but it was further away from us. And it was near the church [Mt. Zion Congregational Church; Mt. Zion Congregational Church United Church of Christ, Cleveland, Ohio] and, in fact, I did a painting in homage to them, where I used part of their address in the painting. If that's, if they were just quite special in their, their, their excitement of, of having us a part of, of whatever they were doing. And so, we knew everybody in their life, of our grandparents' life, couldn't wait to have a, you know, I knew I'd have coffee. Dee Dee drank coffee and, and she taught us how to, to make coffee. And she also drank Old Crow, you know, (laughter) which, you know, we just--I, I mean, it was a family that, that Bampa would sit on the, the front porch. And he would have his gin and tonic, and he would listen to the game, the baseball games. And we didn't care that much about baseball, but just to sit there on the glider with Bampa, and listen to the voice of the Indians, the Cleveland Indians, and to hear the game, and to hear him talk about, about life, and, "To thy own self be true and it shall follow the night and day," ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. And he would quote poetry, and we were just so in awe of, "Ask for what you want and give me a chance to refuse." And I don't ever remember him refusing us anything, but he would always say, "Ask me first. Give me a chance to refuse." And he'd always have little gum, a little Juicy Fruit or Spearmint packs in his chifforobe. That was a big cabinet and his, and so, we couldn't wait to go up there and see what kind of gum he had. And he smoked Virginia Rounds cigarettes which (laughter), I don't know--he's the only person that I've ever known that even heard of Virginia Rounds cigarettes, much less smoked them. And, oh, he was just quite special. He, he was much taller than my grandmother. He was about 6'4", and my grandmother was about, hm, about 5' tall, 5- 5'1" at the most. And something happens to short people, you know, I'm thoroughly convinced that it widens their mouth. It makes them, you know (laughter) that's--they have to make up for it in stature, so she was just like a, a fireball.
Story_ID: 481888
Speaker 1: Dee Dee [Beasley's paternal grandmother, Jessie Beckwith Beasley] shopped every day. I mean, when she passed away, she had--we said, "All right, let's count them." And there were 122 pairs of shoes that Dee Dee literally couldn't wait to go someplace every day, where, either downtown on the, the street car with, with a friend of hers, oh, by (unclear), or she loved to cook, like these folks who cooked went to the store every day because they wanted things fresh. So, she would tear off her apron and said, "I've got to go to the market." "Well, wait, Dee Dee, we'll go with you." You could barely keep up with her. I mean, she would go two and three times a day. If it was one onion she'd need, "I've got to go back to the market." "Oh, Dee Dee," and so, we got to calling her the buy-right bandit (laughter) that, that you--
Speaker 2: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 1: This was my grandmother (laughter), that she would go to the store so often that we would sit down and watch something. And she loved Liberace, and God, Arthur Godfrey. And in the middle of some of the shows, you know, you knew she really needed something from the store, she was going to leave Liberace (laughter). That's--oh, my goodness, or Billy Mitchell [sic. Billy Williams] singing, 'I'm Going To Sit Right Down And Write Myself A Letter' ['I'm Gonna Sit Right Down And Write Myself A Letter']. Oh, goodness. And she'd just--and Julius La Rosa. I mean, we watched, we couldn't wait to sit down and watch programs with them. And, like my [paternal] grandfather [George Beasley, Sr.] every year, would go back east because my aunt, my father's sister, Aunt Audrey [Audrey Beasley], would have him or my grandmother come up to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. They lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but then, they would take these little trips. And they would go to Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York], or they'd go to the Broadway plays. I learned to love Broadway plays through my grandfather bringing the albums home. To this day, I know the words to 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], 'My Fair Lady' [Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner]. Every major Broadway play, I know all the words in the songs because that's how I grew up. And my grandparents being in their house and reading Life magazine and Saturday Evening Post [The Saturday Evening Post], and being able to see the artists on the covers. And I kept thinking one day, my work is going to be on the cover of a Saturday Evening Post. Little did I know I'd outlive Saturday Evening Post, but oh, to be able to see a Life magazine every week, I couldn't wait to do that. Oh, they were, they were so learned in their, their own self-taught way, that they passed all that onto us.
Story_ID: 481889
Speaker 1: They allow me a couple of crazy questions.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here's one of my crazy questions. What kind of a child were you? Were you a good child, were you, a problem with Mommy [Annette Davis Beasley] or Daddy [George Beasley, Jr.] when--
Speaker 2: Oh, I like to think I was just the best. Actually, oh, you know, you didn't--in, in those days, very few kids were bad kids. You, you, you had heck to pay if you were a bad child. You either had to pay in, in the neighborhood of telling, if you're, if somebody's telling on you that your child is out here doing this and that, so, and we had something that we don't seem to have much today, and that was called shame. You didn't do anything to bring shame on your family. You didn't bring it to your grandparents. So, it kept you from doing a whole lot of stuff just thinking, oh, no, if my grandmother ever found out--. I mean, the shame, and so, I always wanted them to be proud of me. It was, it was real simple. I mean, that was, that was my job is to make, make them proud. And so, doing well, you are always thinking, oh, goodness, what--I got to see in this, what am I going, what's my family going to think? And you, it, it wasn't just about you, you were--it, it was a whole lot of people who were depending on you, so, and you cared.
Speaker 1: I know they're very proud of you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They've got to be very proud of you.
Story_ID: 481890
Speaker 1: Can we go back to your brother and your sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is your brother's name?
Speaker 2: George Author Beasley III [George Beasley III].
Speaker 1: George Author Beasley III.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your sister, her name is--
Speaker 2: Annette Joyce Beasley Coleman [Annette Beasley Coleman].
Speaker 1: Joyce Beasley Coleman.
Speaker 2: C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your brother is George Author Beasley, Jr.
Speaker 2: Oh, the III.
Speaker 1: The III, the III, okay, wait, make sure I get that right, the III. As we say, 3, 3 and third, okay. Now, your brother, he was the oldest child? Your sister was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Actually, actually, my brother is the youngest. He's the baby, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. He was the baby. And your sister was the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yes. We're all about a year and a half apart--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which, so we're--
Speaker 1: Okay. And she's still--been in Ohio right now?
Speaker 2: She's still in Cleveland [Ohio], yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And has lived there all of her life. And my brother moved to Los Angeles [California] first, and was here about two years before I was, encouraged me to come here, once I was, was thinking about leaving.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the relationship like between you and your sister as children?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, it's interesting because I, I always had to follow my sister. You know, she was older and so, you know, once you got to class, it was always like, "Oh, we've had your sister," you know, she was always in everything. Oh, she was in student council, and she was, oh, in a lot of activities. So it, we were, they always like having the Beasley sisters in their classes. We were always helpful with teacher's monitor and because I was tall, even in elementary school [Charles W. Eliot Middle School, Cleveland, Ohio], I always became the teacher's assistant. I mean, I was just tall as most teachers, so people equate height with age. And so, my sister is much shorter than I am and so, people now think she's much younger than I am because I'm taller. And so, she must be, you know, oh, younger because she's so much shorter than you. So, about, about the age of seven, we were about the same height. And then, something happened and I got this spurt of, of activity and started growing and (laughter), once I became taller than my sister, I think I took on my own separate identity and, as I see it (laughter). And then, because I could draw, you know, and I was always the best drawer, the best artist in, in the class. And then, in the school, I had this kind of specialness, not only did I look different, and people called me treetop or, you know, they would make up names for a redheaded- you know, or what happened that get the, you know, I was so different from the rest of the family that I was kind of the oddity. So, people even in the family would treat you or talk to you, like you were an oddity, you were an artist. "Oh, she's an artist." And we'd come to expect different things because somebody is an artist. You know, almost as though we give them a mandate to be crazy, you know (laughter). It's almost like, "Oh, well, if she's an artist," whatever I did, "Oh, Pheebs [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley] an artist." So, I got this--I guess it's because I'm an artist, you know so.
Speaker 1: But you, together, you, as, because there's only what--two years' different in age between you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You would play together?
Speaker 2: Oh, we would play together. We had some of the same friends who we still have now. I still have friends from elementary school that are friends of mine now, one particular person. Oh, but, yes, for the most part, we were, you know, even in high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], we had generally the same friends. Some of the friends actually had younger sisters or brothers who were either in my class, or my brother's class, so that kind of kept us close. The church, oh, being in Pilgrim Fellowship, kept us, you know, bonding that we were always having to go to either choir practice or church.
Story_ID: 481891
Speaker 1: And then, one day, here came this little guy.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my brother who's about a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brother George [George Beasley III].
Speaker 2: --a year and a half apart too, oh, and you talk about one, who was really treated was like he was special, is my brother. Oh, and maybe because he was, he was the boy that finally, there's a boy in the family, you know, after two girls that, so we thought, you know, he's just real spoiled. But, but, you know, generally, we all got along. We, we weren't, we, we always played together and we weren't adversaries.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: And my brother, when he--I remember when he would get into a fight, or he'd get into an argument, and he would always say, "Well, I'll fight you when I get to my house. We'll have the fight in front of the house." He would run in the house, and say, "Go to the front door." And so, what I would do is go to the front door. They'd see somebody my height and say, "Oh my God, look at the size of his sister (laughter). Oh, no (laughter)." So any time we would get into trouble, he would say, "Oh, my sister will take care of this. I'll just my--." And all I had to do was show up. It was like, I must have been, seem like I was ten feet tall to his friends, so it was, "Man, did you see the size of his sister?" There I was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) By the way, how tall are you?
Speaker 2: You know, Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], I wish I could be honest. But at some point, I didn't want to know, so for years, I never would put my head against the wall and have that hash mark where everybody says, "Oh, goodness, I'm now this tall." I kept thinking, if I'm, if I don't know, I won't know if I grew, so I won't even fight--it's like not wanting to know your age. I think I'm about 5'10", 5'9 1/2", 5'8", and, and there's always a gentleman who said, you know, men always, some use, use some other kind of bar, you know, I could be talking to a man that's 5'2". And he says, "Well, you know, I'm 6'," so (laughter), so when I realized that they had a different scale of measurement (laughter) is, is, is not the English version.
Story_ID: 481892
Speaker 1: So now, we get this young lady who's tall. What's it like being tall as a lady?
Speaker 2: When you're young, it's terrible. When you're young, it's very painful. When you're growing up, and you're worried about getting tall every day that you don't even want to know how tall you are because you're afraid you grew. And you get all kinds of comments that are not always the most pleasant and, particularly from boys. And sometimes, it's somebody that you really liked, and you'll either hear a comment, or you'll see who they're with, and think, oh, goodness, I've got to be short. It's something--it's one of those things you have no control of. You can't, you can't change it. You can't get rid of it. I mean, even if I was fat, I could do something about it. This was something--I kept thinking, what can I do? Maybe I'll eat less. Maybe I'll--and I would look at, look at people who were round-shouldered, you know, who are trying to, to hunch down. And you think, they look like they're trying to hunch down. Well, I can't do that. I mean, I was--it, it's not that it didn't occur to me. I didn't think about it. It's just that you try and figure out how you can solve this problem. I'm tall (laughter)--I mean, and there's nothing, there's, there's no way to solve it. So, at some point in my life, you just have to say to yourself, some--maybe this is going to work for me. And it, it's not until you're older. And it's interesting now I have friends who have tall children who say, "Pheeb [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], you know, you need to talk to my daughter because, you know, she's tall and she's--." (Laughter) Talk to her? I'll be living, living my own pain, and they said, "You have to tell her how wonderful it is." I thought, it's not wonderful until you get to a certain point in your life. And also, you know, talking to other people about this--they're saying, "Well, you can be a model." Well, heck, you know, you know, how many models there are who are tall that, that it's, it's like playing basketball. There are so few of us that can get to that level of, of being a model, but that was always the thing. "Oh, you, you can wear clothes, or you have this model look." And I thought, nobody wants to date me (laughter), you know. How, how is this working that I can be a model? So, I don't, you know, it's interesting. For me, I think the realization, and it, it's, it, it's surprising how I resolved it. The realization for me was through Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis]. And of all the tall people I saw--and Jackie Kennedy wasn't that tall--but what I did learn about her, at one point, when she was--oh, as he [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was in the [U.S.] Senate, and I think they were running for office and running for president--is that she had a size ten shoe. And I thought, here's a woman who's tall, who has a big foot, 'cause I have one, too. And, and the pillbox hats were out. And I thought, I just loved the little pillbox hat, and the A-line, and that, for me, became kind of transformational that it was okay to be tall and thin. (Laughter) I mean, before that, it was, I want to be zaftig. I wish I had more form. I wish I had more bust. I wish I had more--and then, I thought, wait, here's a woman who's, who's, you know, who may be our next first lady, and she has huge feet. It's okay. So, oh, I think at that point, oh, about the end of my high school years [at John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], I started getting comfortable with being, with being tall. And now, it's--I'm so accustomed to being, you know, you just get accustomed to being stared at. I mean, when people see a tall person walk into a room, an unusually tall person, particularly if it's a woman (laughter), and I find myself doing it myself when I see a woman who's taller than me. And I, and that's, that's not unusual. I mean, it's unusual that I would see a woman who's taller than me, but when I do, I'm--I do the same thing so.
Speaker 1: But to carry yourself so eloquently as a tall woman, always, always (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thanks. Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Phoebe, you're, you're class. When we see Phoebe Beasley, that's, that's class, that is class. And, and we're not--with people, I don't know if we can see it, but the way you write your name, that is class.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: I, I still have the invitation you had. I look at it all the time. That is class really, that is class.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 481893
Speaker 1: Phoebe [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], when you, well, let's get to it, and get it over with--your mother [Annette Davis Beasley] died.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: Oh, still, the most painful day in my life. Oh, I believe I was, I think I was seven. I'm trying to remember. I think it happened '50 [1950], '51 [1951]. Oh, it was a month before I was going to be seven, or I was seven. I'm trying to remember the--I was born in '43 [1943] (laughter). Somebody has to, but, do this math for me. But I think I cried for a month, I think I cried for months. And it started off as, as, as a normal Sunday, or a normal day. And it was Saturday or Sunday that my mother left us off over at Dee Dee [Beasley's paternal grandmother, Jessie Beckwith Beasley] and Bampa's [Beasley's paternal grandfather, George Beasley, Sr.]. And she was going to go to her own mother's house, and come back and pick us up. And I remember Dee Dee being on the one floor that--the one phone that was in our house 'cause everybody had just one phone, and it was on the landing. And she was on the phone, and she started crying. And we thought, "Oh, my goodness. It must really be serious." And, and we thought, it sounded like she was talking to Momma, who we called our other grandmother, called her Momma, Eddie Terrell. And then, we thought, "Well, it's probably Nanny, something happened to Nanny," because Momma, Mother, was about in her nineties, so we thought "Oh, it must be Nanny who something happened to." And so, Dee Dee kept saying to us, "No, wait 'til your Dad [George Beasley, Jr.] gets here, wait 'til your father gets here. You know, he'll tell you what happened." And I--well, we thought, okay, so we waited a few hours and Daddy came over, and he had, he had a bloody nose. And I thought, has he been in a fight? And it seemed like blood was on his shirt, too. But we were on the glider on the--it was on the porch. And he was telling us that Mommy had passed. And so, it was probably our ignorance about what the word passed meant. And then, he said, "Mommy has passed on." And somehow, you know, the, the emotion of the whole thing, you know, his--I guess, hearing it, you know, or however he got the bloody nose, you know, that it was part of his trauma of hearing it. And when he said, just passed, passed--passed where? Where'd she go--she passed to--and we couldn't figure out where she had passed to. We kept thinking she'd gone to some place. And then, he said, "Mommy died." And so, then we, we couldn't figure out that died is passed, so we were all kind of--no one realized she has, she's not coming back. She's not coming, she's not coming to pick us up? You know, she's--I mean, we, we--it, it must have taken him, I would think, a whole lot longer than he thought to make, to have us understand that, you know, and we weren't, my brother [George Beasley III] was about what, he would have been five. So, in April, he, he turned five, and I would have been turning seven. Twasy [Beasley's sister, Annette Beasley Coleman] would have been turning nine. So, it's not like, we weren't able to understand it. Well, we just hadn't been around anybody who died.
Story_ID: 481894
Speaker 1: And, I know that, that they had to actually carry me out of the funeral. I remember spending most of the time in the funeral in the bathroom crying. 'Cause I made so much noise crying, that they took me out of the funeral. And it was at Antioch Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio], and I guess we were always talking about how huge it was because everybody was so shocked--and, "Oh, these poor kids." Matter of fact, I didn't know it at the time, I learned--oh, yes, we did, we knew it because we were all excited about the fact that in August, Mommy [Annette Davis Beasley] was going to have a baby, that she was seven months pregnant. So, we were all excited about naming who our, our sister or brother would be. In those days, you didn't know. We since learned it was a brother, but so that was our, part of our excitement, that she was seven months pregnant. So, to have a heart attack at twenty-nine in the middle of all of this, it's probably, I--it's probably to me why we--none of us have ever had our own kids. My sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] adopted, so she does have a child that she's had for, you know, since she was--Nikki [ph.] was what--a month old or so. But I, but I think that because I think about it so often. I still, I, I, I thought maybe I don't think three or four days go by that I don't think about it, but I think that and I, I couldn't stand it. One of the things--the older I got, I couldn't stand it when somebody would get upset with their mother, or they called their mother names, or they'd get into a fight where I'm not speaking to my mother and so. And, you know, you, you just couldn't even fathom people who--and it was just beyond me to, that somebody would be angry with their mother. Oh, but I think probably it taught me to actualize every moment that, in the back of my mind, we're not here very long. I keep that in my mind to the point that I always think that this may be my last day. I, you know, it's like, that kind of sub-consciousness. And I, and I mean, it surfaces ever so often. In fact, life is not--it, it, you learn at a very early age how fleeting life is. And usually, you don't have to learn it at such an early age, so with, with such clarity, but I never thought I'd live to be older than twenty-nine.  I never thought I'd live to be twenty-nine. And I remember getting to twenty-nine, and thinking on that day--wow, this was as old as Mommy was. And I remember--I think I was in my late thirties that I mentioned that to my sister. And she had told me, she had the same fear, and we never talked about it, but both of us never thought we'd get to twenty-nine. And so, here I sit here at sixty-something. And thinking (laughter), you know, still actualizing every moment that, that you almost get up running against the clock, that you don't know when it's going to stop ticking. So, that's what an early death of a parent leaves for you.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Phoebe [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], thank you. I, I lost my mother [Mosetta Smalls] about a year and a half ago--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --and I, I'm, I'm sixty, and she was eighty-eight.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I'd had the fear. A, a day doesn't go by--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --that I don't think about her. And, like you say, when someone argues with their mother, I have a problem with that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She sometimes, she would get me, she'd get me a little angry with her, but that's mother, that's mama (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's the woman who brought you in the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, that's the root of who you are, yeah.
Story_ID: 481895
Speaker 1: What happened with the family after your mother [Annette Davis Beasley] passed? Your father [George Beasley, Jr.] now--here he is a man with now three children.
Speaker 2: Three kids. Oh, the first thing they did that, that same year--oh, one of the things I remember is, is, and, and happens to this day. And I don't mean to digress, but in Cleveland [Ohio], particularly when you go to church, you either have a red flower or a white flower. When your mother's living, when she's living, in the red; when she's passed away, a white flower.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when they gave us the white flowers to wear, 'cause my mother died in May, and I think it was the next week, or two weeks later, was Mother's Day, and we had to wear the white ones. And people would get, "Oh, poor thing, your mother is not--." That and I remember when I went to a picnic, it wasn't--it was soon after I went to a picnic. And people I didn't know saw me, and made some derogatory comment, and says, "Oh, my goodness, that's terrible, you know, that, that the woman, that the mother would dye that child's hair. And, and the child is just, you know, six years old, seven years old." And I started to tear up, and I remember who I was with, and I think it was a friend of the family, so that, first of all, they didn't know my hair was naturally red. Yeah, there are not that many black people with red hair (laughter). In some places, I remember seeing a lot in Jamaica, but, and she said, "You're always going to get something. You're always going to hear comments. It's going to be about your hair. People are going to think it's dyed. They're going to make comments about your mother. You're just going to have to learn to, you know, it--that, that some people are not very kind, but they weren't talking to you." So, you know (laughter), okay, all right, I do understand. But, but any time anybody would say anything, it would just be very painful about, about hearing about my mom. What happened to the family is they sent us to, to stay with my aunt in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and her husband for that summer. We didn't like being away from our dad. And so, it was the first summer we went to, to Atlantic City [New Jersey], and to Philadelphia, and to the whole East Coast. And so, it was not, it was not the most joyous occasion to have us. And to Aunt Audrey's [Audrey Beasley] credit (laughter), because she didn't have children, she really didn't know how to (laughter), to have children (laughter), in her home. And so, it was this is the way it'll be, and this is the way I want it to be, and, and so, we weren't used to Aunt Audrey at all anyway. So, we couldn't wait to get home, not only to our Dad, but to our grandparents, and to, to what is familiar. Last thing you need to is take kids away from what is familiar. And then, my grandparents came to stay with us. They would be there and cook. We--Daddy had promised us that whatever happened, we would always live with him, and it would always be the three of us. And there would, he would never break us up and send one to up, on toward, on to a grandparent. So, we thought, "Oh, we'll always be together." Oh, so, my grandparents came out and stayed with us. And then, he got a housekeeper who would come out. We didn't like her (laughter), never liked Mrs. Stewart [ph.]. She pulled our hair (laughter), you know trying to get through all the little (laughter) untangled, knaps--oh, dare I say the word?
Story_ID: 481896
Speaker 1: My father [George Beasley, Jr.] started dating this woman, Mildred, Mildred Gaines. And this was, I don't know, year and half--oh, goodness. Well, when we met her, we just loved Mildred Gaines. We tried to do everything we could to be nice, you know, to, to make her like us, to be wonderful children. And they did marry. And, you know, to be at the wedding of your Dad and, and Mil, and, and well, the upshot is (laughter), oh, goodness, a life is, is, you just never know. Their relationship didn't work out that well. My father drank--not to the point that he couldn't work, but enough that it, it's detrimental to a family, and stayed out (laughter). And my mother, my stepmother said, that's it after six years. And we wanted to go live with my stepmother. Well, the courts had ruled that you have to--in Ohio, you have to live with your natural parent. So, I mean, it was, it was, it was, he was, he was, the second most painful leaving, was my stepmother leaving. I mean, we were, we loved our stepmother as though she was our mother. So, she did something absolutely phenomenal, plus she felt the same way about us. But, she was not going to stay in the situation. Um (laughter), we actually--and at that time, my sister [Annette Beasley Coleman], goodness, my sister is something. She actually petitioned the courts, in fact, she testified against my father at the, at the divorce hearing to, to live with, with, and so did my grandparents, Dee Dee [Jessie Beckwith Beasley] and Bampa [George Beasley, Sr.]. His, his mother and father testified against my father. And the courts still wouldn't award us custody of my stepmother. My sister then petitioned the courts, at some point a little later, after Daddy got custody of us, we asked Daddy to leave the house. And, you know, we had a nice house and, you know, it was like a ten, eleven room house or something, that we could run the house ourselves. And he agreed. He moved about two blocks down with some woman he was living with, half-living with anyway. And so, my sister took on running the house, and she also sued my father in court.
Story_ID: 481897
Speaker 1: And here's what the suit was about. She [Beasley's sister, Annette Beasley Coleman] was the youngest person in, to sue her--in the, in the State of Ohio at the time. She was petitioning because we would get these little yellow envelopes that would come to the house after my mother [Annette Davis Beasley] died. We didn't know what they were for and then, eventually, we learned they were social security checks. Now we got them in our name. It would say, Arlene A. Beasley [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], my name, in care of my father [George Beasley, Jr.]. Those checks were to be held for our education. They were supposed to be put aside. That was not happening. It was suppose- supposed to be somehow put for us, and they should have put it into separate accounts. Well, the courts ruled in my sister's favor (laughter). And so, she was the youngest one, not only to sue her father, but to win a suit (laughter). And the, the courts then petitioned that those checks had to be put aside. So, there was all this kind of animosity against our father (laughter) at the time, and the things he was doing against our stepmother [Mildred Gaines] (laughter). And so, and so, he eventually, he agreed to move out, which then, you had my sister running the house, who ran it like a DI [drill instructor], you know. She ran it like a drill sergeant, you know, you will do this, to the point that when kids would come over, and they'd say, "I'm spending the night over--." Phoebe, and my sister was called Twasy [Annette Beasley Coleman]. "I'm spending the night over at Phoebe and Twasy," parents didn't mind because they knew that my sister, who was only fifteen, was, was such a little drill sergeant (laughter). It was like, those lights will go out at ten o'clock. Everybody will (laughter), so, everybody will clean the kitchen (laughter), just like she couldn't wait for her role to be mother. So, there we were. And at one point, you know, when we got older, and Twasy was doing all the bills, and she would have, okay, "You owe this much for the bills. And you owe, Phoebe, all this much," when we start working. And, and my brother [George Beasley III] decided to mount this charge well, you know, "I think she's charging us too much." "Why, I do, too." "Well, why don't you talk?" "No, no, she's your sister." She's no bigger than this. And then, we decided to confront her. "Twasy, we think we're being overcharged for your credit card bill." She pushes it over to, "Oh, why don't you just do it?" "Oh, no, no, no, we're sorry, we're sorry, we didn't mean it (laughter). That's okay, never mind (laughter)." Oh, boy, little did I know (laughter). Well, what I did was ran from all that. Both my brother and I ran to Los Angeles [California]. We eventually moved out (laughter). We had the good sense at some point to extricate ourselves from the clutches of--I eventually left, and graduated, and went to college, went to Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]. And my brother who didn't finish--oh, let's see--did, did he finish high school? Anyway, he eventually moved to Los Angeles. And his surrogate brother, all these years, was Bill Burke [William Burke]. And Bill Burke, who's head of the Los Angeles Marathon, Bill from the--I've known Bill Burke all my life. I mean, he was actually a part of the group of boys that actually shined shoes at the country club [Manakiki Golf and Country Club; Manakiki Golf Course, Willoughby Hills, Ohio] during high school and college. When he would come home, he would get a job, you know, a summer job with my dad. And he would take them all out to the country club, and show them how to, you know, this is what you must do. This is the money. This is how you shine, this is how you, you ace all the--these are the things you need to know in order to have this kind of business. So, when my father died, Bill came to his funeral in Cleveland [Ohio], which was where he was from, and talked about my father had the first internship program for black men (laughter)--that some of them are in jail, some of them were dead, but Bill was his one success story (laughter). But, we never realized what Daddy gave to all these, you know, young kids that he would pick up on the street and that, you know, that they would have to know, "Okay, and meet me at the corner of 150th and Euclid [sic.] at six o'clock. And we're going to go to the country club, and this is what your jobs will be." And this is what they did, and, you know, he'd have about six of these guys all the time that have to figure out either how to get there, or he would take them. And so, that was my, my growing up 'til I got to college (laughter).
Story_ID: 481898
Speaker 1: Interesting about your, your sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] being the drill instructor, your father [George Beasley, Jr.] divorcing. And do you still keep, maintain a relationship or, or you keep, know about Mildred Gaines?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness (laughter), glad you asked. She is probably the closest person to me in my life still, yes, and Mil just turned ninety. And, even after they divorced, she continued to be in our lives. Everything that was important, you know, my--Mil and Dad were always there. And about, you know, she's still, now she's, she's the grandmother of my niece, you know, that, that she's always in their life. And my sister, at one point, wanted my, Mil to live with her, and it was like, Mil said, "Oh, no, I'd have to be in a home, I'd rather be in a home (laughter) first than live with Twas [Beasley's sister, Annette Beasley Coleman]." But oh, so, then she, she was living in an apartment. And she had said to us, you know, "I really want to live in a senior citizen--." And we went to see it, and I thought, well, darn, I want to live here, too. It's like a country club here, you know. And it's on Rockefeller Gardens [Homewood Residence at Rockefeller Gardens, Cleveland Heights, Ohio], and it's, you know, rolling hills and what-not. And so, it was like, figure out I can do this, and we said, "Okay," and "if this is what you want to do," and, you know, it's not that she couldn't afford to do it. It's just, make the details, and what do I have to do, how do I get out of my lease? And I thought, oh, you've come to the right people for, to, you know, to make this happen. So, right now, she lives about ten minutes from Twas, and, you know, Twas picks her up. Or when I go home, one of the things I do, is go to the senior citizen complex. We play bingo every day. I mean, she's, she's one of them--play with three or four cards. I, on the other hand, have trouble working on two at once, but, and she can't wait for me to come to Cleveland [Ohio], so we can, yeah. I came out here when, with my sister, when my sister on her sixtieth birthday, wanted to be here, so Mil came with her. We all went to my house. We've got--my brother [George Beasley III] and I have a house in Palm Springs [California]. So, the only painful thing about that, that planning that sixtieth is my sister's birthday was on 9/11/2001 [September 11, 2001]. And the day we woke up, and found out all that was just quite a--all the time she was planning her birthday, other people were making plans for all of us.
Speaker 1: Wow. I, I don't know if I asked you what--first of all, how do you spell the nickname for your sister, Twain?
Speaker 2: Twasy, T-W-A-S-Y.
Speaker 1: Twasy?
Speaker 2: Twasy, and it was all because she had no hair when she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was really, "Twasy Wasy was a bear, Twasy Wasy, he had no hair, Twasy wasn't fuzzy wuzzy?" And so, they, they nicknamed my aunt nick- nicknamed her Twasy.
Speaker 1: Twasy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was born nine, eleven [September 11]--
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941].
Speaker 1: --forty-one [1941]. And your brother was born--I didn't get that?
Speaker 2: April 27, '45 [1945].
Story_ID: 481899
Speaker 1: We'll forward a little because you went through Univ- you went to Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Graduated in June of 1965--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with a degree in painting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --major?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And a bach- and a minor in education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What was college like for you?
Speaker 2: College--well, first of all, let me, let me go back a few months before I went to college. And I had a counselor. Even though I was good in art, did very well in art, I wanted to major in it. The senior counselor, you know, when you to get be a senior, you get a different counselor. And I remember a counselor telling me that--I said, "Oh, I'm planning to major in art." And she kind of looked at me. It was kind of between a smirk and a laugh, and it was kind of like a slaugh [ph.], and it was like--I thought, no, that's not for me. And it was, "There is no such thing as an African American artist. You have to be serious about your career, and at some point, understand what your limitations are." And I was hearing her, but there was something wrong with what was coming out of her mouth. And she said, "Now, come see me tomorrow, let me know, I'll give you a day to decide what you're going to major in because I need to send this transcript in, and come back, and see me tomorrow." And I went home. And the good thing is I didn't hit her, I didn't react, I didn't (laughter), you know, all of that. What would my grandmother think (laughter) comes back to you. Oh, and since there was really nobody to talk to about, you know, there's not a mother and father there to say--and so, you think, well, now wait a minute, I thought I was good in art and, and to her, to her credit, I couldn't think of an African American artist either. I couldn't think--I could think of African American thespians. I could think of [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis. I could think of, of musicians--Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, Little Richard. But I could not think, and I'd never, I'd never read about an African American artist when I was in high school [John Adams Senior High School; John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio], never saw a book on one. But I don't know--blood, guts, youth, nuttiness, and just pissantiness [ph.], I was determined to put down, I'm going to major in art. Went back the next day and said, "Look, put artist. I'm, I'm going put, art major--that's my major." And she looked at me, and, and realized that I was not to be trifled with at that point, you know. You almost had the, (speaking Arabic) "As-Salaam-Alaikum [Peace be unto you]," (laughter). Don't say another word to me (laughter). There is an attitude where you get particularly, when all of a sudden, we look much taller than we are (laughter).
Story_ID: 481900
Speaker 1: Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] was the most nurturing, caring place I could have selected. I didn't know it at the time. I wasn't even sure I was going to college because of my father [George Beasley, Jr.], and whether there was money, and whether we could do this. And he said, "Oh, we can do it." Well, see, my father always said, yes, whether he had money or not, you know. And that country club money, you just never knew, and it was seasonal because for the most part, it's nine months. And so, he always said yes. It--and we'd find out, you know, three months later, it was no, but he would always say yes. And so, he said, "Of course, we have money to go to col- if you want to go to college, we've got money, you know, you, and we can do this." And I thought fine. It was the most caring place. All my professors, the administration--nobody looked at me, like you got to be out your mind (laughter). So, being at a place where everybody was nurturing and on, on board with my dream to be an artist, I really loved Ohio University. It was just, it, to be away, and to be able to really be around people who wanted to be in the arts, and just work on projects, do things in the arts, and to have that as a goal. Graduating from art, graduating from Ohio University, oh, I knew it was like you still got to figure this out. How are, how are you going to make this work? And so, I also got my degree in education, so I could teach, came back to Cleveland [Ohio], and taught at Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio], and happened to be at something last night for Victoria Rowell. I'm working with her foster children to, in art projects around the country. She's got me going to different cities, too. She's a wonderful person. But somebody came up to me at her book signing last night and said, "Excuse me, my mother was one of your students in high school." Not only did I know her mother, and I said, "Oh, you're Clarice's daughter, Clarice Morris [ph.]." She said, "Yes," and this woman I'm talking to is darn near, you know, she's thirty something. But her mother had called me about twenty-five, thirty years ago, found out and saw a Jet article in a Jet magazine, called me, and said, "I want to, I want to design clothes for you." And she was so good in high school at doing this because I'd had her do a fashion show, that she didn't even need a pattern. All she had to do is give you measurements, and you could design what you want. I could draw it up. So, about twenty-five years ago, she actually made some clothes for me. And so, she said, "Remember my mom did clothes for you? Maybe I was about five years old and she did them?" I said, "Yes, as a matter of fact, and I'm still wearing them. They're fabulous. I love the clothes your moth- ." So to know that there are students of mine out here that I feel like, like they're my children, that she was saying, "I can't wait to tell my mom I saw you." So, anyway, I mean, you fast forward, you never know where that influence is going to extend. You never know.
Story_ID: 481901
Speaker 1: But I taught for four years, and it was probably the most rewarding thing I'll ever do, teaching high school, because these students were about my age. You know, I was barely out of my, you know, into my twenties. And they were, some of them almost into their twenties, (laughter), so, so that age difference, you know, and it's just, and it was during black power and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]; and Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and, you know, keeping the lid on Cleveland [Ohio]. And '65 [1965] to '69 [1969] is when I taught. And I remembered when I--we had actually a riot at the school [Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. And some of the students had beaten up teachers. They had taken over this, the cafeteria. They had masks over their faces or material, and the police were outside. All the teachers and, and students were, about three thousand students in the school, we were all down on the ground in the parking lot. And you had about forty students in the school. And on the bullhorn they said, "Send in Mrs. Evans [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley] and Mr. Dahdale." Well, I didn't mention that I'd gotten married [to Louie Evans, Jr. (ph.)] in that period (laughter), but I was Mrs. Evans, and I heard my name. And Dennis Dahdale [ph.], who is still my attorney today (laughter), said, "Pheeb, you'll have to go in. We have to go, and then save our kids." I thought, wait a minute, I've already given my notice two weeks ago. I'm leaving and going to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. I'm going to California (unclear). And the police were saying, "No, we can cover you." "Cover me? You're about as far as the Pacific Ocean is from this, this gallery [M. Hanks Gallery, Santa Monica, California] here (laughter). You're going to cover me (laughter)? Them's my kids in there (laughter)." Oh, but Dennis convinced me that the thing to do would be to go in this cafeteria, and to help them with their demands, to negotiate the demands. And we went in. They had this long table and sat us in the middle of the table. And I just wanted to, you know, I'd hear the voices, and I would want to smack the student, and rip off this, this, this cloth and say, "Stop it, just stop it right now." But these students were very serious. I mean, they had beaten up, put a couple of the teachers in the hospital--not that some of these teachers didn't deserve what they were getting, retribution, but it was still wrong on their part. Well, they had demands like, "We want to be able to wear afros as large as we want." Well, my way of negotiating was, "Whatever y'all want (laughter)." Dennis, on the other hand, was kicking me under the table saying--"And we want to be able to wear dashi- [dashiki]--." They had the long, they had long dresses, African garb, and now they had to put a limit on how long the train could be. And some of the students were objecting to the length of the train that could be on the garb. And I thought it ought to be as long as a wedding train out the front door and all the way, you make, making turns. But Dennis had said, "You know, we need to talk about the students. We have a safety issue." So, he was studying for the bar. I was studying to get the heck out of there until we leave for Los Angeles [California], but we did negotiate the demands. And they returned the school to the property of the (laughter) Cleveland public schools.
Story_ID: 481902
Speaker 1: You don't remember the name of that counselor by any chance, do you?
Speaker 2: You know, I was thinking about that this morning, and I could not come up with it, and I thought that was purposely forgotten.
Speaker 1: Good, good, 'cause if you had done--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's amazing what the world would have lost--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --had you done, followed her lead.
Speaker 2: Yes. You know what, what, what I think most about is, not her name so much, is, is the students who took her advice and didn't follow their dreams.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And as Langston [Langston Hughes] says, "A dream deferred." That's more painful to me that when I go back to Cleveland [Ohio] and, sometimes, some of the students that I was in class with, kids that, adults now, that I went to school with, I remember one particular person came up to me and said, "Oh, you remember me." I mean, it's like, it, it ain't like you. You, you just left (laughter), you know, you've got forty years of a whole another place. But I did remember him, but what I didn't remember was he said, "You remember on a project, it was on perspective--remember I got an A and you got a C?" Well, see, I knew he was living in a time, or because that was the time when he was running ahead of me. That was the time, that's, that's his benchmark of what he's done. And he perhaps was one of those people who took that advice, and didn't follow his dream, and was now working in a carpet store. And I did understand that. I did understand how he could still be stuck with--I thought, well, darn, is that all you can remember about life is when you got an A and I got a--and I thought, but that's real important. And that's what you see a lot of when you go back home because when you moved--those who moved were the dreamers. You know, if you were willing to leave a place, you were really one of those people like Covey [sic. John H. Schaar] says, "Who was willing to put your dreams in place." You, you had to have the activity, the energy, the vision to do that. There are some people where you grew up, as much activity as they've had, it's, it's the same neighborhood where they grew up. And it's very painful when they, when they have to benchmark themselves against somebody who kept moving.
Story_ID: 481903
Speaker 1: You mentioned you got married. Your, your husband's name, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, Louie Gene [Louie Evans, Jr. (ph.)], it's L-O-U-I-E, Gene Evans, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know when you guys got married?
Speaker 2: Oh, '68 [1968] to '69 [1969]. I think it was June--no, January 6th.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 2: I was only married a year.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you divorced in sixty--'60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. When I came out here, I think the divorce became final--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in July of '69 [1969], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now you're in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm here, I'm here.
Speaker 1: Now you're here in Los Angeles [California], the Land--La La Land.
Story_ID: 481904
Speaker 1: You got four years of education [at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] behind you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Husband's [Louie Evans, Jr. (ph.)] be- behind you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what happens now?
Speaker 2: What happens now? I do have--the good thing is that I had a, I had a base of family and foundation here. Oh, my brother [George Beasley III] was here--been here two years. Bill Burke [William Burke] was here, who I've always thought of as family anyway. And, oh, but for the first, I think year or so, I worked as a layout artist for a fashion publication, SAGE Publications [SAGE Publishing]. And I did that, working on a light table, you know (laughter), oh, doing a little of the art at night, but all I'm doing is, is sketches and things you can do on a table of, you know, in, in an apartment. So, that's--and the things, the, any of the large works that I did, I was doing them still, when I was in Cleveland [Ohio], and would paint at night. Actually, there were, there were ten of us who actually had a storefront. I didn't know it was one of the first cooperatives where you come up with the idea of, "Okay, it's a hundred dollars a month rent. Let's all put in ten dollars, so we'll have place to paint." There was a motorcycle patrolman. There was, you know, somebody who was in advertising; Nelson Stevens, who's at the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], who's a professor of art. And he was a junior high school art teacher at the time, and I was a senior high school teacher at Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio]. And we would have an easel all set up in our little stall. And I thought, could we do, could I do something like that if I moved to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], have a little stall? And, but I never connected with the artist who wanted to do that, and didn't connect with the art world here. That one I grew up in, this one you'd have to find. Oh, so, it wasn't until about a time I'm--backtrack, we were, I was still in Cleveland. We were trying to keep the lid on Cleveland again, trying to burn it down at those time. The school, we were having an assembly program. We'd gotten money, I think, from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. And the, the teachers wanted--oh, goodness, I'm trying to remember--the students wanted H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] to come as the speaker or Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] or Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. The teachers wanted--oh, who is the head of the Urban League [National Urban League] at the time? Whitney Young.
Speaker 1: Whitney Young.
Speaker 2: Our, our compromised candidate guest for the--was Bill Russell (laughter). That's right, that's right. Bill Russell, who was coach and general manager--I think he was just general--no, I think he was, he was still a player. He might have been--no, he was the first coach in the NBA [National Basketball Association], first black coach in the NBA--I think he had just become the first black coach in the NBA. You might check that, but he was certainly world champion Boston Celtic [Boston Celtics].
Speaker 1: Celtics.
Speaker 2: Cleveland didn't have a team, so (laughter), there was no competition there, but he was our candidate. He was the one we, we all could agree on, students, and he came to the school. I remember meeting him backstage, and glad that he was the one who came. The kids loved him, you know, we all knew of him. And he made an impassioned plea to--about education. Fast forward through Cleveland. I was at a Shell [Shell Oil Company] gas station in Hollywood, happened to see him at the other, next pump, and said, "Thank you. By the way, thank you so much for helping to keep the lid on Cleveland. You were at my school. I was--." And he remembered. He became one of my dearest friends, and to this day, is still one of my dearest friends.
Story_ID: 481905
Speaker 1: And Bill [William Burke], when I moved to Los Angeles [California], oh, let's see, oh, trying to remember whether it was then. Oh, he helped me, he introduced, he--well, the most important, one of, one of the most important things he did, at that point, was that he wanted me to meet somebody, that if he thought that I was going to pursue this goal to be an artist, then I needed to know successful artists in any of the arts and, particularly, this particular woman because she had already ferreted the waters. She understood how difficult it was, and was one of the few, and it was Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou]. So, he took me to her (unclear) television show to meet her. And, oh, I think it was months later, she was in town to speak, and I went up to her, and reminded her of our meeting. And she said, "Oh, of course, I remember." But she said something, so life-changing, said, "Could you wait here until after I'm through? I'd really like to talk to you." And I thought--a quick change of my agenda revealed there was nothing else on it for the entire day. And at that time, I was now in radio. I was in radio sales, oh, it was in radio, probably merchandising at the time before I went into sales. And she asked, "Could you have time to go to dinner? I want you to meet my husband, Paul du Feu," and she was staying at the Beverly Hills Hotel [Beverly Hills, California]. And we had the most wonderful dinner. Oh, that was in the '70s [1970s]. Maya is, is still one of the closest people to me--mentor, friend, patron, and so it, it's just, you just never know. You, and, and, and having a mentor like Maya, mentors can see things in us that we and others cannot. And Maya has that gift. And I remember that, at one point--trying to remember the year, you know--I think it was early, maybe early '80s [1980s], late '70s [1970s]. She wanted me to meet everybody she had written about in her books that were still alive. And so, we took a car trip from Los Angeles [California] to San Francisco [California]. And we'd stop at these little hamlets and these little places, and they still called her Maya. And they had a pot of greens on the stove, and they didn't know, "Oh, Lord, Maya, your friend love greens as much as you do. Why, why didn't you tell us that (laughter)?" And we got to San Francisco. We're waiting for a table in a rest- restaurant. We're in the bar area. She says, "Pheeb [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley]," says, "what are you working on?" And I was in radio, in daytime radio sales, marketing. And I started saying, "You know, galleries have been unresponsive," and, you know, "nobody really care how difficult it is, and, and, you know, I'm worn out." And Maya says, "Pheeb, stop it, stop it, just stop it this instant. Even today, I have, I care about you, I care about your work, sister. You must do it, you must do it. You are smart enough, and educated enough to figure it out. You must do it. I will just say this one more time--if you don't do it, you will lose it. If you don't do it, God will take it from you, sister. You must do it." Needless to say, the dinner was so quiet. Even today, I get emotional about, you know, when your friends bring you up short, and you kind of walk that walk, and talk that, but they can see through all of that. And I went back to Los Angeles, and I thought about what Maya said, "You must do it."
Story_ID: 481906
Speaker 1: So, you got a little advice from Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) More than a little, more than a--yes, indeed. And not only that but, you know, it, it, it's about everything. Oh, I'm remembering a wonderful time with Maya being my bid whist partner, and her mother [Vivian Baxter Johnson], and her mother's husband. It was Mrs. Baxter and, and, and her, her husband being our opponents. And Mrs. Baxter, Mother Baxter did not lose well, you know. And we were bad winners, but whether it was playing bid whist, or talking about life, or our men friends, or I mean, it's just--there's--it, she knows better than to talk to me how to cook anything because, you know, that's, that's not something I have a real passion about (laughter) so but--
Speaker 1: Can you burn water (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You can read about it. You, you can--any, I, you know, anything you can, you, you can cook. You can figure out how to read, how to cook it, so she knew I was not the person to be talking to (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But she's been special.
Story_ID: 481907
Speaker 1: So then, you had, you started at SAGE [SAGE Publishing], you met Dr. Ma- Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where else were you, but how did you get into radio? Then, then, now, you started this radio career?
Speaker 2: Started this radio career, yes. It was, oh, an--what was it--a company that hired people only in radio and television. And I thought, oh, I'll be doing props. I'll be doing backstage. And no, and it ended up, I was started in merchandising at KFI Radio [Los Angeles, California]. And KFI was an interesting station. It had been a sports station. And so, at that time in 1970, it had the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers], the Chargers [Los Angeles Chargers], the--I mean it had, oh, the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], but it had a lot of cigarette ads. And in 1970, was it, when [U.S.] Congress said, no longer, cigarettes are no longer on, and television and radio. And so, they decided to key in on another industry, hired a whole marketing department that I was a part of, and they went after targeting the food industry, California's largest industry. And so, I know a lot about food, and how to get things to market, and products, and from concept to consumer. So, you know, whether it's marketing, and so, a lot of this was transferrable as to how to have an art career, too, because most people think it's just about art. Well, it is if you want to keep it under your bed, but how to market your art, how to, when the doors are closed, when you have to think of alternative ways of, do things. And other than showing up at a mall every year to do an exhibit, how do you market your work? So, you know, it became something where the skills were more transferrable. How do you run a small company? Most people will not talk to you, artists, about how do you manage a small business of being an artist? You're working with shippers and framers and craters, and gallery owners, and now it's copyright attorneys. And all of that help the fact that, that I was in radio, and could use those skills that I learned about in radio, and transfer a lot of them--how to make a presentation, how to, oh, but mostly, what I liked about radio is that I was one of those artists who could not live in a vacuum. I needed people. I'm a, a figurative collagist. So, for the most part, I need what being around people gives me. So, most people didn't understand how important that was. They thought--oh, she just has this little job in radio for peanuts, so she can, you know, kind of have her finance her art career. Some of that was true, but I also needed radio because it allowed me making presentations, having luncheons, doing deals. I don't know what it is in me, Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], but I also love doing deals. I love the, the, the process, the idea. How things get bought and sold in this country is one of the most fascinating things to me that it, it's as much a part of me as, as being an artist. So, it was not, oh, goodness, I'm going to this radio. I mean, you could not do that, and be at one of the largest stations in the country, KFI. We have no other means of getting around in this city except in cars. We don't have any public transportation to speak of, so you have one of the largest auto industries in the world. Well, that translates to the largest radio market in the world, and one of the largest stations. You cannot work a fifty thousand watt all clear A-1 [Class A] station like KFI. And then, we had a KOST [KOST Radio, Los Angeles, California] and then KACE [KACE Radio, Los Angeles, California], and not be passionate about that. So, so I was passionate morning, morning, noon, and night. I loved what radio does, and how it communicates. I mean, it's, it's, how it works on your brain, what you need to, to get people to do something. And so, how you get them to, whether it's to do, to buy bread or buy art--I mean, we're still buying a product, so (laughter), it's, it's what I do.
Story_ID: 481908
Speaker 1: And on top of all that, because of, of Bill Burke [William Burke] marrying Yvonne Burke [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke], who was, at one point, in [U.S.] Congress, she ran for attorney general, is now a county supervisor for the last, you know, twelve, fourteen years, I'm also involved in politics. And I have been because of Yvonne for the last thirty years. I love politics. I love how things get done. I, I--what's the underbelly here? And I'm, I'm an arts commissioner, a county arts commission, county arts commissioner, sitting on the Los Angeles County Arts Commission, as a supervisory Yvonne Burke appointee, for the Second District. So, I've been doing that for about ten years. So, there are things that I--how, how the fun arts get funded, where the money goes, and what happens, and how it comes back to the people is, is, is a process I'm very involved in so.
Speaker 2: KFI Radio [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: KFI.
Speaker 2: Howard Neal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Howard Neal.
Speaker 2: Yes, Mr. Neal.
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 2: Help. Talk (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We know the same, we know a lot of the same folks. When you said, KACE [KACE Radio, Los Angeles, California], Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis].
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yeah, we bought that from him--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then sold it for an enormous amount.
Speaker 2: Yes (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes. A lot of people were hurt when they sold KACE.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: As you know, that, that studio now is at KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] right now.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Stevie Wonder's, but Willie, Mr. Davis is still there. He still uses that building as an office.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And before that was [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --who Clarence and Jackie [Jacqueline Gray Avant] are two of my biggest collectors. And he can't believe that, you know, he spent seven hundred thousand [dollars] trying to make it work, and we sold it for about, yeah, seventy-five million eventually. I mean, that's, but--
Speaker 2: As a (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Just stay out here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hm, she's dropping names right now by the way so (laughter).
Speaker 1: I, I've got a--you, you know, when we talk about dropping, it's really a--saluting them.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: It's acknowledging them. It's, it's a part of the history of, yes, and we weren't--we and they weren't all that famous when all of this was happening. I mean, there are people who say to me, "How did you get to Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]?" And a better question would be, how did she get to me, and what was I doing when she found me, because I don't spend time going out looking for--oh, my goodness. You know, it's, it's, some of that is that you, you spend time doing your work, and people know about your work. They pick up your dream.
Story_ID: 481909
Speaker 1: I remember, I was at a gallery. It was the gallery in San Francisco [California], Bomani Gallery, owned by Asake, Asake Bomani, who, at that time, was married to [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover. And Asake was in South Africa when Nelson Mandala when he assumed the title of, when he became president?
Speaker 2: President, yes.
Speaker 1: President. And they were having his inaugural. And I was saying that, you know, Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] is one of those people who's picked up my dream, and kind of carries it, and tells people about my work, and had to chauffeur me in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and make sure people know, that they know about me. And that's what happens when people really like you and your work and, and see the vision, and they help you do that. And he was--she was saying, "Oh, let me tell you what happened in South Africa." Well, prior to them being in South Africa, I had seen Maya in a beauty shop. And she had said to me, "Sister, what are you working on?" Now, I know from the day, thirty years ago (laughter), I always have something I'm working on when I tell Maya. I mean, I just increased my products (laughter), projects by a hundredfold. And I gave her a little postcard, "Oh, this is a show I'll be having at the Bomani Gallery in San Francisco." She said, "Can I have this?" And I said, "Oh, sure, I sent you one." But she got a call when she was sitting in the beauty chair, beauty shop chair from--it was Vice President Gore [Al Gore] at the time. His office was calling to say, "There's one seat left on Air Force One, the president's plane. He'd like you to be his representative in South Africa at the inauguration of, of President Mandela." She didn't have time to go home. So she, they met her in Washington [D.C.], her assistant met her in Washington with clothes and everything. She still had the same purse she had from the beauty shop. She had my little card from Bomani Gallery. Asake said she was talking at the inaugural of President Mandala. She was showing it to Castro [Fidel Castro]. She was showing it to (unclear), "You have to know my friend, [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley, at the Bomani Gallery (laughter)." Asake said, "I couldn't believe it. There was Maya showing your (laughter)." I said, that's my, that's my friends. That's what people who care about you, who know that you're serious, and you're passionate about what you're doing. And that's what her little talk did for me. That's why I gave up watching the Cleveland Browns and, and all football and don't watch, so I could spend more time working on my dream. And it made a difference.
Story_ID: 481910
Speaker 1: Let me read something. This is just a little bit about [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley. "Phoebe Beasley's day usually begins around six a.m. when she's awake- awakened in a Woodland Hills [Los Angeles, California] home by calls from the East Coast friends who often forget that there's a three-hour time difference between Los Angeles [California] and New York [New York]. Before eight, and what might--someone called the second home, a Mercedes-Benz 420SEL headed for her office at a Los Angeles radio station where she works as a very successful advertising account executive. And it goes on and on and on--back home around seven p.m. Is that Phoebe Beasley?
Speaker 2: Yes. I think it was Herb Nipson [Herbert Nipson] who wrote--I'm trying to remember who wrote that for Ebony magazine. And, yes, I, I--absolutely. It is exact, that so much about how those twenty-eight years working night and day, worked. I mean, there were times when, you know, you get home. You do meetings, have the deals, you know, and take off one garb going to the studio, paint until two, three in the morning, get ready for a sales meeting eight, eight-thirty the next morning--absolutely. That's, oh, you know, when people say, "How did you do it?" I'm always curious. I, I'm always--have more wonderment with people who raise kids. You see, I didn't have that in my mix, so it was just about me, you know, maybe a couple of dogs that, that needed to be fed. But, for the most part, it was all--I had to decide what to do with that time. There was nobody else drawing on my time. But when you talk to people who are raising a two year old, a three year old, and a forty-four year old, I, I, you know, a husband or, it's just amazing what they can do. So, I still hark back to that actualizing every moment though. You know, that, that, we don't know, and having mentors like Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and Gordon. I mean, I would talk to [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks. He would call me, and he would be telling me the projects he was working on, and you would just be amazed. And I, I get off the phone thinking, goodness (laughter). He's thirty years older and, and I'm not working hard enough here (laughter). He's got eighteen projects he's doing just in one day. So, again, it's about who you surround yourself with. And if you surround yourself with people who are working at the pace of snails, trust me, that will be you. If, it's when you get calls from--I remember getting a call from Stedman Graham. And he had an idea, that he wanted me to do something special for Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], or did I have anything already that--and I had no idea he was going to call. Oh, and I said, "Well, you tell me about her." And he spent an hour telling me about Oprah. And I thought, "(Sighs) I just want some man to think of me the way he's (laughter) thinking of Oprah." I mean, it was just--and so, I thought, let me think about something special for her, rather than something I already have. And I, you know, "See if you can get me some things, and some photographs, and what-not because, you know, I'm a collagist." And, "Okay, I'll try." And, well, the upshot is he called me about, about a week later. They were going to be, he was going to be in Los Angeles [California]. Actually, I think they'd already arrived when he was talking to me. And the next thing I know, he was on the phone. And I thought, wait, isn't this supposed to be a surprise? And it was like, "Well, you know, you might as well come over here. Let's talk about a painting." But because I was in radio, I didn't have time to wait for the things he was going to send me anyway. I mean, I got my own timetable. You got to do things, and you're, you're very time sensitive (laughter) about, about what, what must be done. I'd already started the painting. So, when he--we had to, I think, walk upstairs to see her at the hotel. They were in a kind of a penthouse setting and, and it was come on in. I mean, it was in the bathroom. They were putting on makeup. And, and so, the only place to sit was on the rung of the bathtub. And I got to--my first meeting with her was, was looking at her through a mirror. She was--because I was sitting on the--and they were doing her hair and her makeup (laughter). And, and she says, "Okay, well, I need to tell you about this painting." I thought, I probably need to tell you since I've already started it. And it was, "Okay (laughter)." And, again, our meeting had happened--I mean, the, the fact that I knew of her, and it was because of Maya, who had suggested to Stedman that maybe he'd want to think about calling me. And so, that was, was our initial--we both had the same mentor.
Story_ID: 481911
Speaker 1: But I said, "You know, I, I have a painting that, that you were six years old, and you were on your knees, and you're in, in prayer." And she [Oprah Winfrey] said, "Okay, okay." "And there's a figure, I have a figure sitting on the bed. There's your grandmother [Hattie Presley Lee] and your grandfather [Earlist Lee]." And she said, "Wait, there was no grandfather." And I thought, okay, I thought, who did I see, you know? Sometimes you, as an artist, you get to, you get to conjure up things. You get to use that side of your, your senses more so than most because that's what we do. And I thought, hm, maybe it was another grandfather. But then, she said, "You know, that, that you're remembering, you, you have incredible powers of intuitiveness. So, there was a grandfather." "Oh, really?" "But I never talked about him." And I thought, "Do you want to talk about him now?" And I realized she had tears in her eyes. And she said, and she said, "I never talked about him because the only time he talked to me, he never talked to me, the only time he talked to me was when he yelled at me, and said, 'Gal, get up on this porch.'" So she says, "I've never mentioned him." I said, "Well, I have him as a shadowy figure." She said, "That's what he was." I said, "Do you want me to leave him?" And she said, "(Nods head)." I said, "He stays in." I said, "Okay." And I said, "And I have, I had this bedspread, and it has a chenille bedspread." And, and she said, "Okay, um-hm." And I said, "It was pink," and she said, "(Nods head)." And I said, "Near your grandfa- -mother sitting there, and she has glasses." She said, "She didn't have glasses." And I thought, she did. I said, "Well the Bible is on top, the glasses are on top of the Bible." She said, "You're remembering my childhood better than me. Now, that I remember, she did have glasses. She only used them when she read the Bible." I said, "Well, they're actual-," and I thought, 'cause I was thinking when she said she didn't have glasses, I'd have to take them out, and I'd already done them in, in metal (laughter). And I did them in wire (laughter). And I got to figure out how to take those out of there. So, when she said, "Yes, she did have them." I thought I'd get to leave them. She said--I said, "I have a doll." And she said, "Pheeb [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], we were so poor, I only had a cob, corn-cob doll." And I thought, oh, darn, what century was this, you know? I mean, I, I, at that point, I wasn't even sure we were in the right century when I was talking to her. And I, and she said, "We had a slop jar." And I thought, "I got one in there--it's in there." And she said, "Okay." And I remember leaving there, and going to a Ralphs supermarket, and going straight to the vegetable stand, and getting an ear of corn, went back home, cut that ear of corn down, put a skirt on it and some eyes. And I thought, here I am working on this child's doll, and putting that in the artwork.
Story_ID: 481912
Speaker 1: And when, when I sent it, and at that point, she had said to me, "Well, okay, you know, it was for Christmas, but Christmas is not that important to me. What's important is my birthday, so if I just--." And I thought, fine, give me another month (laughter). Hell, I don't have to work as hard (laughter). And they got it very much before her birthday. It was like a week before. And I thought--haven't heard anything. And then about eleven o'clock that night, I got a call from Stedman [Stedman Graham]. And he said, "I've never known Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] to be at a loss for words, but I'm going to try and get her on the phone." And she came on the phone, and she says, "Girl, I'll tell you what, I'll never live in a house where this doesn't hang." She--I said, "Do you mind--can I call Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and tell her?" She says, "No, I want to call her." And I thought, okay. She said, "Oh, my goodness," she said, "you know, I was uncomfortable with this news crew that's going to be at my house," trying to remember what year that was. It'll come to me. "But it's the first time, you know, I've got a new house or apartment. And, oh, Barbara Walters is coming, and the news crew, and I've never had these folks in my house." And she says, "But they're, but now, they--my grandmother's [Hattie Presley Lee] here, my grandfather [Earlist Lee]." She says, "I'm feeling a little comfortable," so she said (unclear). And it was interesting when it--this thing was going to run on Tuesday, the day of the Academy Awards [Oscars], or whatever day it was. Oprah called me on a Saturday, and said, "Girl, I just want you to know before you see it. I saw a clip of, of what's going to be on, and they didn't use your name." I said, "Oh, I'll tell you what. I'm thankful for what, for what's given." And she said, "Well, they didn't, they only said, you know, a friend of, or an artist that O- that Stedman had commissioned it." And she says, "But I'm going to do other things. I'll help you. I'll do other things." And I thought, it's okay, it's okay (laughter). And, sure enough, they'd said something. They showed the painting and, and said, this was a gift from her, Stedman, her friend, to Oprah. And (laughter), and you could kind of read my name. And people called me, "I think, I saw your name (laughter). Did you do--?" And then, she did an article in Ebony, and you could see my artwork in that, and she mentioned my name. And it was like, I got, I can't do enough. And then I worked on 'The Women of Brewster Place.' And, you know, I was working on that, and just did a show for me in Chicago [Illinois]. I've never done a job with plainclothesmen. At that point, I'd never done, you know, that you had to have Chicago's finest there because at that point, you know, it was--people would call and say, it's just for me, and I'm RSVP'ing for one. And they'd show up with six people (laughter), you know, every relative they had. I had never done a show where I thought, I'm, I'm going to lose (laughter)--I thought I was going to faint at my own show (laughter). It was so crowded, but she was incredibly, she's been incredibly supportive of my career.
Speaker 2: Well-deserved, well-deserved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
Story_ID: 481913
Speaker 1: How do you describe the art of [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley?
Speaker 2: Hm. I have always thought that it's vignettes of life. It is--I have always wanted to think of my work as walking in to a person, place, an idea, a thing. But it's a vignette of, of what life looks like, that there are times I think that I could do theatre, stage plays, because I feel as though I understand the period of, of time, or I feel that period, or I can, I can get inside the mind of that time. And I don't think what I do is that much different. I've--it, it's a vignette of, of an idea, a person, place, or thing. When I did one called 'Executive Order 9981' [Phoebe Beasley]. And there has been so much on this war that we're currently in--the Iraq War, but when I think about all wars that I've grown up with, whether it was the Korean War, which I never really understood. A Korean War, you know, I didn't know what, what we were doing in, in Korea (laughter). You know, why don't the Koreans fight the Korean War (laughter)? I, I mean, and the only one we really understood, I guess, it was World War II [WWII], you know, that's kind of (laughter) the, but when I was thinking about it, I know that there's been so much on the Tuskegee Airmen, and what their life must have been like. And there's a friend of mine, Karen Hudson [Karen Hudson Freeman], whose father, Elbert Hudson [Elbert T. Hudson], was one of the Tus- Tuskegee Airmen. And because of one of her grandfathers, was Paul Williams, the incredible architect, and that's known for so many buildings in, in America and other countries. But wondering what their life must have been like, when first, they were in an all-black [U.S.] Army or [U.S.] Navy. And then, they were in an integrated Army and Navy, and what it must have been like to, to want to be a part of a whole Army, or those that didn't. I mean, I talked to Tuskegee Airmen who didn't like the fact that it was now going to be integrated.
Story_ID: 481914
Speaker 1: You were talking about the Tuskegee Airmen and the integration?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, can you pick up from there then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Oh, I wanted to do something that when that group of individuals looked at a painting, it, it's so-called something to that past memory. And it translated into something that young people would say, "What was that all about?" I mean, when you talk to people who didn't know there was a black army and a white army in this country in, in '45 [1945], it's just, it's just amazing our ignorance about history. And I thought if, if my, if I'm here for any reason, it is to spark something positive in somebody. And if it means somebody said, "What is this 9981 [Executive Order 9981]? What is the executive order? What did Truman [President Harry S. Truman] do?" And want to know about all of those people who spent time in an [U.S.] Army that was segregated, and then desegregated, to find those people, the Tuskegee Airmen, who are still alive, or to even understand the period? And then, you begin to understand maybe a little bit about Iraq. Once you understand about the history of, of all wars, or that we've been in, or that, that you have some--you, you can't get to any place unless there's a history here. You know, you measure history, not just by how far we come, but how far we're going. And when you have no measurement, when people just start yelling about something, and so much what I hear now is just, is repetitive. Who is it who says, "We're just stuck on stupid," [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Russel L. Honore]? We, we--it's just, it's nonsense that we don't even understand our history.
Speaker 1: No, we don't.
Speaker 2: We don't know the, the pain of words, or the painfulness of one word, or why we react so badly to a word. So, that fact, painting or, or that collage, 'Executive Order 9981' [Phoebe Beasley], there are certain periods in our history that I just think are just too monumental that, that ought to be relived, or celebrated, or acknowledged, or just, just that they become a part of the information process. And so, it's interesting about that painting. Oh, I'm in an organization that women form, women all over the world, and we sponsor leadership for women, too. And one of one was a colonel, Colonel Barbara Faulkenberry. She's the colonel of the war college in Alabama [Squadron Officer College, Montgomery, Alabama]. And I sent her one of my catalogues. You know, I'd met her at, at one of our national conventions. And she wrote me back, "Thank you for the catalogue, but, oh, my goodness, this 'Executive Order 9981,' you know, the Tuskegee Airmen museum is on this campus. And I am here with the president of--Charles McGee." And she sent me, she emails a picture of me, of, of the two of them reading my catalogue. And the photograph, 'Executive Order 9981,' is there. And they were thanking me for acknowledging that particular time in history. And I thought, you never know where your idea is going to extend, but you must be the vehicle for making that happen. And if you can do it, you know, I--the reason my work will only get to me so much play is because it has to, of the positive message. And how do you take good to an audience that evil is on the ascendancy (laughter)? It's as though I'm working against--I'm working up stream (laughter). I feel like (laughter) a darn salmon, but it's okay 'cause that's what we must do. There's so much that the people want to see that, that has, does not relate to. How do you, how, how do you, so it's, what's that, that people need to read. They need to educate themselves--
Story_ID: 481915
Speaker 1: How many paintings have you done in your lifetime?
Speaker 2: Hundreds. And, and again, I, I would, I'd like to say, I'm not sure, but in the early days, I'm really not because I didn't write everything down. I didn't document everything. I don't say we, we couldn't even have--we couldn't afford to photograph everything. So, there's a lot that's lost and what--somebody will say, "Well, who owns this?" And I thought, hm, in my wildest dream, they'd have to find me and tell me. And so, that's what's happened. Some people have actually told me, "I own such and such work," and I thought, you do (laughter)? I didn't know that. I thought, thank you for telling me because I have no record of it. So, I would, I only know that there are hundreds, probably, you know, into the thousands, but, but the ones I have that are documented, it's hundreds.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So, and, again, everything is not sold. Everything is not something you want--seemed as, you know, there are things that you have that--I mean, they're back home in, in the attic (laughter). My sister [Annette Beasley Coleman] used to, oh, give them away. And then, when she came to my first show and realized--wait a minute, these things have a price to them. They got red dots on them. Went home, put a lock on the attic door (laughter), and put the key around her neck (laughter). Oh--
Speaker 1: What's the most money you've ever gotten from one of your paintings?
Speaker 2: Hm, thirteen--I'm trying to think if it's higher than thirty-eight thousand [dollars].
Speaker 1: Thirty-eight thousand?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. I think it's topped out at--and I, I'm trying to add all the commissions things I've gotten, too, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Thousands of paintings. And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 481916
Speaker 1: Numerous celebrity clients, as well as other clients as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And most people are not as you well know are not celebrities (laughter). That's a, that's a, that's a group in itself that, you know, that people want to know who owns your work. It's easy to use those names because we all feel some kind of connection. I remember getting a call from [HistoryMaker] Reuben Cannon, who's a producer. And I've known Reuben for about thirty years, and Reuben said--he was in New York [New York] and he said, "Pheeb [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], you know, I've been working on these, these movies and play- and I, I want you to, I want to patch you through to a Tyler Perry." And I thought, a who (laughter)? And I said, "Okay." And next thing I know, Tyler Perry is, is on the phone, and he's driving from some place. I think he was in Atlanta [Georgia], and he has this idea he wants to commission me for a work, and, and I thought okay. And I knew Reuben had been working with somebody named Tyler, but, you know, to me, Reuben was always the, the person, you know (laughter). Tyler worked for him. And so, I remember talking to Tyler a little bit about the commission. And I thought, okay, well, let me quote some prices about how much and, and it was like, "Okay, okay." And then, I got off the phone. And I, a few days later, I tried to reach him about something. I couldn't, and then I called Reuben back, and I said, "Reuben, you know, you know, now, this Tyler Perry, you know, does, does, does he know how much it cost to commission? Reuben, do--can we, can we trust (laughter)?" And Reuben is saying, "Pheeb, just make the deal, Pheeb, just make the deal." And I thought, now I just want some clarity here, you know, because, you know, usually these things are written, and, you know, you have big contracts, and da-da. I'm used to having things (laughter) with a little more clarity.
Story_ID: 481917
Speaker 1: So, it was Reuben [HistoryMaker Reuben Cannon] who said--and then, when I finished the painting, 'cause usually, you know, something about the person who's commissioning you to do something. And Tyler [Tyler Perry] had this idea. And I, so we made a date to when to deliver the painting, and all be in town. And, and, "Bring it to my place in Malibu [California]." And I thought, "Malibu?" I could count the number of black people who either lived in Malibu, or could afford to live in, and I thought Tyler lives in Malibu? And I thought, fine. Well, I had no idea what he did and, and, so, when this man comes to the door and, and I thought, don't speak before. And he said, "I'll take you to Mr. Perry." I thought, oh, thank goodness. I didn't say, "Tyler, is that you (laughter)?" And he took me to a man who was much taller than I was. And so, I was surprised that I was looking up at anybody (laughter). And he said, "Okay, let's see it." And I thought, this is the part where, you know, where you're--I'd been inhaling all this time for about a month working on this, thinking I don't know this guy. I don't know what he's like, I've got to, you know, work off of, knowing Reuben. I got to trust my friend, Reuben. And Tyler starts unwrapping as he looks at it, and he said, "Oh, my goodness. It is so much more, it is so, it's, I love it, it's so much more than I thought." And I thought, "Oh, thank the good lord." And he said, "You know, Pheeb [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], when I gave you this painting to do, this artwork, I just left it to you and God." And I thought, Tyler, that's nice to hear, but, you know, my part of it, (laughter) that, that's the part where I had a real trepidation because--and what the project was, he had been to Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] Bridge to Now party [A Bridge to Now - A Celebration of Remarkable Women During Remarkable Times]. She, she did for Legend [Oprah Winfrey's Legends Ball], she did it for about twenty-one [sic.] women. And he wanted me to recreate that, so that would be carrying her, you know, that the singer was somebody who was, you know, that, that had those twenty women carrying her to another place in her life over this bridge, this bridge to now. And I thought, "Okay, I know some of the women. I know Oprah. I don't know Tyler, but he loved what I did." And then, at that point, I thought, okay, you know, and we talked about (unclear) watch, take, get it framed and, and I said, "Oh, I brought my catalogue just in case. You couldn't come to my show," but, he said, "Well, you got time to look at it." And I thought, a quick check of my agendaroo [ph.] (laughter). So, he looks at it, and he said, "Well, how will I know which ones you sold?" And I thought, "I can tell you." But he started looking, "And I like that one, and I like that one." And I thought--and so, he said, "Well, how much are they?" And I thought, "I'm not, I'm not Mariah Carey, you know, I don't sell CDs out of my car. You don't see her selling CD's ot of--I didn't bring a price list (laughter)." So, why would you--so I said, "I'll tell you what. I'll go home. I'll get the price list, and I'll call you back." And I thought, fine, 'cause he's interested in--I don't know, several. And he called me back and said, "I want this, this, and," and bought several paintings. And, and then, when I went and took the paintings to him, he wasn't there. And his assistant, Targie [ph.] said, "Oh, he couldn't be here, he's doing a play." And I thought, he's doing what? And he said, "Pheeb, you, you don't know that he plays a woman." And I thought, "Tyler does what (laughter)?" She said, "You need to see the play." And she said, "You know, tomorrow, if you have time, let me give you tickets to see the play." I said, "Tyler (laughter)--." I went to see the play. First of all, in the Kodak Theatre [Dolby Theatre, Los Angeles, California], I thought, what black man could fill the Kodak Theatre? It's like three thousand seats in there. Not only was it filled, it was overflowing. I'm in row two, about the third act, I mean, Tyler's talking to the audience when they're coming in. And, and, you know, "Why are you late?" What--"The freeway." And he just, "You know, the, the bathroom is far in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Y'all ought to know better. That's why you got bad seats." But anyway, he, at about act three, he looks down and says, "Phoebe, is that you?" I mean, he comes out of character. And I thought, it's me, Tyler. I didn't even believe I was (unclear). Anyway, I now know what he does. I, I have an idea of what--I've seen all of the plays. So, it's just one of those stories.
Story_ID: 481918
Speaker 1: You get calls, Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] calling me one morning, "Why do I need to have this stuff you keep sending? You've been sending me this stuff for years." And I said, "Because you need to own my work." And he said, "Obviously, if I'm calling you, I must be interested." And I thought, well, that's what sales taught me (laughter), you know. Half the sale, if you don't have to make the call. And he said, "Here's what I want you to do." He says, "I want you to all me back tomorrow." And I thought, tomorrow (laughter)? "And tell me which one--make a presentation, tell me which one I should buy, and why." And I thought, what, make a presentation? Can we--just select one? So, that's what I did. And in the meantime, I'd gotten on a jury. I was hoping I wouldn't get on for Djimon Hounsou, who was suing somebody for damages. Judge says, be back at these hours. So, there I am eating a chicken sandwich at a Ralphs parking lot, making a presentation over my car phone to Earl Graves about why he should buy 'Textured Threads' [Phoebe Beasley] on the cover of this. And I said, "You know, I don't know your wife [Barbara Graves], but you're wanting it for her, and she's been the texture of your life, the wings under your feet and, obviously, those three boys she's been raise- I don't know much, anything about her, less about your boys, a little about you, but any woman who's been with you for forty years, obviously, understands that she has to be the thing that makes the texture in your life." He says, "You're making me cry. You know, I may have to fly you here just to make the presentation to her." So, actually, he had me write what I said, and I wrote it in calligraphy, so it could also be with the artwork. And he sent the check (laughter).
Story_ID: 481919
Speaker 1: How do you best want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I want to be remembered as somebody who worked very hard to make a difference.
Speaker 1: Simple, but strong. That's a hell of a statement.
Story_ID: 481920
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't talked about? I know we didn't--I, I didn't ask you, are you, are you married? Did you get married again?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been engaged about nine years.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I've been engaged about--we didn't talk about the book ['Sunrise Is Coming After While,' Langston Hughes, Maya Angelou and Phoebe Beasley], Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] called one day and said--
Speaker 1: You wrote a book?
Speaker 2: It has--I didn't write it--it has, oh, it has original serigraphs in it. I'll show it to you. It's downstairs.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And Maya called one day and said, "I've recommended you for this project, and I don't think anybody else should do it. And I hope you'll consider it, and that's my Christmas present, and goodbye." And the publisher [The Limited Editions Club] called and said, "It is to illustrate the poems of Langston Hughes, Dr. Angelou is going to be writing the forward on you and on Hughes, and she's going to title the book and select the poems." So, it was our first collaboration. And it's a limited edition book. There are only three hundred in the world and, mostly, universities and countries own it, so it was a fabulous project.
Speaker 1: Wow, strictly poems and pictures (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it's, it has the poems of Langston Hughes and the serigraphs of [HistoryMaker] Phoebe Beasley, yeah.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's beautiful.
Story_ID: 481921
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't talked about that you would tell (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there's probably a lot (laughter) but let's not bore you.
Speaker 1: Bore me (laughter)? Gosh. Phoebe [HistoryMaker Phoebe Beasley], Phoebe, oh, my God.
Speaker 2: Oh, the fact that I did the official artwork for the, President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. Oh, I first did the original artwork for, and poster for, President Bush in '90 [1990], in '89 [1989]. And when I got that commission, fast forward to '92 [1992], and they were looking for artists for President Clinton. He had now won the election in November. From November to January, they were looking for an artist. And I thought, there's no way they're going to pick me for this project. They already know that I did it for President Bush. And, (laughter), lo and behold, they selected several artists, and decided that I would be one of the artists. President Clinton would present my--a monograph, a monoprint of my artwork to each ambassador, both foreign and domestic, as a gift from America. And I would be one of the official artists. And it--they both had the official seal. I brought the artwork with me today, but both have the official seal of the inauguration. And I'm the only artist commissioned by two presidents, I think, of different administrations. (Laughter) Or as somebody said, "I find that very troubling (laughter)." I said, "I think it's the way they are," so (laughter), oh, goodness. That's what happens in the arts.
Speaker 1: Only artist commissioned by two presidents of different administrations (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Story_ID: 481922
Speaker 1: What's in the future for you, ma'am?
Speaker 2: I keep getting up (laughter). If you can keep getting up, you can keep dreaming.
Speaker 1: And you ain't work in radio no more, you don't do that no more?
Speaker 2: I'm not in radio. I--well, I've been lecturing for years. You know, that's, that's one of the things that, that I've been doing for years and do, continuing to do art exhibits. Oh, but, you know, you're always looking--how do you differentiate yourself from every other artist out here because it's, it's really about loo- looking at ways of doing things differently in any business. And people forget what a business art is, if you're going to do this, as opposed to doing the art, and leaving it under your door. If you're going to be a professional artist that means you're selling your work. So, already, it means you have to understand about marketing and merchandising, and what happens and, and galleries and dealers, and so doing all that.
