Story_ID: 283605
Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with William C. Baxter, Jr. [HistoryMaker William Baxter] at his summer home, 17 Cedar Avenue, Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts], on the island of Martha's Vineyard.  His offseason home is in Englewood, New Jersey.  The date is August 10th, 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me.
Speaker 2: William C. Baxter, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, C. Baxter, B-A-X-T-E-R, Baxter.
Speaker 1: And, you like to be called Bill, is that right?
Speaker 2: I'm called Bill by most of my friends.
Speaker 1: I'll call you Bill then.  Bill would you give us your date of birth and your place of birth.
Speaker 2: I was born in New York City [New York, New York] in Harlem on May 16, 1940.
Speaker 1: What hospital?
Speaker 2: Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Columbia Presbyterian, okay.
Story_ID: 283606
Speaker 1: Before we start to look at your family history and your growing up years leading to your, your career, your profession, we have a few kind of warm-up questions that we'd like to ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they're kind of People magazine type questions and they also give people who look at your interview kind of a certain dimension, different connection of your personality, and so I wanted to ask you, Bill [HistoryMaker William Baxter], what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is apple pie.
Speaker 1: Apple pie, okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the fall of the year, where it's relatively cool, warm during the day and cool in the evening.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color I have to say is green because I wore, I wear a lot of clothes that have some green in it and I always enjoy that color green.
Speaker 1: I know that you spend most of the summertime here on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], but have you had other vacation destinations that have been favorite places for you for vacations over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, we've gone to Las Vegas [Nevada].  We used to go to the islands a lot.  Then we started coming to this island.  It's much cooler.  It's very pretty, but it's much cooler, so we sort of gravitated to, toward this island more so, but we spend, we also spend quite amount of time in Atlantic City [New Jersey] because I like to gamble, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say we, the we is?
Speaker 2: My wife.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Thelma Baxter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Last question, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, kind of philosophical thing that you like to say from time to time to yourself or to other people?
Speaker 2: You only pass this way once, so enjoy yourself while you're here.
Speaker 1: Okay, thanks.
Story_ID: 283607
Speaker 1: We, as I said earlier, like to explore the HistoryMaker's family background so that we have a context with which to understand your growing up years and moving into your education and profession.  And so we're gonna start with your family, and would you give me your mother's name, when she was born and where she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Christine Juanita Segee, which is now Christine Juanita Phillips because she was married a second time.  It was Baxter, now it's Phillips, but she was married a second time.  She was born in Columbia, South Carolina in the year 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did your mother grow up, her early childhood and teenage years?
Speaker 2: She, her mother brought her here when she was ten years old, so she grew up in Harlem [New York, New York] herself.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  Did she share with you, has she shared with you, she's still living, right, your mother?
Speaker 2: She's still alive now, eighty-seven years old.
Speaker 1: Has she talked to you at all about her life in Columbia before she came to New York City?  Did she talk about those early years at all?
Speaker 2: She doesn't talk about that that much.  She doesn't seem, I guess she remember it, but she doesn't talk about it that much, just a few times she mentioned things that happened to her in South Carolina, which I don't really recall, but she spent most of her time up here, so, she came here when she was ten years old so her, her experiences are, are here in New York City.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years in New York City from age ten through her teenage years?  Did she talk about with you, anything about her growing up years in New York?
Speaker 2: She talked about, she, she liked the movies.  She talked about a lot of her movie stars and what not.  I think Lena Horne was one of her favorite idols, and she spoke about, she talked about the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and different, and different types of show people that, that grew up in the early, early days of her youth you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was about 1927 then when she, when she came to New York, came with her mother.  What was your grandmother's name?  What was her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was May Segee.
Speaker 1: And would you spell Segee for us?
Speaker 2: S-E-G-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you why your grandmother, May Segee, why she moved to New York from Columbia?
Speaker 2: I assume, gathering from what they tell me, to get a better life.  There were more jobs available and I think, her, her husband gravitated here to find work.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  That was your grandfather [William Segee] then.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grandfather, okay.
Story_ID: 283608
Speaker 1: Let's stay on your mother's [Christine Segee Phillips] side for a little bit more.  Did your mother have a occupation or work when she--
Speaker 2: My father [William C. Baxter, Sr.] had a hat business so she was a milliner.  She made hats, she sold, she sold hats and she made hats.  And was quite a, quite a lucrative business for a while there, until the war [World War II, WWII] broke out.
Speaker 1: I see.  How did she get into the hat-making business?
Speaker 2: That I'm not sure of.  I'm not sure how she got into it.
Speaker 1: Where did she makes the hats?  Did she do these at home?  Did she have a workshop?
Speaker 2: They had a hat store.
Speaker 1: I see.  Where was it?
Speaker 2: 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] in Harlem [New York, New York].  7th Avenue and 126th Street, between 126th and 7th Avenue.
Speaker 1: I see.  So the hats were made there?
Speaker 2: Hats were made there, blocked and made, steamed and blocked and made it, had a blocking system and everything with the steam.  They would steam the hats and block 'em and then she would sew them.
Speaker 1: Was this, was she a solo proprietor?  Did she have other people working with her on this?
Speaker 2: Just she and my father.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, okay.  But you don't know how they happened to get into that?
Speaker 2: I don't know the history of how they happened to get into it.
Speaker 1: And what kind of hats did they make?
Speaker 2: Women's hats.
Speaker 1: Women's hats?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All women.  Okay.  How do you, how would you describe your mother?  She's still with us.  What kind of person is she?  What's her personality like?
Speaker 2: She's a great person, great person.  She has many friends.  She would not harm a fly and she just a great person to be around.  To this day, she's very social.  She has to be around people.  She's very well-liked by her friends and people around.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And where does she live right now?
Speaker 2: She lives in Riverside Drive in, in Manhattan [New York].
Story_ID: 283609
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Would you give us your father's name and the year he was born and where he was born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in 1909 in Henderson, North Carolina, the son of a doctor, Dr. [John E.] Baxter, who practiced in Henderson, North Carolina.  I think it was called Franklin County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father's name?
Speaker 2: William, William [C.] Baxter [Sr.].  The same as mine, now I'm a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did he grow up, your father?
Speaker 2: He grew up in Henderson, North Carolina, and he went to a school, high school called Albion Academy [Franklinton, North Carolina].  I recall him telling me about Albion (unclear) Academy.  And then he gravitated to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: How do you spell Albion?
Speaker 2: A-L-B-I-O-N.
Speaker 1: Was that a private or public school?
Speaker 2: It was a private school.
Speaker 1: What do you recall him telling you about going to that school?
Speaker 2: He had some great times.  He had some great years.  He had a lot of friends there.  He had some great times.  He said the South was sort of oppressive in a way.  He said one thing he really remembered, he saw a man being lynched and I think it inspired him to come north, you know.
Speaker 1: Albion, was that elementary and high school?  Was that a secondary school?
Speaker 2: I think it was a high school.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Okay.  And was it an all-black school?
Speaker 2: I assume so, I think so, yes.
Speaker 1: What other stories do you recall, incidents that happened to your father, with your father before he came to New York that he shared with you growing up?  He talked about the lynching.  Any other memories that he shared with you about his years growing up in Henderson?
Speaker 2: Well he told me that when he, he became sort of successful with, with his hat business.  He went back to Henderson and he had a brand new Cadillac and he went to the gas station and it was a white, a white gas station and he said that the attendant who was pumping the gas asked him, was this your bosses' car?  So he said he didn't want to start any, any kind of trouble or anything so he just yeah, he just said yes, it's my bosses' car.  My mother [Christine Segee Phillips] was kind of angry because he didn't tell 'em that it was his car.  But he didn't, he didn't want any trouble.  I remember him telling me that story.  I remember vividly him telling me that story.
Speaker 1: Any other similar stories?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember, I don't remember any other.
Speaker 1: When did he come to New York City?  When did he leave Henderson?
Speaker 2: He came to New York, I think he had to be, had to be about maybe twenty years old, twenty or twenty-one years old, when he was twenty or twenty-one.
Speaker 1: And you know why he moved to New York?  Did he come alone?
Speaker 2: He was pursuing an embalming career, a career as a mortician.  He went Renard School of Embalming [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: What was the name of the School?
Speaker 2: Renard, Renard, the School of Embalming.
Speaker 1: Renard, the School of Embalming.
Speaker 2: I remember him telling me about it, the School of Embalming.
Speaker 1: So that's what brought him to New York?
Speaker 2: That's what brought him to New York.  But he didn't have much success with his exam, you know, I think he failed the exam a couple of times so he never really, never really got his license.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a setback in his life, one of the setbacks in his career.
Speaker 1: Did he ever work for any morticians though?
Speaker 2: He worked for some morticians in the neighborhood.  He and his brother both worked for morticians in the neighborhood.  They both were pursuing, pursuing embalming careers.
Speaker 1: And so he then moved into what kind of work then, what was?
Speaker 2: He had the hat business.
Speaker 1: Now did he have that before he married your mother?
Speaker 2: He did that before he married my mother.
Speaker 1: He did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he met my mother, he met my mother, my mother was a young, was still in school at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Him being maybe seven or eight years older than my mother.
Story_ID: 283610
Speaker 1: How did he [Baxter's father, William C. Baxter, Sr.] get into the hat business, from embalming to the making of hats?  Do you know how that happened?
Speaker 2: That I don't really know how he got into the hat business.  I don't know what inspired him to go into hats, but he saw the potential in it so he said he had a very, it was a very lucrative business for a while until the war broke out.  Women stopped buying hats at that time.
Speaker 1: Where did he manufacture this apparel?
Speaker 2: He would buy, buy from the vendors downtown, downtown New York [New York] and bring the hat bodies, I remember him bring the hat bodies back to the store and from there he'd block 'em and, they called, it was called, they were called blocking, which means you would steam them and get them into shape, different shapes and my mother [Christine Segee Phillips] would adorn them with different trimmings and what not.
Speaker 1: So your mother did the decorating and he did the basic kind of construction?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But you don't know how he got into that?
Speaker 2: No, I explained, I don't recall.  I'm gonna go back and ask my sister [Crystal Baxter] about that, whether she, if she knows how, how they really got into it.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the business?
Speaker 2: Baxter's Hats [ph.].
Speaker 1: Baxter's Hats.  And where was it located?
Speaker 2: 127th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: 127th and 7th, okay, okay.  How long did your father and your mother have the hat business, the hat-making business?
Speaker 2: We had the hat-making business for roughly, I would say about eight years or so until the war broke out, and he stopped and he started, started driving a cab and had a job, but basically he drove a cab.  Then he opened up the hat business again in nineteen--in the 1960s, he opened up a hat business on 145th Street.
Speaker 1: I see.  And your mother continued to work there?
Speaker 2: My mother was still working in the business also.
Speaker 1: Now while he was drive a cab during World War II [WWII] and in the '40s [1940s], did he do that full-time for a long time.
Speaker 2: He did it full-time for a long time.
Speaker 1: And what other kind of jobs did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember him working in an ice cream store one time, but he basically drove that cab.
Speaker 1: Did he own his own cab or did he work--
Speaker 2: No he worked for the yellow, the Yellow Cab Company.
Speaker 1: Yellow Cab, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: He wasn't fortunate enough to get the medallion and own his own cab.  To get the medallion and everything cost a certain amount of money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Couldn't afford to get his own cab.
Speaker 1: Did your mother work during this time that he was driving?
Speaker 2: No, no, she stayed at home.  She cooked and washed and got us off to school.  The things that homemakers do, you know.
Speaker 1: And where were you living at this time, you and your parents and brother and sisters?
Speaker 2: We really only lived at 129th Street, and then the city took over the block, and I remember, we had, we had a couple of large tenement buildings, but they were famous business.  One building was called the Port Royal [Port Royal Apartments] and the gentlemen from the Mod Squad, Clarence Williams III, lived in that building.  I remember him living in that building.  He grew, we like kind of sort of grew up, grew up with him.  And the city took over the tenements and they built projects, so we moved from our building right across the street into the projects, you know.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.  Let me stay with your father for a little bit more.  How do you remember him?  What was he like as a person?  What was his personality like?
Speaker 2: Well he was a person that he was stern, but he, but he, he would dance around the house.  He liked to dance.  He would go, he would always, he would always dance.  He would tell jokes now and then.  And he had a little, I'll be honest with you, he had a little drinking problem at times, but he was basically a nice person though.  You know, he took care of his family.  He cared about his family, had certain rules he didn't want to be broken in the house.
Story_ID: 283611
Speaker 1: Before we go to your, your grandparents, your mother's [Christine Segee Phillips] and father's parents [Pauline Garland Baxter and John E. Baxter], and before we talk about your, your brothers and your sister [Crystal Baxter], we had talked about the careers of your parents, would you tell me and describe for me what your profession was, what your career consisted of, what did you do?
Speaker 2: My career consisted of running recreation programs.  I worked in the New York City Parks and Recreation Department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation].  I put in thirty-seven years before I retired.  And it could have (unclear) a number of things, planning and organizing, getting people together, officiating, you know, on a face-to-face level with kids running programs.  Running swim meets, running track meets, running basketball tournaments.  Things that I like, I really enjoy doing, you know.  And a person in that capacity had helped me so it inspired me to go into that line of work.  I enjoyed, I enjoyed every minute of it.
Speaker 1: Now beyond the directing of the recreation department and managing many of the activities, tell me about the other dimensions of your career.
Speaker 2: Well, my wife [Thelma Baxter] doesn't like it, but I went into a, I got into a Latin band. I was the Latin drummer for about, I stayed in the band about six years.  We played in all the clubs in New York City [New York, New York] and what not, you know, all the Latin clubs throughout the city.  I really enjoyed that.  I love Latin music.  I really enjoyed that.  That was the time of my life.  My wife wasn't happy with it because you had, you had to spend too many hours out of the house, but I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: But in addition to your recreation work, as a professional recreational planner and designer and implementer, you had another whole dimension of your career which was doing what?
Speaker 2: Oh it was (unclear) and avocation, which was basketball officiating.  So I was working at different high schools, I was travel through all the colleges in the area and the colleges, colleges out of the area also.
Speaker 1: And how many years did you officiate basketball?
Speaker 2: Twenty-three years on the college level and maybe close to thirty years overall, and twenty-three years on the college level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 283612
Speaker 1: Let me go back if I can to your, your mother's [Christine Segee Phillips] parents, your grandparents on your mother's side.  What was the name of your maternal grandmother, your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Mrs. May Segee.
Speaker 1: And do you recall the year she was born and where?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1897 in Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: How long did she live?
Speaker 2: She lived to be 103 years old and she was really the strong backbone of our family, because she was really, had she really, in real life if she wanted to be a manager, she would have been a top manager because she can manager everything in terms of the family, in terms of cooking, where to meet.  Everything was based around her, what she wanted, when she wanted to have dinner, when she wanted to have a family reunion and the whole, whole, I mean everybody gravitated toward my grandmother.
Speaker 1: And she lived to 103, you said.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: A hundred and three years old.
Speaker 1: So you grew up with her then?
Speaker 2: I grew up with her, in the household with my grandmother, yes.
Speaker 1: In what ways did she influence your growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she pointed out the bad aspects of life.  When she would see a drug, a person who was addicted to drugs, she would say I never want to see you around a person like that.  She would point out the bad points of life.  She was an excellent cook, so she made all sorts of goodies and she made you eat your vegetables and eat a certain diet.
Speaker 1: Which of her dishes was your favorite?  Which of her preparations?
Speaker 2: She, she made an apple pie, apple and blueberry pie.
Speaker 1: That's where the apple pie came from.
Speaker 2: That's where the apple pie came from.  One of the ways the apple pie came from.  She made a tremendous apple pie.
Speaker 1: So she was the consummate homemaker then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her mother, your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother?
Speaker 1: Yeah, your grandmother's mother.
Speaker 2: Well I think, for part of the time, she had been a slave at some point.  That's what I was told, but her, I know, I know her husband, who wasn't really her husband, and I don't know whether he was a slave master or not, but that was my grandmother's father.  So, my grandmother comes from German, I guess German and Irish descent, to a certain degree.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: Your great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: I think, I can't think of her name, 'cause my great-grandmother, she passed away at an early age, my grandmother had to take over, raise the rest of the children herself.  She didn't have much time for herself because she had to raise the rest of the children because her mother passed away at an early age.
Story_ID: 283613
Speaker 1: What about your father's [William C. Baxter, Sr.] parents?  What was his mother's name?
Speaker 2: Pauline Garland [Baxter].
Speaker 1: Pauline Garland?
Speaker 2: Garland, yes.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that, Garland?
Speaker 2: G-A-R-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: And do you know where she was born and when?
Speaker 2: She was born in North Carolina but I'm not sure which town.
Speaker 1: Did you know her?
Speaker 2: I never met her.  She had passed away when, when I met my grandfather, she, she had passed away.
Speaker 1: I see.  Well tell me about your grandfather, your father's father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Dr. John E. Baxter.  He was a doctor, physician, physician in the area.  And the funny part about it was that he, he would tell us how he would get paid.  He would get paid in chickens.  He administered health, healthcare to all the black recipients and he would get paid in chickens and eggs and pieces of bacon and slabs of bacon and things of that nature.  He never got any cash money for what he was doing.
Speaker 1: He never got any cash?
Speaker 2: Very, very infrequently.
Speaker 1: Where did he study medicine?  How did he prepare for--
Speaker 2: Oh, he, from my understanding, he graduated from Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].  From Shaw University he went to McHarry Medical, Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: And would have graduated when?  Do you have any idea when he, when he would have graduated?
Speaker 2: I don't have any, I don't know those years he graduated from Shaw University.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: I met him briefly.  I was very, I was very small at the time.
Speaker 1: And that would have been in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: In North Carolina.  My father would take us back to North Carolina periodically.
Speaker 1: And how long would you stay?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: We stayed down there, stayed there for a couple of weeks.  They had a large house down in, in Henderson [North Carolina], and we stayed there, and I remember riding on the running board of that car, the old car that had the running board, I remember standing on the, riding on the running board of the car.
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather have an office in the home, do you recall?
Speaker 2: He had an office, and he very, from what I could remember he was a very soft spoken man, you know.
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of returning to his home with your father in the summers?  Any other memories?  You talked about being on the running board.  Any other memories?
Speaker 2: I remember when he, he woke us up early in the morning to go down there.  His father had passed away.  I remember going back for the funeral, so that's the last thing I remember.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather physician when he passed away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he passed away.
Speaker 1: You remember going to the funeral.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of family members there as you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, quite a bit, quite a few.
Story_ID: 283614
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, about your siblings.  You have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have a brother [John Baxter] who lives in Arizona now.  He formerly lived in California, but he sold his house in California.  Now he's moved to Arizona.  He's retired now, but he's a cake decorator, a retired cake decorator.
Speaker 1: And what year was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1944.
Speaker 1: In Where?
Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York, New York].  The same, same residence that I had.
Speaker 1: Did he have his own bakery or did he do this for other large bakeries.
Speaker 2: He did it for other large bakeries and large bake shops.
Speaker 1: And you had another brother [Frank Baxter]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Unfortunately, he died early.
Speaker 1: And what was his career?  What was he--
Speaker 2: No, he had dropped out of school.  He had gotten in a little trouble.  He dropped out of school and went to the military and wound up dying in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: And did you have other siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a sister.  Crystal Baxter, who works for, she works as a receptionist.  She lives in Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: What year was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1942.
Speaker 1: So you were born in 1940.
Speaker 2: Born in 1940, me being the oldest of four siblings.
Speaker 1: What was it like being the oldest?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother claimed that the oldest is always the most successful.  He claims that more was done for me than the rest of the siblings.  That's what he claim, but being the oldest I had to set an example for the other three coming up.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did the three of you do together, very quickly and generally?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [May Segee] would get us together and take us to the circus.  She'd take us out to Coney Island [New York, New York] a lot.  We walked the boardwalk.  I remember the Nathan's [Famous] Hot Dogs and the things of that nature, the various rides.  And that's what we do, we do things like that together, go to the beach together, and go on picnics together with my grandmother and things of that nature.  Ride the ferry up the Hudson River.  We do things like that together, you know.
Story_ID: 283871
Speaker 1: What was it like, Bill [HistoryMaker William Baxter], growing up in New York City [New York, New York] as a child, as a teenager?  How do you recall those years at home?
Speaker 2: Great years.  New York is a very active place.  A place for a young person with a lot of energy to grow up in because I felt when I was growing up during my younger years we had the best music, we had dances, you could ride the subway.  You could get on the subway at three in the morning and go to sleep and nobody would bother you.  The music was great, the dancers was great.  The type of activities we had with the, going out to the beaches and different things like that was very unique.  It's a little dangerous now and we live in a different time now.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the street that you grew up on and what you remember about that street and the neighborhood around it.
Speaker 2: I remember everybody knew everybody in the neighborhood.  Parents looked out for you.  If your mother wasn't around, your parents, if you did something wrong, they would report that to your parents.  They would point you in the right direction.  You can go into the grocery stores and what not, and the people knew you and you knew all the grocery store merchants, and just a sort of a happy way of life.
Speaker 1: What were the jobs and occupations of the parents of the children that you grew up with?  You talked about the work of your parents, what were other people doing for work at that time as you recall?
Speaker 2: Well, some people were domestics.  I remember a lot of people, a lot of people were domestics.  We had, some people were policemen.  There weren't that many minority policemen on the police force at that time, so he was a big hero was a policemen on the block.  He seemed to be a hero and I can't think of what other people were doing.  A lot of people stayed at home and worked in their houses.  I don't know what the fathers did.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your home, the inside of your home.  What was your home like?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [May Segee] was there, and she worked cleaning houses, so she would go out from time to time, but most of the time she was home.  My mother [Christine Segee Phillips] was there, of course, 'cause we had, we had young children that she had to raise.  And one thing about it, when you came home from school, there was always someone there to receive you when you came home.  I thought that was good, because in many cases, children come home now they don't have anybody to receive them and to direct them when they get home.  I always had my mother there.  If there was a problem, she could always solve it, until my father [William C. Baxter, Sr.] got there.  I thought that was very unique.
Story_ID: 283872
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories as a child growing up in Harlem, New York City [New York, New York]?  How far back can you remember?  What's the earliest memory that you have as a child?
Speaker 2: I remember 1947 snow storm when we had, when they took me out to go to school and there were mounds of snow, I mean, up two stories high and we went all the way to school in all that snow, and the school was closed.  And I don't know why we went there, but the school was closed.  I thought that was, I never forgot that.  It was such difficulty getting to school, it had to be maybe five to six blocks away, and we trudged through all that snow and we got there, because the teachers couldn't get in obviously.  Teachers didn't live in, some of the teachers lived in the area though.  That's one good thing about the school system also.  Some of the teachers lived in the neighborhood, but that's not, that's not true today.  But in any, nevertheless, the school was closed that particular 1947 snow storm.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: So what'd you do that day?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I can remember what we did when I got back home.  But I was happy that the school was closed.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Any other very early childhood memories?
Speaker 2: I remember the different games they used to play at the elementary school, blue bird through my window, and different groups you used to have to play during recess, and the teachers didn't mind taking a, taking a swipe at you to hit you upside the head.  The teacher would hit you on the head if you didn't do, do what was right.  If you were talking a lot, they had no qualms about coming over and smacking you in the face, which is sort of unheard of today because if that's done today, the parents come in and they wanna attack the teachers, you know.  But it was different during that day and age.
Story_ID: 283873
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well I remember growing up in Harlem, but you don't see--they had the things called icees.  In other words, there would be a big block of ice.  You had a shaver.  They would make their own syrups on the cart, ice cart.  They were called, it was called icees, and it cost five cents.  They would shave this cone, nice cone of ice and put it in a cone and put the syrup on it.  You could buy those things for five cents.  You don't see that any more.  Those were one of the things that we, we really--then it was also little candy stand, which was seemed to be made by, seemed to be built.  You know the candy stand you can get all your candies and sodas and everything right there at the candy stand.  Come right out of your house, home, and walk right to the candy stand and get your sodas and what not.  I, I really enjoyed that growing up as a child, you know.
Speaker 1: Any other sights, any other sounds that--
Speaker 2: Of course you smelled the garbage cans, which were, you know, which weren't good smells.
Speaker 1: Particularly in the summer.
Speaker 2: Particular in the summer you smelled the cans.  That was a part of life, and if you got too hot you can also always go up on the roof.  People would actually go up on the roof or come out onto the fire escape and talk and sit out there and drink lemonade and things of that nature, sitting out on the fire escape and going up on the roof.  The roof was a very cool place to go.  You could look out over the city and have a very nice view and what not.  I thought those were nice parts of life, that you don't see any more today.
Speaker 1: How many floors were there in your home?  How many floors did you--
Speaker 2: We had six.
Speaker 1: Six floors?  Wow.
Speaker 2: And when we were in the projects, there were fourteen stories.  But just in the tenement building, I call them tenement buildings and I guess that's what they were.  It was like six floors.
Story_ID: 283874
Speaker 1: When did you start elementary school?  What school did you first attend?
Speaker 2: I first attended, it was a private school, and my father [William C. Baxter, Sr.] was doing pretty good in those days, I went to a school called the Little Brown Schoolhouse [sic. Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School, New York, New York], off of Central Park, Central Park East, on Fifth Avenue and Central Park East [sic.].  And then from there, then I got to go to public school system at P.S. 68 [Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Let me stop you about the Little Brown Schoolhouse.  Did you say brown or red?
Speaker 2: Little Brown Schoolhouse.
Speaker 1: I've heard of that school.  Do you recall who founded it, or what can you tell me about it?
Speaker 2: I don't know who founded it.  I remember it was a prestigious school at that time, prestigious private school.
Speaker 1: So that was, that was your very first school then?
Speaker 2: That was my first, first school I went to.
Speaker 1: And you were about how old?
Speaker 2: I had to be, I had to be six, somewhere around six years old.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about those, that year or the next year?  How long did you stay there, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember staying there, I think I stayed there about a year.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of that year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a very strict school.  And from what I understand, some celebrities went there.  I don't recall who the celebrities were, but my mother [Christine Segee Phillips] would always tell me that she went to school with, she'd give me the name of the person and I don't recall who the person was.
Speaker 1: And where was it located?
Speaker 2: Central Park, Fifth Avenue in, in the 90s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How'd you get there?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember how, I think I got there on the bus.  Or either they sent, oh yeah, I'm trying to remember whether I was picked up or not.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: It was a private school?
Speaker 2: It was a private school.  I don't know how long I stayed there.  I think I stayed there a year or so.  I wound up in public school after that because time, times became a little more difficult.
Speaker 1: So your parents paid tuition then, as you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I recall, my father was able to pay then at that time.  Then as the additions to the family came, times got a little, a little rougher.
Story_ID: 283875
Speaker 1: So you went to public school.  What was the public school that you then went to?
Speaker 2: I went to a school called--the first school before I went to [P.S.] 157 [Harlem, New York, New York] was P.S. 68 [Harlem, New York, New York], which was right across the street, but they said that 7th, they said that 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] was a line of demarcation as to whereas I was out of the district.  So they sent me to another school called P.S. 157.  And that was a good school.  Over there they had this gentlemen, Mr. Cooper [ph.], a teacher named Mr. Cooper who lived in the neighborhood.  He ran a glee club.  He had a glee club.  I was able to get into the glee club and my sister [Crystal Baxter] was in the glee club.  I was able to learn how to harmonize and sing, used to sing spirituals, Negro spirituals.
Speaker 1: This was in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of student were you?  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked school.  I was in my, I was a pretty good student.  I was in the top, top classes in public school, and junior high school I was in the 8-1.  They went by numbers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had the same system when I was in middle school, 8-1, 8-2, 8-3, 8-4.
Speaker 2: Right.  8-4, 8-5, 8-6.  All the way down to 8-17 to 8-23, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Ours didn't go that high.  I think they went to 8-9 or 8-10.  I remember I was in 8-7.
Speaker 2: Ours went all the way up there, went up to 8-23.  I remember being in the, it was, my mother [Christine Segee Phillips] said it was important to be in the 1, 2, 3 and 4 classes, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have any notions or thoughts when you were in elementary school about what you wanted to be as you got older, what you wanted to do?  Have any things that you like--
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't have any idea of what I wanted to do later on in life.  I didn't, I didn't get to that point until later on and when I was in high school [Commerce High School; High School of Commerce, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 283876
Speaker 1: Any other memories of your elementary and middle school years?  Any other?
Speaker 2: I know I wanted to play basketball, I wasn't good enough to make the basketball team.  In junior high school I wanted to make the basketball team very badly.  That's when I started playing, I had just started to play basketball.  I wanted to make it, but I didn't, I didn't make the junior high school team, so I--
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that at the time?
Speaker 2: I was down but luckily we had Mr. [Holcombe] Rucker (unclear) who would coach basketball at night and he would take us, he would put us all on a team.  He put, it didn't matter what level you were on, he would put you on the team anyway to let you develop, let you develop, you know, develop your skills.  I was able, he ran the tournament right out there in the playground where I lived and he had all sorts of pros coming in there to play.  Guys like Walter Dukes, Ray Felix.  I don't know if you remember any these names.
Speaker 1: And you were how old now when you had this experience with Mr. Rucker?
Speaker 2: I was thirteen, fourteen, thirteen years old, thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Mr. Rucker.  What was his first name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Holcombe Rucker was his name.
Speaker 1: Holcombe Rucker?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how did you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: R-U-C-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what was his position in the community?
Speaker 2: He was a playground director, and he also worked at a church called St. Philip's [Episcopal] Church [New York, New York].  He was the coach, the basketball coach there.  So he would recruit a lot of kids from the, from the projects and take them to this church.  They played basketball for the church.  He had different grade levels in the church that they'd play on.  And, the park, the park [Rucker Park, New York, New York] where he ran the program is famous now.
Speaker 1: And tell me about those parks.
Speaker 2: They have an entertainer's league there now.  Entertainer's league where all the pros come out and play now.
Speaker 1: Where is that located?
Speaker 2: Well, he moved, it started out on 128th Street.  We had Wilt Chamberlain come out and play, and now it's up to 155th Street and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard].
Speaker 1: Okay, I know about where it is.  So you began to develop a real interest in basketball then through Mr. Rucker?
Speaker 2: Through Mr. Rucker.
Speaker 1: Any opportunity--how tall were you then?  You remember?
Speaker 2: I had to be about five, I'm 5'10" now, 5'11", had to be about 5'6" or seven [5'7"] at the time.  I grew a couple of inches after that.
Speaker 1: In what ways was he especially influential to your development at that time?
Speaker 2: Well he would, he would give me an evaluation.  He would write down what your skills were, what you needed to work on and if you had any problems, you could take your problem, you could talk to him.  He was a very caring person, and I haven't seen hardly anybody like him since he passed away.  He passed away at an early age, of lung cancer.  He contracted lung cancer at thirty-eight years old.  But he sent so many, he was helpful with so many of us going to college and what not.  He would write to the different schools, to different southern schools and schools all over.  He would write to the schools and say he had prospects, and the coaches would say, well send 'em down and if they can make the team they can get a scholarship.  So you go down on a trial basis.  If you made the team you get some sort of athletic aid, some athletic scholarship.
Speaker 1: Where was Mr. Rucker from?  Was he a Harlemite?  Was he a New Yorker do you know?
Speaker 2: He was a Harlemite but he lived up in the Bronx [New York], and he had, you know, he had three kids of his own and what not.  He spent, he put so much time in with the other kids that he didn't have much time for his own kids.
Story_ID: 283877
Speaker 1: You went on to high school.  No, you went to Cooper Junior High School [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, Harlem, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where was that located?
Speaker 2: 120th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Speaker 1: And then from Cooper, where did you go?
Speaker 2: Commerce, Commerce High School [High School of Commerce, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And where was that located?
Speaker 2: 66th Street and Broadway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your high school years, particularly about basketball.  Were you able to make the team then?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't make the team my first couple of years, then when I made the team I had a job.  I had to choose between the job and playing on the basketball team.  I choose the job because I needed the money.  We had shortage of money in our family because we had, we had four children.  There was four of us.  So I really got into fashions.  Everybody wanted to wear these, what they called Ivy League clothes.  Used to go out and get button, button-down shirts and sport jackets, and everything cost money so I kept the job.
Speaker 1: So what job did you have?  What was your work?
Speaker 2: I had a job, I started out at the job as a page in the library and then later on I became, I was a messenger, which I would, I would deliver different letters and things downtown in the downtown area.  You know it's very interesting to walk down Fifth Avenue and look in the window while you're still working and taking letters to different companies and what not.
Speaker 1: Was this library work or was this different work?
Speaker 2: No, this was messenger work.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, library work and then you had messenger work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a messenger service job.
Speaker 1: Which library did you work in in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: A branch called George Bruce Branch [George Bruce Library] which was over on 125th Street and 3rd Avenue.  And then there was another branch that I also worked, also on the west side, 125th Street over near, near Old Broadway.
Speaker 1: How much did you earn working in the library?  Do you recall what your salary was?
Speaker 2: I know I worked for an entire month and wouldn't get paid, and when I got paid, it was forty dollars, somewhere around there.  But that seemed like a lot of money then.
Speaker 1: Right.  And you were a messenger for what, companies, or Western Union or what?
Speaker 2: Quick.  It was called Quick Messenger Service [ph.] whereas you would sit down.  They had a lot of old retired persons there working also and you'd sit down and they call you and say take this and deliver it to Bonwit Teller [& Company, New York, New York], or deliver it to whatever the company name was.  And you'd go, you probably have to go in like the service areas, you had to go through back service elevators.  In some cases, you could ride in the front of the buildings also and get on the regular elevators also.  But it was very interesting.  You saw a lot of sights in downtown New York.  You pass by Rockefeller Plaza [New York, New York] and all these places and look in the windows and look down in the square of Rockefeller Plaza.
Speaker 1: Now how did you travel from the headquarters to Bonwit Teller's and these places?
Speaker 2: If you, if it was over a radius of over ten blocks, you'd be given car fare.  Many times, being kind of young, you can walk and keep the carfare, keep the car fare and save the car fare and get paid also.
Speaker 1: So these are two jobs you had during high school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any others during high school?
Speaker 2: No, those were the only jobs that I had.
Speaker 1: So you worked these jobs during school time and summers with?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after school.
Speaker 1: After school.
Speaker 2: 'Til about six, until six o'clock.
Speaker 1: I see.  Everyday?
Speaker 2: Every day, five days a week.
Speaker 1: So that prevented you then from playing basketball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I couldn't play because basketball was in the afternoon, right after school and if you had a job, couldn't afford to quit my job.
Speaker 1: Well how did you get your basketball in?  You must have been playing basketball?
Speaker 2: I played basketball at night with Mr. [Holcombe] Rucker at different centers, community center, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  We played in different, the Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  They had all those, all of them had teams and you'd play in those different areas.
Speaker 1: What teams did you play on?
Speaker 2: St. Philip's, called St. Philip's Episcopal Church [New York, New York] on 133rd Street.  They had a recreational center attached to the church.  We played in that recreational center.  A very nice staff over there you know.
Speaker 1: I know a little bit about St. Philip's from other people whose lives I've, I've studied involving people, people who had funerals there and weddings there and attended there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Very intimate.
Story_ID: 283878
Speaker 1: Tell me about your high schools years academically.  What was it like being a student at--
Speaker 2: Growing up, I had some problems.  I was a good student, but I started to socialize, go to the dances and, you know, parties and things like that so I got interested and I got sidetracked from my work.  I remember I had, in algebra I had a ninety average but my teacher was absent so I cut, I cut out of the, I snuck out of the class and went down to have me an extra lunch period.  And she found out about it because she had someone else taking attendance.  She told her.  And she gave me an eighty.  She said I'm not giving you a ninety because anybody that sneaks out of my classroom can't get a ninety.  So she gave me an eighty.  I should have had a ninety.  And, I had some problems with chemistry.  I think I failed chemistry and what not so I had to take that again.  You get sidetracked you start fooling around in class and what not.  But I, but I graduated on time, which a lot of my friends didn't, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: What, the course, the courses that you took, this was at Commerce High School [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] you said?
Speaker 2: Commerce.
Speaker 1: Commerce High.
Speaker 2: Yeah but they had to be able to think of a, supposed to be a business school, but they also had academic courses too.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: College preparatory, I was in the college preparatory.
Speaker 1: You were in the college prep?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was your favorite subject?  Do you have?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was biology.
Speaker 1: Biology?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 283879
Speaker 1: Now you're in high school [Commerce High School; High School of Commerce, New York, New York].  Did you have any notion at that point about what you thought you might wanna do as an adult once you got beyond high school?  Did you have any notions about what you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not at that point.  I wanted to play pro basketball.  I thought about playing pro basketball.  I was, that was my aspiration, which, I guess it happens to a lot of, lot of young kids.  They feel they can make the pros, they like to make the pros.
Speaker 1: You talked earlier a little bit about what your professional career was and what you did.  As you look back now, do those growing up years, particularly the junior and senior high and the presence of Mr. [Holcombe] Rucker, did they influence your decisions later on about your career?  Do you think that somehow you were already being shaped for being a recreational director?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of admire what Rucker did for all the people that, that was touched by him.  I admire what he did in terms of mapping out plans because I had no plans to go to college really.  My father [William C. Baxter, Sr.] was working.  He never really spoke to me about going to college, but I saw so many people come back during the summers to play in the tournaments from these different colleges he had, from Saint Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia], Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  These people came back to play in the tournaments so I said, if they can do it I can do it, you know.
Speaker 1: Any of those players especially that you remember or stand out in your mind that came back from the colleges in the summer?  Anybody in particular?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well a lot of them, a lot of them had very good careers after, after going to black southern colleges, you know, because many, many of the players up here went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], St. John [St. John's University, New York, New York], some of the large universities but the people that went to the small black colleges [HBCUs] did well also so I, I kinda, I saw that.  I said well if they can do it, I can do it, you know.
Speaker 1: And some of those small black colleges were, would you give us the names again?  They were, what was some of those?
Speaker 2: St. Paul, Virginia State.  He sent people to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania because I was, because I was slated to go there, but I chose St. Augustine [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] instead of Lincoln University, 'cause I wanted, it was near Henderson [North Carolina].  I think Raleigh [North Carolina] was right about thirty-five miles from Henderson, North Carolina, so I felt that I had some relatives down there, so I decided to go there.
Speaker 1: Who were the relatives that were living?
Speaker 2: I think it was some my father's because there were two sets of children.  I think some of my father's half, half-sisters were still living down there, still at the house.  The house had gotten sort of run down.  On one of my basketball trips, I think we were going to Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina].  We were on our way there, we stopped in Raleigh, North Carolina.  I stopped, I was able to stop over at the house and I hadn't seen, I didn't really know those people that were there, but they seemed to know me.  It was kind of like a little small reunion, you know?  I was able to stop on one of the trips.
Story_ID: 283880
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Commerce High School [High School of Commerce, New York, New York].  And what was next?  What was your next opportunity?  Where'd you go?  What happened?
Speaker 2: I got, I got--well first of all, my father [William C. Baxter, Sr.] had contracted cancer so he was, he had just come out of the hospital from an operation so they wanted me to, when I graduated from high school, we had to get public assistance.  And when I graduated from high school they wanted me to get a job and work.  And I remember this guy, the, I guess, what would you call them, the social worker, was saying well we want to give you this job making suitcases.  I said well listen, I'm trying to go to college.  He said well I don't think you're going to get that basketball scholarship.  He was very negative.  I don't know whether he was doing this to help me.
Speaker 1: Who said this?
Speaker 2: The caseworker.  He said I think you better take this job because I don't think you could make the basketball team down there.  So I said I'm gonna show this guy I can make the basketball team and I'm not gonna take this job here.  I don't want this job anyway because it's low, it's not a prestigious job at all.  So I said I'm gonna go to this college, I'm gonna make the team and I'm gonna show this guy.  In a sense he inspired me to, to get this scholarship, to go after this scholarship and go on and make the team and go to college as opposed to going, going to work, and not being able to further advance my education.  I remember my father, and my father, he told the people to take this, take this public assistance and shove it 'cause you're trying to impede my son's progress from going to school.  So that was one of the, one of the high points in my life, whereas now I decided to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me how that, how that happened.  Now you got a scholarship and how did all that happen?
Speaker 2: Well you go to school on a trial basis.  You go to school early.
Speaker 1: But who got the scholarship for you?  I mean who, who got you the scholarship?  How did you--
Speaker 2: Mr. Rucker, Mr. Holcombe Rucker.  He wrote to the schools.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: He said Billy [HistoryMaker William Baxter], do you want to go there?  I can get you a scholarship to St. Augustine College [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  So I didn't know much about St. Augustine, but it was a football player who used to come by our playground who was playing football for the school.  He had gotten a scholarship.  I don't think Rucker had gotten a scholarship for him, but nevertheless he got a scholarship playing football.  And he said, he gave us a breakdown of the school.  Said the school was very nice.  This is the coach.  The coach is nice.  I enjoyed myself.  I like the school.  It was a very pleasant atmosphere, a good learning institution.  So I said well okay sounds good to me, I'll go there, you know.  That's how I got started, that's how I got started to go there.
Speaker 1: So you were how old when you went to St. Augustine's?
Speaker 2: Eighteen.
Speaker 1: And did you start playing basketball immediately when you got there?
Speaker 2: We had to try out for the team.
Speaker 1: You had to try out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well as soon as you got there, you had to try out.  If you didn't make it, and you know, he had freshmen, and he had people coming from, people from Chicago [Illinois], Virginia, Florida, all over the place.  You had to make the team.  He offered you a certain amount of athletic aid.
Speaker 1: I see.  So how many did you have to compete with then?
Speaker 2: Had to be about, had to be about thirty guys.
Speaker 1: Thirty?
Speaker 2: About thirty guys down there.
Speaker 1: And when did all this start, in the fall or late fall?  When did you first get on the courts there?
Speaker 2: Oh it was early September, before school opened.  You had to go down there, you had to go down there with the football players.  Football players were down there and you stayed in the dormitory with the football players.  They were trying out for the team also.
Speaker 1: But you didn't have a scholarship at this point though?
Speaker 2: No, not until the coach put, put his name, he only, he only had a certain amount of scholarships, maybe ten scholarships or so.  So he had to pick who he wanted to, to give these ten scholarships to out of maybe thirty people.
Speaker 1: And you were able to gain one of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got one of the scholarships.
Speaker 1: So when did you know that you had the scholarship?
Speaker 2: When you go down to the business office and there's a business office there.  There's a guy in charge of the registrar, and he tells you.  He opens up a big book and tells you, you have X amount of dollars on your scholarship.  This is what you have to pay, if any, if you have to pay anything like that, because the scholarship money is all contributed by the alumni.
Speaker 1: Right.  Does that include tuition, your lodging and your food and everything?  Was it a whole--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole package.  I mean college was very cheap in those days.  It was like maybe $700 or $800.
Speaker 1: For everything?
Speaker 2: For everything.  Which seemed like a lot then, now it's a pittance now.  It's nothing now you know.
Story_ID: 283625
Speaker 1: The September, October basketball tryouts at St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], you said there were thirty, thirty people competing for positions on the, how do you remember that competition, as you think back about it?
Speaker 2: He sent, he sent, Mr. [Holcombe] Rucker sent down five, five of us, so we came down together.  But there were other people from Chicago [Illinois] and different places, different areas.  It was kind of like rough, you know, it was kind of like dog-eat-dog.  You all competing against each other for a scholarship or a place on the team.  Of course, play would get sort of rough now and then, you know.
Speaker 1: What position were you attempting to?
Speaker 2: I was short, I was considered short in basketball, I was considered, I was trying to a point guard position.
Speaker 1: You were how tall at that point?
Speaker 2: I was about 5'10".
Speaker 1: And that was short for basketball at that time?
Speaker 2: Short, short for a basketball player.
Speaker 1: How short were the tallest at the time?
Speaker 2: Where, at school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in that fall.
Speaker 2: We had a couple of guys 6'8".
Speaker 1: What was the best part of your game at that point?
Speaker 2: My game was ball handling, dribbling and ball handling and they say, back they gave me the legend, the legend honors for sports legend in the palm.  They said I had the best crossover dribble.  Everybody uses the crossover dribble now.  They say I, they say I was using it very early.
Speaker 1: What's a crossover dribble?
Speaker 2: It was when you fake and you come from hand to the other hand, right hand to left hand.  It was called a crossover, and you whip it over to this hand and whip it back over the other hand, trying to befuddle the defense, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any part of your game at that point that you didn't feel comfortable with?
Speaker 2: Defense.  I became a better defensive player after I got out of college.  But my defense wasn't strong.
Speaker 1: How many points were you scoring before you went to St. Augustine you were playing in the summer leagues.  How many points were you scoring?
Speaker 2: Well before I went to St. Augustine I was just, I was developing.  So I wasn't scoring a lot.  After I got out of St. Augustine was when I scored, I was scoring a lot.  I averaged about eighteen points a game down in St. Augustine, and after I got out of St. Augustine, I developed it even further.
Speaker 1: So you made the team at St. Augustine's.  You got the scholarship.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that first year as a basketball player at St. Augustine's.  Well how do you remember that first year, the competition and who did you play against?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the guys that I played against were guys that were older.  They were more experienced because some guys would go to college and drop out and then come back later on, which I thought gave them, gave them an advantage.  When you're going out at eighteen years old, you're learning.  So they're a little stronger than you are, you know, a little more experienced than you are so, but I think I did okay my, I did all right my freshman year.
Story_ID: 283626
Speaker 1: How did you do academically?  Did you like the school [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did well.  I met this lady, Madeline Stent, do you know her?
Speaker 1: Madeline Stent, I remember her.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, she, her relatives are the Delany sisters.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And I had, I didn't do well in her, one of her sister's classes, Julia B. Delany [sic. Julia E. Delany] was my teacher, speech teacher.  And she intimidated you, you know.  She says she did come up to here to make a speech and she didn't like it, she said well, take your seat young man.  You said absolutely nothing and have a seat.  So that intimidated me so I dropped out of class so I failed speech and I didn't go back to speech again until my, my senior year, and the story was that if you go back your senior year you can only get a D.  You can't more than a D.  I got a C.  I did okay.  Once I got over the fear, I got a C, but she was very intimidating, very thorough.
Story_ID: 283627
Speaker 1: How'd you do basketball-wise that first year, as a freshman?
Speaker 2: I did okay.  I did very well.
Speaker 1: How'd the team do?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Team didn't do that well the first year.  We did well our second year.  We went to the tournament and we beat a couple of teams, Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], some teams we weren't supposed to beat.
Speaker 1: Were you still in contact with Mr. [Holcombe] Rucker after you went to St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to see him because he would, he would run the tournaments.  And you had, you had to admire him because he went to [The] City College [of New York, New York, New York], while he was doing all that, he went to City College and got his degree and became a teacher in Harlem [New York, New York], you know, 'cause that's what he, he like to help people in any way he could.  And things were just starting to go well for him when, when he became sick, ill and passed away, you know.
Speaker 1: What did you do during the summers between your freshman year, sophomore year, junior year, what did you do summers?  Did you go back home?
Speaker 2: I worked in the, worked in the parks, the recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] as a playground assistant.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: I worked on the Lower East Side down around Essex Street, if you know Essex Street and Old Broadway, down in that area, and I worked, that way it gave me a summer, summer job every year.  Every year I came back they gave me a summer job.  The first year out of college I worked at a, at a food fair.  I was called a food fair and they had different exotic foods they sold down of the New York Coliseum [New York, New York] on 59th Street.  I worked there, just packaging, packaging and stamping food and packaging it and so on and so forth.  Then I got the, it was very difficult to get that playground job, but I got the playground job later in the summer so that, that started me off.  That means that every summer I came back, I had a job over the summer.
Story_ID: 283628
Speaker 1: What did you major in at St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I majored in physical education, physical education, which you take all the courses that a doctor takes with the, without the chemistry and the math.  You take all the biological anatomy, biology, kinesiology and physiology.  It sounds like it's not difficult but it can be very difficult.
Speaker 1: Well I majored in biology myself and chemistry and so I was particularly interested in health sciences so I had a lot of that stuff myself being a bio major.
Speaker 2: Let's stay with the basketball because you continued to play four years of basketball.  What were some of the highlights of your basketball at St. Augustine?  What are some of the games, some of the championships?
Speaker 1: Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] was our rival, a cross-town rival, so--
Speaker 2: Shaw University?
Speaker 1: Shaw, yeah.  So we beat them most of the years.  I think we lost one year, we lost to them once during my four years.  We played them eight times and only lost to them once.  But the highlight was going to the tournament when we beat the number one seed, which was Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina] at that time, at that particular year.  We went all the way to the championship.  We lost to Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: And was this your junior or senior year?
Speaker 1: That was my sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Sophomore year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And how many were scoring at that point per game, roughly?
Speaker 1: I was scoring about eighteen a game, eighteen points a game.
Speaker 2: What about your junior and senior year, tell me about the competition.  What were the highlights of your basketball, at your junior and senior tournaments?
Speaker 1: Beating Shaw University.  We didn't make a tournament those two years, 'cause we had a lot of injuries, you know a lot, lot, lot of players were injured, and it's just one of those things, you know, where some of your key players get injured, you can't do that well.  Only, out of twenty teams, only eight teams make the tournament.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of this tournament?
Speaker 1: CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] Tournament.
Speaker 2: C-A--
Speaker 1: CI double A, which is a very prestigious event now.  They have it every year.  People from all around go to it.  It's called the CI double A.
Speaker 2: Did you team win that championship in your, the years you were there?
Speaker 1: No, we came in runner up.
Speaker 2: Did you ever get injured on the floor?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got injured.  I had a, what do you call it, a contusion where I ran into a player and his knee hit me right here in the thigh region, in the thigh, and it knocked me out for about eight games.
Speaker 2: How did you feel about that?
Speaker 1: That was bad.  The coach thought I was faking it.  He didn't, he didn't take to that too well, but I couldn't, I couldn't run.  Then he became hard.
Speaker 2: Who was your coach?
Speaker 1: A gentlemen named Jessie Clemmons [ph.].  He was from Champaign, Illinois originally.  He had played for St. Augustine years before, before I got there, but he was the coach.  He was strict but he helped me a lot, helped me mature a lot.
Speaker 2: In what ways?
Speaker 1: By being strict, you know, you can't go off the campus when you have a game.  He didn't want to see you going out and coming in late.  Make sure, he would make sure you would go to class.  He would check on you and make sure you went to class and whatnot, and make sure you were passing all your subjects.
Story_ID: 283629
Speaker 1: Did you have any thoughts about professional basketball at this point, as you moved through St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of thoughts.  When I got out of school after playing in semi-pro leagues, I played, I tried out for the Eastern, the semi-pro teams in the Eastern Basketball League [Eastern Professional Basketball League; Continental Basketball Association] which was at Trenton [New Jersey].  They had a team at Trenton and had a team at Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.  So I was on those teams but it wasn't that much money, and if you got hurt it wasn't much compensation to pay for, pay for your injuries.
Speaker 1: But you did get paid for playing?
Speaker 2: You got paid for playing, yeah.
Speaker 1: How much did you make a game?
Speaker 2: For a person who was unknown like myself, $40 or $45 a game.
Speaker 1: And what were the teams you played on?  What were the names of the teams?
Speaker 2: I tried out for the Trenton Colonials.  I tried out for them.  I didn't stay too long with them, and at Wilkes-Barre Barons.
Speaker 1: And this was in the nineteen--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixties [1960s], late 1960s, and early '70s [1970s].  And the players that would retire from the pros would come down here and play.  I think K.C. Jones played in the league.
Speaker 1: Of the Boston Celtics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the Celtics.  Of course, he would get maybe two hundred dollars a game, something like that, 'cause he was a big-name player.
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember K.C. very well.
Speaker 2: K.C. was tough.
Speaker 1: What about Bill Russell and Sam Jones, did they come down?
Speaker 2: No, no.  After they, once they retired, they retired.  But guys like K.C. Jones played, Larry Costello, dude from the [Philadelphia] 76ers, he would come, he would play.   It was just weekend money for them, you know.
Speaker 1: I knew K.C. pretty well because a group I used to hang with after the games, would go to his house in Framingham [Massachusetts], and Willie Knowles [William "Rod" Knowles] used to be out there.
Speaker 2: Willie Knowles, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I used to play golf with K.C.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So how many years did you play in this pro league, the semi-pro league?
Speaker 2: I didn't play in them too long because I didn't make it that well down there, so I, it wasn't much money so I said I'll make enough to play.  But I played in summer, I played all throughout the summer.  I played against Julius Erving [Dr. J], you know.  I played with John Williamson, from the [New York] Nets [Brooklyn Nets], played with Willis Reed.  All of the [New York] Knicks, most of the Knicks were on my team you know.  I did, I did, did pretty well.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Story_ID: 283630
Speaker 1: Now in addition to playing in the semi-pro league on these teams, you finished college you had your college degree [from St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], what was your full-time work?  What were you doing?
Speaker 2: Parks recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation].
Speaker 1: So tell me how that started and what was your early work?
Speaker 2: When I came out I had to take a civil service exam.  I had to take an exam for it, and they put you on a list and they take you off a list.  And then you have to work, you have to work six months on a satisfactory basis to become permanent.  So, you know, I stayed there.  I enjoyed the work.  But Thelma [Baxter] said maybe you should be teaching, maybe you should be teaching school.  So I got my teaching license and I started teaching in junior high school.  I didn't like it. It was a very tough, very difficult, tough job.
Speaker 1: What were you teaching?
Speaker 2: I was teaching science, but just the homeroom itself was a problem.  Just the kids coming back into the homeroom and going out for lunch and coming back from lunch.  When they go out for lunch, they be, they be pretty active when they come back.
Speaker 1: So in what way did you find it a problem?
Speaker 2: Just that it was very difficult to keep some of the students in their seats.  And you could be teaching something and have an attentive class, but just two students being unruly would just disrupt the entire class, plus I didn't particularly like it, you know, so I says, it's gotta be a better way.
Story_ID: 283631
Speaker 1: You mentioned that Thelma [Baxter], your wife, suggested that you go into teaching.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When and where did you meet Thelma?
Speaker 2: I met Thelma at a party in a brownstone.  I guess you wouldn't call it Harlem [New York, New York] because it was a 164th Street, the brownstone was.  A friend of hers house.  I met, I met, she was having a party and that's when I met her.
Speaker 1: Was this after St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] or while you were in college?
Speaker 2: This was while I was in college.  She was still in high school.  I was, I was in college.  I met her there, but then we didn't see each other again until maybe a year or so later.  And we started dating maybe a couple years after that, after that party, but I met her initially at a party.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she attend college in New York [New York]?  Where was she--
Speaker 2: She, she went to [The] City College [of New York] in New York.  She attended college, City College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year were you married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].  And where were you married?
Speaker 2: At the chapel of Intercession Church [Church of the Intercession] on 155th Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, was she teaching at that point?
Speaker 2: No, she had just graduated from high school.  She wasn't teaching at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did she start teaching?
Speaker 2: She started teaching, she graduated from college in 1968, '67 [1967].  She started teaching in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she elementary, middle, high school teacher?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: She was a high school teacher, okay.
Speaker 2: High school English teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell us about your family, your children, their names and when they were born.
Speaker 2: Well, Dana, Dana [Baxter] was born in 1970, and Dawn [Baxter] was born in 1975.  We have two children.  They both went to, attended the Peterson school [ph.].  We elected to send them to private school, Peterson School in Riverdale [Bronx, New York].  They both went there.  And they graduated and they both went to, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Dana from the Wharton School of Business [Wharton School], and Dawn from the Annenberg School of, it's called the Annenberg School [for Communication], but they both went to the University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Communications I think.
Speaker 2: Communications, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.  And, what is Dana doing today?
Speaker 2: She has her own business.  She used to work for MTV.  She left MTV to start her own business and she calls it Time Media.  She's a publicist for Time Media Productions [ph.].  She has a business partner, one business partner.
Speaker 1: And this is located where?
Speaker 2: Downtown New York.
Speaker 1: In New York City?
Speaker 2: New York City.  Dawn works for the marketing representative for Nike [Inc.].
Speaker 1: And where is that located?  Where is she?
Speaker 2: They have a base in California, but it's also based out of New York.  I don't know if its downtown also, downtown New York also.
Speaker 1: Both in New York City?
Speaker 2: Both in New York City.
Story_ID: 283632
Speaker 1: If I can, let me come back to your first position with the New York City recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation].  You were teaching school and what was your first position with the department?
Speaker 2: I was what they call recreation director, whereas I organized activities in a small geographic playground area.  Also there were citywide events that you do like track meets, swim meets, basketball tournaments, things of that nature, you know.  Then they placed me in a recreational center.  They built a brand new recreational center called the Tompkins [Corners] Cultural Center [Brooklyn, New York].  They put me in charge of the Tompkins Cultural Center.
Speaker 1: Would you spell Tompkins for us?
Speaker 2: Tompkins in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Could you spell that, Tompkins?
Speaker 2: T-O-M-P-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was the recrea- that was a cultural center.  It didn't have a gymnasium, but it had a large theater, had an indoor theater.  It had a game room.  It had an arts and crafts room so they had cultural activities and then they had plays, had bands, big bands come out, Blood, Sweat & Tears and we had concerts in the large park area itself, and we had programs for senior citizens, programs for youth and adults also.
Speaker 1: How long were you associated with the Tompkins Center?  How long?
Speaker 2: I stayed there until I, I worked out there for, how many years was it, six or seven years, until they built the place in Harlem [New York, New York] called the, they used to call it the bath house, but it was really, it was made into a recreation center called the [J.] Rozier Hansborough [Recreation] Center [New York, New York].  They had a pool, they had a gym and they had karate rooms and things of that nature.  So they brought me over there to run that program.  I came over to run that program.
Story_ID: 283633
Speaker 1: Now how was New York City, particularly Harlem [New York, New York] different for young people now that you were working with as a recreation professional?  How was it different for the youth that you were working with contrasted when you were growing up as a, as a youth in Harlem?  How have things changed?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't have many facilities.  There have more facilities now.  All we had when I was growing up was St. Philip's Church [St. Philip's Episcopal Church, New York, New York].  We had the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  They had Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and maybe the Kennedy Center [Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Community Center, New York, New York].  Now they have all sorts of recreation centers now.  They have a lot more recreation centers, a lot more places where kids can go.
Speaker 1: By the time you became a professional in the field, there was more diversity.  Certainly you mentioned a couple of places.  So there was a lot more diversity for the young people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I think you also had the board of ed [board of education] centers that were open also, back when I was coming up.  Now the budget doesn't permit for the board of ed centers to be opened up because the teacher contract calls for, I think, thirty-nine dollars an hour or something like that.  So it was very costly for them to open up now.
Speaker 1: So these were like community school programs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  After school community centers because most of the schools close up and you don't get a chance to use the schools anymore.  But then, they would open the schools up.  Schools should, in my opinion, schools should be open in the afternoon and evening for the community at large.  They should be able to use the school and the gym, gymnasium, but because of the cost to open the building, the cost of opening each room in the school, they elected not to open them up 'cause it's too costly.
Story_ID: 283634
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit more about our progression in the City of New York [New York] in the field of recreation.  Tell me some of your other moves and positions.
Speaker 2: Well, after I, after I went to the [J.] Rozier Hansborough [Recreation] Center [New York, New York], which I enjoyed working at, I took the supervisor's exam and I was appointed off the list as a supervisor so they sent me out to Brooklyn [New York].  I was sent out to a place called Sunset Park in Brooklyn to organize all of the recreational activities and things of that nature in that large, it was a very large park.  And I was sent out there to organize all the activities in that park.  So I stayed out there for a while then I, the trip was too far coming from [New] Jersey all the out to Sunset Park in Brooklyn was a long trip.  So I elected to transfer to the Bronx [New York].  So I transfer over, they transferred me over to the Bronx as a supervisor.  I worked, well I ran a district for a while with the community boards, and then they appointed me as borough director in the Bronx.  I got appointed by a white commissioner, Bronx borough commissioner, he appointed me.
Speaker 1: As what?
Speaker 2: As the borough director of the Bronx, borough recreation director of the Bronx.
Speaker 1: The entire borough?
Speaker 2: I was in charge of all the personnel in the borough, which was a very, it's a very difficult management position.  Then subsequently, the commissioner got in trouble and he was bounced.  So they put a new commissioner in and he brought his own person in.  So I wound up as a senior manager out in St. James Parkway [St. James Recreation Center, Bronx, New York].  It was a large recreational center.  They put me in charge of that center to manage that center.  We had senior citizens, we had youth and adults.  We had a Hispanic, Hispanic program out there.  We had afterschool workshop and, yeah, well, that's about it.
Speaker 1: As you look at your early positions in recreation and then the middle and then the last one, what were some of the challenges that you faced in this profession.  You certainly were well educated.  In fact, you had another degree beyond the one from St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that preparation.
Speaker 2: Well I thought that, I thought I should be able to enhance my career if I went and got my master's [degree] in recreation.  It assured me, would teach me how to coordinate all of the recreational activities to meet several needs, to meet the needs of the handicapped, to meet the needs of senior citizens, to meet the needs of adults and to meet the needs of youth.  So I went, I went to that master's program and I thought that helped me a lot because--
Speaker 1: Where did you study?
Speaker 2: At Lehman.  Herbert H. Lehman, the Lehman College [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: And that's part of the New York City higher ed system.
Speaker 2: That part of the city university system.
Speaker 1: Part of the city university system.  Okay. And what year did you receive that master's degree?
Speaker 2: In 1975.
Story_ID: 283635
Speaker 1: Let me come back to the challenges that you found as a recreation professional.  What are some of the major challenges that you faced over your long career?
Speaker 2: Well, I know when I got to that recreation center [St. James Recreation Center, Bronx, New York], we had basically Jewish, Jewish personnel using the center as a senior citizen's center.  However, there were a lot of Hispanics in the area who wanted to use our center who thought that they had been frozen out.  So had to, and we invited them in to run their programs.  Also we had to bring youth, youth programs in there also.  So we had like a homework workshop and an after school program.  We had senior citizens during the day.  We had to mix the senior citizens with the youth, which was difficult.  You had to, you had to get the Hispanic culture in there where they had, they had, they liked arts and crafts whereas the Jewish contingent, they wanted to go trips to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and places like that.  Where the Hispanics all they wanted to do was, they wanted to have arts and crafts.  They had, we had a feeding program we brought in there also.  So it was very difficult to get the two cultures together, but it worked out after a while.
Speaker 1: How did you manage it?  How did you, what resources did you pull in to help you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, we put the food program, we gave the card, they had some card players in there, we gave them a special room.  The Hispanics wanted to engage in arts and crafts activities, we gave them a special area.  We had a special area for the kids when they came in.  We also had an environmental program in there we called the Bronx River Restoration Group was in there also.  I'm floundering now, but just trying to touch base on how we did it.  But we managed to get all those groups working there at one time and they all co-existed.
Speaker 1: When you were the top person for the borough, Bronx [New York] borough. What was your major challenges in that big position 'cause that was your last major position was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the major challenge was trying to motivate twenty-five and thirty year old workers to do, to do a job.  It was very difficult to motivate people to work sometimes, especially when they were your peers at one time.  We all worked at the same level at one time.  I thought that was a major challenge to motivate them to be able to do certain things which they hadn't been accustomed to doing you know.
Speaker 1: All in all then, how many years did you work as a professional in the field of recreation?
Speaker 2: Thirty-seven.
Speaker 1: Thirty-seven years.  Does that include the years, the summers that you worked between college [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, in those years I only worked two hours, two months in the summertime, but that was only a total of eight months.  So when you leave they factor that time in.  They factor that time in also.
Speaker 1: Very briefly, before we end this part of the tape, what did you enjoy about doing this kind of work?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed, when I run into, when I run to former kids that I worked with, when I run into them and I see that they're matured and they're grown up in a nice outstanding individuals and they say you were one of my role models, that makes me feel pretty good, you know. That they've done something, that they managed to stay out of trouble and then become productive in society and whatnot.
Story_ID: 283881
Speaker 1: We had some discussion about some of the challenges that you faced in your work in the various New York [New York] neighborhoods in terms of recreation and athletics for young people and adults.  And we've had tremendous demographic changes in all of our big cities and particularly New York City within the last ten, twenty, or thirty years.  In what ways did those demographic ethnic group changes impact your role, your job and the challenges that they present and how did you deal with 'em?  Would you describe some of the changes?
Speaker 2: In the center [St. James Recreation Center, New York, New York] itself, the ethnic group had been denied the right, the use of the center, which was the Hispanic group because they came later on, they were last to come into the area.  They hadn't, hadn't been able to use the center and they wanted to use it.  So the group, the white group that was using the center had not had the experience of the Hispanics being in the center and they kinda like didn't want, didn't like them being in there, so I had to work to get them to try and cohabitate and use the center collectively.  That was a major challenge 'cause you had different ethnicity in there and it didn't work out at all time, but as we got the program going and we had this, a lot of special events going, they started to work together and what not, as a group.  But, of course, money became a factor in the sense of being able to take trips and what not 'cause the Hispanics didn't have the mobility to take these trips that the other group had that had been there before them.  So that was a problem for a while.
Speaker 1: Any other ethnic group challenges, changes that you faced in your work?
Speaker 2: Well with the food program, sometime the food, the different types of food that was requested was because we had a feeding program there.  They had different types of food that was requested.  Some people liked the food and some people didn't like the food.  Of course, blacks and Hispanics have a different, had a different diet than some of, some of their white counterparts.  But we kinda worked that out.  We tried to, we tried to have a, how can I phrase it, we tried to get the type of food that they all would, they all would like, they all could eat.  Can we splice that tape?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you need to pause?
Speaker 2: Continue.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can start over if you like.
Speaker 2: But we got them through. In the final analysis, we got them to cohabitate in there pretty good.
Story_ID: 283882
Speaker 1: How many other managers were there across the city, in addition to yourself?  Do you have an association?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how many centers that they had because they gave me the position of a center manager and there's a lot of centers in the city.  And I don't know how many, how many it was, but they had a lot of center managers.  They were all--
Speaker 1: Did the managers meet?  Did you ever meet as a group?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, we would meet as a group.  They'd have a monthly meeting.
Speaker 1: What kind of things were discussed at the meetings?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Staffing, programming, seasonal programming.  What were some of the other things we talked about?  The budget, the overall budget.  Because everything now, everything now, as it was in the past, everything was revenue-producing.  They wanted to produce revenue so they, they installed a program of fees and charges which you had to pay for the program.  Whereas before the city [New York, New York] would, all the programs would be free, provided to you on a free basis.  But now they started, they wanted revenue, they wanted to do revenue to pay for itself.  They wanted it to be revenue-producing so they started a fees, they started a fee program.
Speaker 1: But how did that work?
Speaker 2: They rebelled against it at first, most of the members because they had been using it for free for many, many years, but it was a nominal fee of maybe ten dollars, ten dollars a member.
Speaker 1: For how long?  For a year?
Speaker 2: For a year, for a year's membership.
Speaker 1: Did that generate a lot of money or was it--
Speaker 2: Wasn't a lot of money, didn't generate a lot of money, but some of the other things that you had there, had to pay, we had like an ex- a weight room, an exercise room.  They had to pay like twenty dollars a month for that, to use that.  That was revenue-producing.  We had like emergency service using, teaching a course there.  And that would produce maybe a couple thousand dollars a year because he would charge five hundred dollars per person just to teach 'em the emergency medical service to train 'em to pass the test.  And he had maybe forty or fifty people taking that, taking that course pretty much every year.
Speaker 1: So did that mean that you as a manager, a director had to set up an accounting system or did you have somebody to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we had to manage all the money and set up an accounting system.
Speaker 1: Did you have to do that or did you have some--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to do it.  I was responsible for it, coordinating the money and passing the checks in on a monthly basis.
Speaker 1: Were you as manager director and other people at your level, were you associated with any of the colleges and universities in the city in terms of program planning and resources?  Was there any--
Speaker 2: Not too much with the colleges, not too much with the colleges.  I had, I had some of the environmental group, the Bronx River Restoration Group, I had them in there.  I associated with them because they would come in and they would clean up the entire Bronx River but they had a base out of my center.  They had an office and everything set up in the center [St. James Recreation Center, Bronx, New York] and they would run various programs for kids also.  They were in the center also.
Speaker 1: I just remembered an experience that I had with the Bronx Zoo [Bronx, New York].  It was Black History Month and they brought me down for the day and I spoke to children at the Bronx Zoo.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And my, my subject was African American contributions to the science, particularly nature and natural science and that kind of thing, and the animals.  I just thought about that, you know, and I don't even remember what year that was now.  It was at least twenty years ago.  It was a day kind of thing.
Speaker 2: We didn't do anything with the Bronx, although the Bronx Zoo was right near, right in the proximity there, very near, but we didn't do anything with the Bronx Zoo.
Story_ID: 283883
Speaker 1: Where were you living, you and your family?  Where were you living during the time that you had these positions?  Where did you reside?
Speaker 2: I was living in Englewood, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you commuted then?
Speaker 2: I commuted, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that a long commute every day?
Speaker 2: Well depending on the Cross Bronx Expressway how bad it was.  And many times it wasn't bad.
Speaker 1: Your wife Thelma [Baxter] was a New York [New York] public school educator during this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were her position?  What did she do during--
Speaker 2: She started out as an English teacher at Taft High School [William Howard Taft High School, Bronx, New York] and from there she went to A. Philip Randolph Campus High School [New York, New York] and [The] City College [of New York, New York, New York] as a, she had a special position there.  Then she went from there to George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] as a assistant principal.  And from there to Theodore Roosevelt [High School, Bronx, New York] with the five thousand students as a principal.  Then she became a district superintendent in Harlem [New York, New York].  That was her last position before she retired.
Speaker 1: Did her work and your work coincide in any kind of way?  Did, was she helpful to you or vice versa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well she got me the job in the, as a gym teacher up at George Washington in the evening.  She was responsible for me getting the gym, gym position as we ran programs for the basketball tournaments for the youth up there at George Washington High School at night, in the evening.
Speaker 1: I see.  And what years was that?  Do you recall the decade or was that--
Speaker 2: I did it for a period, a term of ten years aside from the officiating, I did it for ten years from the, from 1992, I'm sorry, from 1990 to nineteen, to 2000.  About ten years, roughly about a ten year period.
Story_ID: 283884
Speaker 1: Well you just said officiating and that leads me to the, the next part of our discussion.  You had a distinguished career, I think, and I would say even a pioneering career as a basketball official, as a referee.  Would you tell us, begin to tell me how you entered the work of officiating basketball, how you get into that and what that was like when you started?  When did you start?  How did you start all that?
Speaker 2: Well I was a former player so I, I had an interest in basketball because I was a former player, and also with the recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] I had done small amounts of basketball officiating in the recreation department because we used to run basketball clinics for the staff and set up a training program for the staff to teach them how to officiate.  So I said well, I'm gonna take the exam and become licensed to do high school because some of the, some of the recreation directors were doing high school basketball in the, for the parks and recreation department.  So I took the exam and I passed it.  And I started doing high school basketball.  So many of the high school officials aspired to become a college official.  So I said well let me apply for the college officiating position, but it was very difficult because you didn't have that many minorities in the field of college basketball officiating.  My earlier, my earlier counterparts had to go to the human rights commission to get in because everything was in Rockville [Maryland], (unclear) Long Island [New York] to try and try out for these basketball, for these college positions.  You had to apply and you had to be voted in.  So it was kinda like a closed shop.
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the high school officiating 'cause you said you had to take an exam to be licensed for high school.  What did you have to know, I mean did you, did you have to study a book or did you have to--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you had, you had to study this book out of ten basic rules, you get 409 case plays, 409 out of ten basic, you only had ten basic rules, but out of those ten basic rules, you can get 490 case plays out of it.
Speaker 1: Situations--
Speaker 2: Situations, situations.
Speaker 1: --during the game.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we called them case play because it's a case book, but like you say, a situation.  It was a very difficult exam.  You had to study the book, you have to know, and they give you a hundred question exam, but you are allowed to get seven wrong.
Speaker 1: Seven wrong?
Speaker 2: You can't get any more than seven wrong.  You get any more than seven wrong you fail.  So you have to pass that to qualify for that and then you have to apply to the colleges if you want to get into the college, college ranks.
Speaker 1: Did you pass the high school test the first time?
Speaker 2: I passed it the first time out.  So I was lucky to do that.
Speaker 1: What was some of the more difficult cases in this, in this preparation?  Was there any cases that were really tricky?
Speaker 2: Oh, they have all sorts of tricky questions, you know.  Questions as to when the ball goes into the basket and the spin of the ball causes it to come out and not go all the way through, how do you adjudicate that situation?  Well the ball has to pass through the basket for it to count.  If it comes out of the basket and it doesn't pass through the net, you have to continue in play.  That was a very tricky question at that time because the ball, actually it was in, but because the spin causes the flip out of the net, and didn't go pass through the net, you cannot count two points on that.
Speaker 1: Can you give me another example of a quote tricky question or something really sensitive that you have to really watch carefully?
Speaker 2: Okay, a player steals the ball and goes to the wrong basket, goes up for a shot and is fouled in the act of shooting, how many shots would you give that player?  Normally you would think you would give that play two shots, but you can't give that player two shots, two shots because he, it's not a legal shot because he's shooting at the wrong basket, so if you're in the bonus situation, you give them one and one or one plus one, or, if not, they would just take it out on the sideline.  That's a tricky play there.
Story_ID: 283885
Speaker 1: So you pass this test what, was it 1972, you told me you started?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972] I started.
Speaker 1: And what high schools' games?  Where were you refereeing high school games, New Jersey, New York?
Speaker 2: In New York, I was, I took, I took this in New York.  I didn't move to New Jersey until 1975.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And you take the International--IAABO Association of Basketball Officials [International Association of Approved Basketball Officials].  That's what the name of it is.  But they start you out with junior varsity then they let you build up the varsity play.
Speaker 1: So these were night games, weekends?
Speaker 2: Afternoon.  In New York, afternoon game.  Because they didn't want the games at night in New York because it's too many rider situations.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I think it's bad in New York, but Jersey has a better thing because the parents can come out because the game is in the evening.  But New York, they've had such bad situations over there that they had the games in the afternoon and in some case they have a, you know a lot of spectators in the gym in some case, at the rough, at the rough schools.
Speaker 1: So you did afternoon officiating for junior varsity?  That was your first, first what?
Speaker 2: That was my start.  I started out in the, I really started in the summer playground with a group of us, SUBOA, I was telling you about.
Speaker 1: Tell us about SUBOA.  What does that stand for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  SUBOA was a minority organization called the Sports Worldwide Official Associations [Sports United Boro-Wide Officials Association, Broman Division; Sports United Benevolent Officials Association] which was a minority organization to train minority officials because there weren't that many minority officials around and they weren't getting any exposure, so they formed this group of SUBOA, which is all minority officials.  However, we didn't turn anybody away.  If you, if you were a white official, you could join the organization also with no problem.
Speaker 1: Well did you help start this organization, or--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't one of the founders, I came in a little after the founders.
Speaker 1: But they assisted you in getting ready for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.  They gave me a training program.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Whereas you would get the, get the questions, you get a review of the exams and you would, you would study in there.  And you'd actually get paid games in the playground.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: To get your experiences on the floor.  We call it floor work.
Speaker 1: As you back on the beginning of your work as an official, did you find it difficult?
Speaker 2: It was a very difficult job, because especially when you're doing, when you're out there doing the summer playgrounds, you have a lot of hostile situations.  When you out in the park and it's tough.  If you can handle those games, you can probably work anywhere.  You can handle the games anywhere, you know.  So it gives you experience in just handling, handling situations.
Story_ID: 283886
Speaker 1: So junior varsity and then you went to refereeing varsity--
Speaker 2: Varsity in high school.
Speaker 1: And how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: I was fortunate because I only had to do it for a couple of years before I applied for the colleges and I got accepted into the college ranks.
Speaker 1: Now what was that process all about?  How do you, how did you initiate that and how does that happen?
Speaker 2: You had to get the right for the application, fill out the application, put down some officials that you know who are already on the college level and they have to see your name and the rest of the officials have to vote you in.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the officials at the college level that you used to, by name, who were some of the people that--
Speaker 2: A couple of the guys had gotten in ahead of me.  A guy named John Purvis, he worked for the [New York City] Department of [Parks and] Recreation also, but he had gotten into the college ranks earlier.  He used to officiate my games when I was playing.  That's where I knew him from.  Of course, he knew, once he saw my name he knew me and you have to, have to have some credibility to go along with you, you know.
Speaker 1: Who was the other person that you used as a reference?
Speaker 2: There was a guy named Jim Murry who was one of the first black officials around.  He was there.  It was about three or four guys that I knew, and some other guys I had worked some high school ball with also, because when you're working college you work high school and college too.  So I had worked with some of the other guys and they knew the type of person you were.  They would vouch for you and they would vote for you, so it's real political in terms of getting in.
Speaker 1: So how was the test for college officiating differ from the high school officiating test?  Was it different?
Speaker 2: Well, it's an application.  You don't take a test to get in.  But after you were in, there's a college exam that you have to take before the season starts, but you don't take the exam to actually get in, but you have to take the exam, that exam to qualify you to officiate, but not to get into the organization.
Speaker 1: Was that similar to the other exam, or was it a different type of exam?
Speaker 2: Well, college had different rules than high school.  They need to, need to get one set of rules, but they only have two different sets of rule.  Then you had the women's board of officials.  They had another set of rules.  Everybody has their own set of rules.  They need to, there should be one basic set of rules, that's my, in my opinion.
Story_ID: 283887
Speaker 1: Do you recall the first college game that you officiated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where, where was that and what was the--
Speaker 2: Where was that?  I think it was Pratt, Pratt Institute [Brooklyn, New York].  That was my first, my first college officiating game.  My first varsity college game was at Queens College [City University of New York, Queens, New York].  I remember that vividly because it was my first varsity game.  I think I started from there.  When you come into college you do a, you go on the associates' list when you first get in.  You doing it like freshman.  At that time they had freshman basketball.  You're doing a freshman game.
Speaker 1: When you started college officiating, how many games would you officiate a season?
Speaker 2: When I, when I first started or after you're seasoned?
Speaker 1: Well, after you, when you first started, how many were you doing?
Speaker 2: They don't give you that many.  I had about, I'd say about a fifteen, fifteen games.
Speaker 1: These were night games, weekend games at the college level?
Speaker 2: Night games.
Speaker 1: Night games?
Speaker 2: Sometimes weekend, but after you become established you do somewhere from fifty to eighty, eighty to one hundred games, once you get started.
Speaker 1: A year?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year.
Speaker 2: The top guys do, they do a one hundred games.
Speaker 1: How do you maintain your physical being for all of that?
Speaker 2: You have to stay in shape.  You have to run, do a lot of running.  I played tennis so that helped me out a lot.  You have to do a lot of running to get ready for the season.  They didn't want to see you very heavy.  If you get too heavy, they, they drop you out, you know.  Can't get too heavy, however, there are some guys that do get heavy, but they have so much experience that they need it, so they try to keep them hanging around.
Speaker 1: What did you have to do, let's say twenty-four hours or twelve hours before officiating a game?  Was there any special things that you had to do for yourself to get ready for a game?
Speaker 2: No, normally when you go to those college games you had to be there an hour and a half before, before the game.  That way it gives you a chance to have a pre-game with your partner, to relax.  The athletic director is relaxed once he sees you come into the building, they give you the quarters and what not so you can discuss how you're going to call the game.  You can hang your coat up and relax, just relax.  You have to be there an hour and a half before time.
Speaker 1: And once the game is over, can you leave or is there things you have to do after?
Speaker 2: No, you leave.  You take a shower and you have to wait for the other guy to finish, then you leave, leave together, make sure everybody leaves together.
Speaker 1: So you had some pretty long days when you were working and then officiating.  How did your family live with all this?
Speaker 2: They took it, they took it in stride.  You know, it's a very, it's a very well-paid position.  People don't realize what the people get for those games.
Speaker 1: Well, I was gonna ask you, what, what was the compensation for the college games?
Speaker 2: Depends on what level.  The Division I games, anywhere from $500 to $1,000 per game.  And some of those guys do a hundred of those games you know, but Division III levels were hundred and a quarter, up $125.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the big tournaments, major tournaments that you eventually officiated at.
Speaker 2: Well, I was chosen to do the Division III Final Four, which was in Roanoke, Virginia.  Once I was also sent to Buffalo, New York to do the Division III final.  I did the Division II final in Springfield [New York].  It's called the Elite Eight, the last eight teams in the Division II colleges, which, I wasn't up there that year, but St. Augustine's [College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] went up there one year.  I recall them going up there, for the Final Eight, but it's usually teams like Division II teams, like Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], St. Augustine, California, Bakersfield [California State University, Bakersfield, Bakersfield, California], teams like that, but it's a good brand of basketball 'cause that's the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association].  And the Division I tournament, of course, is the very big tournament, where you have, where you have all the, Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] and North Carolina [The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana] and all those teams.  That's Division I.
Story_ID: 283888
Speaker 1: When you look at the number of basketball referees or officials, during the time you were at your peak, at the college level, how many referees were there across the country, or let me put it another way, how many African Americans were there officiating at the top level?
Speaker 2: They had some but not that many.  Years ago it was very few, but then recently, they've gotten, they've gotten some African Americans in there.  There's a lot of them in there, but it's still not a, not a lot of them.
Speaker 1: Well when you started you say there was very few.  What are we talking about?
Speaker 2: I'm talking about in my area, out of sixty, sixty officials, college officials, the college officials are the elite officials in the geographic area.  Maybe in the New York area, there were about sixty.  We may have had five or six minorities in there out of the sixty officials.  Now it's a few more, but it's not, it's still not a lot.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other officials that you got, African American officials, that you got to know well and, through this work?  Were there others that--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there were others, David Day, I mentioned John Purvis.  I'm trying to think if there were any other African Americans, Leroy Hendricks.
Speaker 1: These were all New Yorkers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all New Yorkers.  A guy in Maryland, Bob Barnett [Robert Barnett, Jr.].  Up in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, a guy named Roscoe Baker.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I knew Roscoe.
Speaker 2: You know Roscoe, Roscoe--
Speaker 1: I didn't know he officiated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Roscoe was a college official.
Speaker 1: Any others in Boston that you can think of?
Speaker 2: I know so many, not the African American.  I don't know many African Americans.  I know Roscoe was one of the few African Americans they had up here doing college basketball.
Speaker 1: Well, one of my longtime friends and a friend of yours and associate of ours here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], from Providence [Rhode Island], Kenny Walker [HistoryMaker Kenneth Walker].
Speaker 2: Kenny Walker, yeah, he was a big official.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you know--
Speaker 2: He was really a pioneer.
Speaker 1: Was he before you?  Yeah, I guess he was.
Speaker 2: He was before me, he was before me.  I never had the pleasure of working with Kenny.
Speaker 1: But you say he was a pioneer, so what do you know about his career?  He came what, ten years before you maybe, or?
Speaker 2: Ten years before me.  See we had black officials in the New York area, but they used to send Kenny down from the Providence area to work St. John [St. John's University, Queens, New York].  So we didn't have a lot, a lot of the officials down, down in, I don't know whether they felt they weren't ready for it or what.  I don't know what the story was.
Story_ID: 283889
Speaker 1: In preparation for officiating, I guess did you actually consciously watch other referees, was that your preparation?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you watched other officials, see how they handle situations, see what their philosophy is, you know, and you try to have the same, you try, you try and be on the same page with all, with the way you're gonna call the game, but everybody has their own feel.
Speaker 1: Now that leads me to the next question, did you have any controversial calls that you made yourself that were controversial that held the game up?
Speaker 2: You know you're always gonna be controversial to the losing coach.  But you just have to go along with the rules and with the mechanics and just call, just call it the way you see it, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any calls that you made that were really, caused a ruckus with the coaches or held the game up or anything, any?
Speaker 2: You know I can't recall too many.  I didn't get in trouble that much.
Speaker 1: It was a very physically, I guess mentally, strenuous occupation refereeing?
Speaker 2: It takes a lot of concentration.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you have any injuries or health problems as a result of these many years of going up and down the court?
Speaker 2: No, well I had, I had had a mild heart attack but that happened on the tennis court.  I was lucky I didn't have any procedures done, I think I was just too hot out there.  Which would happen on the basketball court also, you know.  That's why you try and stay in good physical condition.
Speaker 1: I know Kenny Walker [HistoryMaker Kenneth Walker] has a problem with his knees--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I think he attributes some of that to--
Speaker 2: Pounding, pounding on the--
Speaker 1: --pounding on the floor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  A lot of officials, a lot of the heavier officials have trouble with their knees, but just even, even the slender officials have trouble with their knees and their back, you know, just running up and down the court a lot.  You have to stay, you have to stay in good physical condition.  It keeps you, it makes you stay in good physical condition really.
Story_ID: 283890
Speaker 1: New York City recreational department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] positions in 1999 and you retired from coaching [sic.] at the collegiate level in 2000?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], yeah.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], okay.  So all in all how many years did you officiate then?
Speaker 2: I officiated on the college level for twenty-three years.  I officiated overall for about twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: Are there any tournaments at the collegiate level that stand out in your mind in any special way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was, I was chosen to go to Salem, Salem, Virginia to referee the Division III Final Four.  I thought that was a big, that was a big thrill to be able to go down there and do it, you know.  To be chosen to go to any post-season tournaments is always a big thrill.  It's really a sense of accomplishment as an official that they would, that they would chose you out of all of the other officials that are out here to go to these different tournaments.
Speaker 1: Now how many games of that then?  That was a three or four games stretch?
Speaker 2: It's one game.
Speaker 1: Oh, one game?
Speaker 2: I went to the junior college national tournament.  You do two games a day.  You do about, you do about six games.  That was the junior college national.
Speaker 1: You received awards or recognitions for your officiating?
Speaker 2: Yes, I received some awards.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about some of the more memorable awards, the big ones?
Speaker 2: Well I got one for the Public Schools Athletic League [New York, New York] for being official of the year.  The NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] send you a plaque for being chosen to go to the NCAA Tournament, so I went to the, I went to the Division II Tournament and the Division III Tournament, so I got, I got plaques for that going there.  I've done high school finals in the Garden, New York City Madison Square Garden for many years.  I think, I think I've been chosen to do the high school finals in the Garden ten times I think, I think about ten times.
Speaker 1: In Madison Square?
Speaker 2: Madison Square Garden, yeah.  Then I've done the Tournament of Champions [New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association Tournament of Champions] over in New Jersey, at Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey].  So I've had, I've had some good prestigious assignments, you know.  Some officials never get those assignments.
Story_ID: 283891
Speaker 1: In retirement, both from the recreational work and from officiating, you've been retired roughly five or six years now.  What have you been doing in retirement?
Speaker 2: I'm still doing, I'm still doing some games, private school, girls' games, junior college games.  I'm going to turn back the schedule this year.  I'm not going to do any more junior college games.  I'm gonna retire, I'm gonna retire fully from college officiating.  I still will continue to do the high school game because it's, I guess years of seeing some of the other officials, you know, I, I really have a lot of fun, I enjoy doing it, you know, so I  plan, I plan to continue to do that.  So I'm able to keep active in some way, some form or fashion, trying to keep active.
Speaker 1: So you are a role model now, and there were role models throughout your life.  As you look back quickly, who were the major role models in your life, for your work as a recreational professional, but also as a basketball official?
Speaker 2: There was this gentleman named John Purvis.  He worked for the New York City recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation].  He was a little older than I was but he was, he used to officiate my games.  And he was also working on the college level, and he was really an outstanding individual, so he was like, he acted as role model for me.
Speaker 1: John Purvis?
Speaker 2: John Purvis.
Speaker 1: Spell his last name.
Speaker 2: P-U-R-V-I-S.
Speaker 1: And is he still living?
Speaker 2: He's still alive.  He lives in Charleston, South Carolina now.  He, he relocated from New York [New York].  He lives in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: In other ways was he a role model for you?  What, what stands out about him in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well he became, he was always professional in what he did.  He didn't hesitate to help you if you needed help.  And he was the, he was the borough manager in Manhattan [New York, New York], borough recreation manager in Manhattan.  He ended up like that.  And he was the first minority official I saw, that I saw in our area doing Division I basketball.
Speaker 1: Sounds to me like he might be a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  No question about it.
Speaker 1: Perhaps later I can get his address and telephone number so we can put him on the list.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 283892
Speaker 1: Bill [HistoryMaker William Baxter], is there anything that you'd like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: No, not really, I think you've covered most of it.
Speaker 1: We have a few, a few wrap-up questions.  Why did you wanna tell your story?  I know that I invited you to.
Speaker 2: Well I think this story should be told just so people can understand what, what types of professions people can go into and the opportunity, what it takes to do it and there's no easy street if you want to take a look, wanna look at it that way.  Everything, everything you do in life takes work.  And you have to have somebody to be able to help you along in most cases.  No man is an island and nobody stands alone by himself uphill.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have lived your life so far?
Speaker 2: I feel lucky, I feel lucky and blessed that I was able to do these different things and live my life and be able to work and have these work settings and enjoy what I'm doing and regard my work as play in many cases.  I think it's a lucky person that can do that.  Some people have jobs that are very stressful, although officiating can be stressful.  My job was stressful but it was not, to a large extent it wasn't.  I enjoyed, I still enjoyed most of it.
Speaker 1: In hindsight and looking back, would you have chosen a different career for yourself?
Speaker 2: I look back I think, I think I would go the same route, however, as you know with the recreation department [New York City Department of Parks and Recreation] you don't make a lot of money.  I would think that maybe, sometimes I think that maybe I'd go another route to make a little more money, but then I question myself.  I say is it really worth it, 'cause I really enjoy what I've done over the years.
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Maybe travel abroad.  I haven't, I haven't gone across the water yet to travel.  I think I'm gonna go to the French Open [Paris, France] next year over in France.  I'd like to do a little more traveling.
Speaker 1: That's tennis, right, French Open?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's tennis, yeah.
Story_ID: 283893
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and/or concerns for the African American community today, across America?
Speaker 2: Well, the prison, the prison statistics alarm me.  And most of the African Americans are the ones who are incarcerated.  I'd like them to be able to change that and be more productive in their lives where they wouldn't have to go to prison so much.  So it's probably a tall order, but that's what I'd like to see, where there's not so many of us, that we can achieve a little bit more.
Story_ID: 283894
Speaker 1: I'm sure that you turned a lot of lives around for young people.
Speaker 2: I would hope so.
Speaker 1: Would you give me one or two young men or women whose lives that you think you impacted upon, lives you changed?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just say, I can only judge by what some of the, some of the people have told me.  They said, it caught me by surprise that one, one gentleman said you, you were my role model, you were a musician, you were, you were an athlete, you were a musician and I kinda like patterned myself after you, you know, so it kinda caught me off guard, but I felt, made me feel very good about myself.
Speaker 1: Who was that person?
Speaker 2: A young, a pretty young man that grew up in my building when I lived in the, in Manhattan [New York, New York].  He lived, he was Haitian.  We helped him get a, his status over here, become a legal, legal immigrant.  We helped him become a legal immigrant.
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life and you may have already answered this, but I'll ask it in a different way, what stands out the most for you as you look back on your life at this point?
Speaker 2: What stands out most for me, I think I made a good choice with my wife [Thelma Baxter].  I have to, I have to attribute a lot of my success to her.  She's understanding and she's an intelligent lady herself and she's made some great strides, 'cause she kept a little pressure on me to do some things well, you know.  I think I made a great choice in that respect.
Story_ID: 283895
Speaker 1: For young people coming up today, the young people that you worked with, that teenage range, teenagers, what is your message and advice for young people today, particularly those who may want to follow in your career path in the field of recreational education, outdoor living?  What advice do you have for young people?
Speaker 2: Well, I think education is the key.  I would say get as much education as you can.  But be willing to work, to work at what you want, you might want to do, and you have to be, you have to be somewhat collaborative in a sense.  But don't try and grasp everything at once.  Good things come to those who wait and you got to be a little patient.  Because just like we used to say in officiating, it's better to be two years too late than one day too early, cause you never get there, you know.  If you mess it up the first time out, you never get another shot at it, so just be patient.
Story_ID: 283896
Speaker 1: Last question.  How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a fair person, a person who, everybody likes to be liked, but I know everybody will not like you, but I like to be remembered as a fair person though, that's all I can say on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Great interview.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
