Story_ID: 667573
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interview today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Curt Champagne.  Sir can you please state your full name and spell for us please?
Speaker 2: Bobby, B-O-B-B-Y, Bennett, B-E-N-N-E-T-T [HistoryMaker Bobby Bennett].
Speaker 1: Now is that your given name?
Speaker 2: That my radio name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Which, which have been all my life (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: My real name let me give my real name also.  My name real name is Marshall Payne III.
Speaker 1: Okay that's interesting, all right and a third too which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --indicates that you know you were, you know the fam- some sort of family tradition being past, it's already been two Marshall Paynes and you're the third.
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather was Marshall the first [Marshall Payne, Sr.], and, and that was on my father's side and then my father was Marshall the second [Marshall Payne, Jr.].  And he was a junior, so to speak, and then I came along and I became the third.  And my lot in life of course was to be a lawyer 'cause that was a good legal name (laughter) Marshall Payne, wow, III.  But you know I didn't become that.
Speaker 1: Okay but is that, maybe I, I don't know if should wait until the point now, can you let me know when we get to the point where you changed your name?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, I don't wanna skip past, past it 'cause it's got to be a story behind it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think that's probably a more ap- appropriate time to tell it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation was, I was a disc jockey, a program director, a writer, but mainly I guess you would say started off as a disc jockey, a guy that plays records, okay?  And I did that for the majority of my adult career, twenties and thirties, and then I got off into being a program director.  And also from program director, writer, decided to write a book ['The Ultimate Soul Music Trivia Book: 501 Questions and Answers About Motown, Rhythm and Blues and More,' Bobby Bennett and Sarah Smith] which we'll talk about later, but basically I guess my occupation would be that of a radio announcer or disc jockey.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, July 20th, 1943.
Speaker 1: We have the same birthday at least the July part anyway, July the 20th, yeah.  And okay now before, oh what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: September 10, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? You, you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Oh we're in Punta Gorda, Florida.
Story_ID: 667574
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, as sort of a warm up--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I guess.  My favorite too- food would be steak, some type of steak, rib eye is my favorite in the meat category, and then of course you go to the potatoes that and the ca- in the potato category.  And macaroni of course, so there's several of them but I guess my favorite would be some type of rib eye steak.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess--let me give it to you in months.  My favorite time of the year is around May, May early June it's not too hot, you coming out of winter.  You're going into spring; it's a good time of the year, spring, early spring, late summer or early spring, late spring so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Right here, right now (laughter) used to be Cancun, Mexico. I used to love Cancun, as a matter of fact, I almost built a house there.  But Cancun, Mexico, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I used to have one when I was on the radio, man don't pay no overtime and I don't do none (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right I knew, I knew every disc jockey has a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 667575
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side, but separately.  And then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give me your mother's full name and spell for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Flavia Mae Sloan [Flavia Sloan Payne] that was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: S-L-O-A-N-E?
Speaker 2: No E.
Speaker 1: No E okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She would've been ninety-three years old, her date of birth is May 27th and I believe wow, that would be what, 1922, '23 [1923]?
Speaker 1: Yeah like '21 [1921] I think, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some--
Speaker 1: Yeah 1921 I believe.  So and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Pitts- Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay so what do you know about your mother's side of the family how, how far back can you trace them, are any good stories on that side?
Speaker 2: No good really stories except my grandfather, my mother's father Mark R. Sloan [Mark Sloan, Sr.], he came to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania when he was like eight or nine years-old, by himself.  His mother lived in Greenville, South Carolina had, I think was three kids all together, and she decided that the best place for him would be up north.  In the South of course when he was born they were still experiencing a great degree of segregation.  And he went to Pittsburgh, lived with an aunt at that time, and she was someone who didn't have any children.  So he became her, not only her son, but he became her only dependent, and he went to school in Pittsburgh.  I think he finished like tenth grade and then he, his first job, I'm not sure about the first job.  I know he worked in the church, but his job, his real job one that he kept for the rest of his life was that of a--he worked as a postal employee [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  And he went back to school, got his I don't know if they call GED [General Educational Development] at that time but that's what he did.  He became the first African American letter carrier in the State of Pennsylvania, and he was very proud of that fact.  I remember (laughter) on his route, I don't know whether remember there was a dancer who was very prominent in the movies, his name was Gene Kelly.
Speaker 1: Right Gene Kelly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Gene Kelly's father [James Kelly] and mother [Harriet Curran Kelly] lived on his route and (laughter) and he would always mentioned that, "Guess who lives on my route?"  And so he was very proud of that, but he was a proud, very proud black man, always wore a shirt and tie.  I don't know why he'd get off from work and usually he'd get off 3, 3:30 in the afternoon.  'Cause he worked, he worked very early and he would change his clothes, and he'd always put on a shirt and tie, and then he'd come down to dinner.  'Cause my mother and I and lived with them for quite some time while my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.] was in the [U.S. military] service.  But Pop would always wear a shirt and tie, I never knew why, but he always did, he said man should look like he feels.
Speaker 1: Yes there's a generational thing on some of them 'cause I know, I know people in that generation yeah, they had a suit--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on and, even if you look at the old mo- movies almost everyone--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had on a suit (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I, I notice like old baseball game movies, all the guys in the stands had on suits and hats and ties (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right it wasn't seen as a dress up--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --thing but a, a standard dress.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 667576
Speaker 1: So did he grow up in the, what they, the, the legendary Hill District of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No he grew up in what they know or known, was known as East Liberty. East Liberty was like there was Homewood, East Liberty then the Hill District.  And he grew up in, in East Liberty, and like I say he was very into education, very proud man.  And we used to get very angry with my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.] and my uncles my, my mother's brothers, they were all in the service, this is right after World War II [WWII].  And they, of course African American troops at that time, they treated the German prisoners better than they did the black troops.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: You know (laughter).
Speaker 1: The German POWs [prisoner of war] here in the United States (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were actually treated better, well there and here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: African American soldiers.
Speaker 2: And that used to, I guess you can say piss off my [maternal] grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.] (laughter) and Pop was a good guy, I mean he basically I got most of my younger education from him.  As far as learning how to blay- play sports, going to sports, my dad was always gone. He was in the [U.S.] military.  And he was, him and my grandmother [Marguerite Tapsico Sloan] were very inspirational as far as my education and everything else is concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so were there any stories from Greenville, South Carolina as to why your father was sent, I mean was there any incidents that went down?
Speaker 2: Well not really, my grandfather really didn't talk about that time of his life very often with us.  So all that I know basically is the fact that you know it was very, very segregated down in Greenville at that time.  And whether he got in trouble I don't know, he was a young, like I say he was only eight or nine years old and his mother sent him up north.  That's, that was about it, the extent of it, and that's as about as much as he would talk about.  He wouldn't talk about anything else, and at that time of course there were things that, that older guys just didn't talk about, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 667577
Speaker 1: What about your [maternal] grandmother, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Grandma was from St. Clairsville, Ohio and her mother was some sort of, I don't know whether it was Blackfoot or what, but she was Indian [Native American].  And her real name was Marguerite Tapsico [Marguerite Tapsico Sloan] and she came from St. Clairsville to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] from some, St., St. Clairsville to Pittsburgh.  Married my fat- my grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.] I guess she's about eighteen at that time when she married him, and they had three children.  Her mother, I didn't get a chance to know her because she was gon- she was dead before I was born.  But I used to hear my grandmother talk about her quite often and she would talk about rituals that she had, Indian rituals so to speak.  She, I don't think she ever married, the grandmother, my grandmother's mother rather.  I think she got pregnant by some guy that was just passing through, some black dude who was just passing through and consequently my grandmother was a result of that relationship.  And she was a, a great lady, she didn't work at--during the time I was little boy, after I got grown she became a cook for the Iversen family.  And the Iverson family owned, well he was the president is it Lorenzo Iversen [sic. Lorenz Iversen].  The president of Mesta Machine Company [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], very, very wealthy, they lived in the area of Pittsburgh that the Carnegies lived in, the Mellons and all them.  My grandfather became a part time chauffeur for them, and he would work weekends when he wasn't at, at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  But grandma was, she was quite a cook, she was incredible, I, I remember that most much about her because (laughter) her claim to fame was cooking, you know.  And if there was, if she was alive today, I'm sure she'd have a cooking show on somebody's network, she was that good.
Speaker 1: Okay all right so, so your mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] you know she was a, so she was I would guess she'd be fairly well off with, with your grandfather having what--the same communities, a good job working for the post office.  The first you know black letter carrier.
Speaker 2: Yeah mom and, and her two brothers, they're both older than her, she was the baby of the family so to speak, and Mark Jr. [Mark Sloan, Jr.] was my uncle and Edward [George Sloan] he was my uncle also, they were her brothers.  They were I guess by today's standards they'd be middle class, she went to Peabody High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Peabody at that time was, that was, that was where black folks that were doing pretty well went to school, they didn't go to Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Westinghouse was, was doing pretty well at that time, but Peabody was a cut above.  She went to Peabody, I think my two uncles they, they all went to Peabody also.  And mom did, she did well, there was some apprehension about her marrying my father [Marshall Payne, Jr.], because my dad was a tremendous athlete, but he went into the [U.S.] military right away.  And they said well he's in the military, he won't amount to much, you know he lives over here on Paulson Avenue, he (laughter).  I remember my mother and my grandfather arguing about that quite often.  But of course daddy came out of there, came out of the service and he did pretty well.  He didn't do as well as he would've done if it was now, this time, this time in the, on the calendar, but he did pretty well for that time.
Story_ID: 667578
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna get to him but--now did your mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No she didn't go to college she, she graduated high school [Peabody High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], she came out of high school, I don't know at that time especially in the North how many kids, how many girls went to college.  It was like you know get a job, but she got married right away, she got married to, to my grand- my father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] who was on his way to, in the [U.S.] military.  And she didn't go to college but she had to send, she could've done, have done it she had wanted to.
Speaker 1: Okay now did your mother have any special talents or aspirations, I mean at, at that age when she was coming up?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't think so, I you know she was sort of cloudy about what she, she eventually became a dietary supervisor at Montefiore Hospital [University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Montefiore, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So she was into food also just like gran- (cough)--my grandmother [Marguerite Tapsico Sloan] was, but as far as aspirations of being a secretary or being a nurse or teacher or something of that sort, I don't, I don't think so.  I don't recall her ever talking about doing anything like that, but her, her job was being a mother, 'cause she had me right away.  And then she had my brother [Raymond Payne], three years later and then two more, my two youngest brothers [Gary Payne and Anthony Payne] came along I guess two, two and three years after that.  So we're so- sort of spread out but that was her job.
Story_ID: 667579
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna go to your father's side, your father's name [Marshall Payne, Jr.] is the same as yours, we know.
Speaker 2: Yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he's a junior now and what is his date of birth and pl- place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well he was two years, he would've been two years older than my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne], his date of birth was March 9th, was that 1920?
Speaker 1: Nineteen nineteen [1919], 1920.
Speaker 2: Yeah somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay that's good enough and where, where was he born?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay so Pittsburgh side, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family, what about your grandparents?  And what are the stories about that side?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, Marshall the first [Marshall Payne, Sr.] worked at U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation]; he had muscles, oh boy this guy was, he was built (laughter).  He had one of those kind of jobs where you sling steel you know, I don't know what it was but he got hurt in the mill.  And he was basically he was sitting down I, at the time and after he got hurt, he hurt his legs in some capacity, I don't remember what.  Because it happened before I was born, but I remember his arms his, he was just a big man.  He was a huge man and he had four, four or five brothers that couple of them lived in Virginia.  And I had the opportunity to meet them I guess when I was about twelve, twelve years old.  And they were all huge, just big men you know the kind of guys that, if they'd played offensive line for somebody, they'd knocked down the defense (laughter).  But my grandfather was, he was a smart man he was very, very--and his job, he was a number writer after he got hurt in the mill.  His job was to disseminate information to the young guys, he would just sit there and it was like he was the Pied Piper and they would all come along see Mr. Payne was talking about that day.  And he would collect his number money and he was doing pretty good, he did very well as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Did he get any kind of pension from U.S. Steel for his injury?
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean it was so long ago, I don't have anything, anything, I, but memories.  But I'm and my mother, see my, I guess well yeah I can tell you this now, you can place it anywhere you want.  My uncle took a lot of pictures and my cousin Bruce, who is mentally challenged, he has access to all the pictures that were taken.  But we can't reach out to him; we can't get in touch with him.  I think the last time I've seen him was about three years ago, and all I, all we wanna do is come by the house and look at what pictures that we could, you know, we could take.  Pictures that'll be influential as far as the history of our family is concerned.  We can't reach out to this guy, I don't know he's, he's weird, he's very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bruce?
Speaker 2: Bruce Sloan [ph.].
Speaker 1: Bruce Sloan?
Speaker 2: Yeah he's one of my unc- well my uncle's one of his boys, he had two, two sons and Bruce was the youngest, but he's a weird guy.
Speaker 1: So, so your grandfather, now you say he was from Virginia?
Speaker 2: No, he's from Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Yeah you said he had brothers in Virginia?
Speaker 2: He had brothers they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But he--
Speaker 2: --migrated. They left Pittsburgh and went to Virginia.
Speaker 1: So as far as you know is there any other family origin, any place other than Pittsburgh for your, your--?
Speaker 2: Well like I say Virginia that's where his brothers were, but as far as he was concerned--
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm talking about place where the family would've been first before they got to Pittsburgh, was it Virginia or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: I don't know I, I--
Speaker 1: There've been black folks in Pittsburgh for a long time.
Speaker 2: Oh they, they've as far as I know he originated; now my grandmother she was the product, she came from North Carolina.  Greenville's--was it Greenville or Greensburg, North Carolina [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lila, L-I-L-A, Lila [Lila Lewis Payne]. I don't know her last name, Lewis, Lewis, I'm sorry.  My grandmother's, her mother's name was something Lewis, we used to call her Grandma Lewis (laughter), I never did know, and she was an Indian [Native American].  Every 4th of July she used to dress up in her Indian gear and get drunk (laughter) that was her, she would get drunk.  She died, I guess she was about ninety-seven years old, she ju- she died hanging curtains, yeah, I mean she was in great shape.  And she didn't speak a lot of English, she would, I would stay with her quite often on weekends, and she would talk and you know.  I don't know Blackfoot Indian or whatever she was, she would speak in that language, but she understood me.  And 'cause I was a little boy, I guess I was six or seven I would go over there and stay.  But she came, like I said from Greensboro, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 667580
Speaker 1: Didn't speak English, all right.  Okay so, so your father [Marshall Payne, Jr.], now did he have, did he have any stories about growing up in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: He was an athletic junkie I mean he played ball his main thing was track and field.  And high- he would high jump; he had the record of doing the high jump for something like twenty years or whatever in the City of Pitts- Pittsburgh.  And that would, track and field was his main thing, but he played baseball, all of them did.  I think he had, he had four other brothers, and they all played some kind of ball, but you know like I say was back during the Jackie Robinson era, you know.  Going back, before that even but as far--
Speaker 1: So he played like baseball and track and field?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm surprised he didn't play any football.
Speaker 2: No my dad didn't play football, my uncle Craig played football, Craig Payne and my, Donald [Donald Payne] played football.
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh being such a football place, okay so he was an athlete and, and did, did he go to Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or--?
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay and okay so when he, he finished Westinghouse he joined the service you said?
Speaker 2: He went I think two years at what they used to call Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and it was known as Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology] at that time.  And he went to Carnegie Tech, he wanted to be an engineer, and he got drafted from there and went into the service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad was, he's a very, very intelligent man, when it came to things like math, like you know how guys or people who will do crossword puzzles?  He used to go library and get math books on trigonometry and calculus and things of that nature.  And he was very smart but he was kind of, kind of crazy when it came to regular things.  In other words, you know he had tremendous senses as far as book learning is concerned.  But thin- other things in the street he was, he was sort of weird (laughter).
Speaker 1: Give us an example for--for instance.
Speaker 2: Well you know for instance I remember when I was a very young, I guess twelve or thirteen, the first time he got out of the [U.S.] military and he was working.  Well he was a kind of guy that would gamble his paycheck away, you know he would get wo- get paid on Friday.  And he end up, and you know he'd end up at the gambling place wherever they used to gamble play poker and blackjack and whatnot.  He was just you know like that, he wasn't very responsible.  And it got to a point where my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] would have to go meet him on Friday when he, when he got paid you know, to get his money.  Otherwise, there would be no money, you know, so he was very intelligent but very unresponsible.  You know he did not and I learned that, I learned that from him.  I said never will I have the opportunity if I have a family that my wife [Connie Payne] will have to do that.  So even though indirectly he didn't teach me that, directly I did learn that from him.
Story_ID: 667581
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] and father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: Yeah but it, let me see, I remember he met her at a dance, she and my aunt [Juanita Payne] who became my aunt, they were girlfriends at the time.  They had gone to some type of, some type of dance you know, kids were going to at that time.  And he met her at this particular function, and of course my grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.] was looking for a guy that was gonna be a doctor, lawyer, Indian chief [Native American] (laughter).  He was not looking for a high jumper (laughter) and my dad was very good looking too, he's a good looking guy.  And he knew it and consequently they met at this affair and I think she was still in high school [Peabody High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], well he wasn't.  He was, he was in his first year at Carnegie, Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and they got married when he, you know he got, here's your paper, greetings, this is Uncle Sam.  And he got married before he took off for his basic training, but they were originally met at a, at a dance.
Story_ID: 667582
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] have any stories about the war, this is World War II [WWII], was he, was he stationed in the states or, or was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was stationed overseas he was in Saipan [Northern Mariana Islands], he would, he would have a few drinks and he would talk about it.  Talk about someone getting killed, he had, I, I guess well now guys that were in Vietnam and whatnot stress, they call it some kype- type of syndrome (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Posttraumatic syndrome [posttraumatic stress disorder].
Speaker 2: Yeah post--and I think you know he was in World War II and Korea [Korean War] and if you know if they had that terminology that back then certainly you could equate that to him.
Speaker 1: That's unusual that a man would serve in World War II and in Korea.
Speaker 2: Well he came out, he was out for maybe a year and he could not go, by this time he has a family, he has two sons.  'Cause me and my brother [Raymond Payne] were born at, by this time, he couldn't go back to school, go back to college, 'cause he couldn't afford it.  He just decided, well you know I'll go back in the [U.S.] military, so that's how he got caught between both wars you know Korea and World War II.
Speaker 1: Now let, let me throw a monkey wrench in this, and from what I know when you got out of World War II, you had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Everybody that had a discharge after World War II can use that money and go to school, even the blacks saw this.
Speaker 2: I don't know where that, that could've been.
Speaker 1: I'm just saying that whatever he said about it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he could, he could afford to go back to sch- especially if he was going before he left--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --after, not I'm sure--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if he was in good standing he could go right back in and finish.
Speaker 2: Well I don't know I you know I'm not privy to that that information, but I do know that he went back in and he served again.  But now when he went back in he served in the Air Force, he went in the Air Force.  He was in the [U.S.] Army at first and then the, then the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay that's a new branch of the service then the United States Air Force, and when he went back in, is when the I guess it was close to the point.  Now did he go back in '47 [1947] or '48 [1948], you know?
Speaker 2: I think it was '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay now this is when right after Truman [President Harry S. Truman] officially integrated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --the Army now didn't really happen for another fifteen years (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but this is when he officially did it.
Story_ID: 667583
Speaker 1: Yeah so I was just wondering you know if he [Bennett's father, Marshall Payne, Jr.], if he really liked the discipline of the [U.S. military] service rather being out of it or what, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he didn't really have to go, you know he could've gone back to school theoretically I don't know if there was something that happened that prevented.  But if he was in good standing, which he was he wouldn't be able to get back in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right he was in good standing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he, so he goes to Korea then and the Korean War is going, this is, now this is a war that I know black soldiers right on the frontline you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) the Korean War, was he wounded at all in the Korean War.
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, I don't believe so, no.  All I know is he was a first sergeant and he had a lot of men under his control so to speak.  But and he served in, in 'til about 1954 I believe, and then he came out.  And he, like I say he was never really, really happy you know being out of, but he had very little choice at that point.
Speaker 1: So that, that made like twelve years for him he's in the service.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right and your mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] just kind issued an ultimatum that he, that he--
Speaker 2: Well yeah she basically gave him an ultimatum because she said, "I can't," you know, "I can't keep going all over the world with these kids."  And we need to sit down--and that's when you know I was living with my [maternal] grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.] and my grandmother [Marguerite Tapsico Sloan].  'Cause they had a big house, no kids at this point 'cause everybody was gone, so that's where we went.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were, you were about what eight years old?
Speaker 2: I was about nine.
Speaker 1: Nine?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you would have been, you had spent most of your childhood without your father.
Speaker 2: Yeah right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Almost, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 667584
Speaker 1: Let me ask you--it, when you think about your parents' talents the- their disposition, their, their views.  How they walked, how they talked what they looked like, you know, you know who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] (laughter) yeah.
Speaker 1: Wh- why because you, you think 'cause, because you're around her more you think or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that and the fact that my mother had this spirit of giving up, she was, she was like my grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.], she would never give up.  She didn't, she wasn't a college person, she didn't go to college, but she was one of those people that whatever she wanted to do she did it.  And I find that I'm the same way, you know if I wanna do it, I'm gonna do it (laughter).  At, regardless what the outcome or what the situation may be, I'm gonna do it, and you know she's the same way.  Whereas my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.] he was a great guy but he wasn't it, it had to be easy or he wouldn't deal with it.  You know he was totally different than her in that re- that respect, and I learned that like I mentioned to you earlier.  I learned that from him you know I said, I remember well that's getting off the beaten path, I'll save that 'til later (laughter).
Story_ID: 667585
Speaker 1: But yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's a good story you don't, don't forget it now.
Speaker 1: Well I remember when I first came to Washington [D.C.], when I, when I first announced that I wanted to be a disc jockey.  Now remember now this, is the mid-'60s [1960s], and this is crazy, I mean nobody--a disc jockey, what is that?  You know there were no deejays there were not clubs, there were no street jocks you know and the, and being on the radio was totally obscene, that wasn't gonna happen.  But I said, "Hey, it's gonna happen, I'm gonna be a disc jockey." "Why would you wanna be that?"  You know my grandmother [Marguerite Tapsico Sloan], I never will forget on my mother's side, she wanted me to be a doctor.  And then my other grandmother [Lila Lewis Payne] wanted me to be a lawyer, and they had a, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], which is still in existence, had a student of the week, and I was the student athlete of the week, and so a lady came out and interviewed me and whatnot.  And, "What do you wanna be when you grow up?"  Well I wanted to play center field for the Los Angeles Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], and I wanted to be a disc jockey.  And nobody knew what a disc jockey was (laughter), "What is a disc jockey?"  You know because like I say my grandmothers on both sides wanted a doctor on one side and a lawyer on the other side.  And with this name that I had, Marshall S. Payne III [HistoryMaker Bobby Bennett], I was supposed to be one of those two, not a disc jockey.  So nobody supported me except my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne], my mother said, "Whatever you gonna be, you're gonna be good at it, and you gonna be the best that-at is out there."  And that was it, she never said, "Don't be this," or, you know--and then I never will forget it.  But anyway we moved to D.C., I moved to D.C. and I lived in a placed called Marbury Plaza [Washington, D.C.], and I got this apartment because John Pace who was the general manager at the time [of WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.].  John Pace said to me, "I guess," oh I was young I was twenty-one or twenty-two, Pace said, "Where you living at?"  And I said, "Well I'm living with Jim Kelsey right now Mr. Pace, I don't have a place to live."  So he said, "I'll get you a place," so Charles E. Smith was the real estate broker and he had this building, and it just been built called Marbury Plaza.  And it was oh it was fabulous, I mean he, when you walked in the door, you walked in it had double doors.  And you walked in and little lobby and everything, it looked like a hotel.  And so my father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] was one of, him and couple of my uncles they moved, moved me down there, so my father af- after the move and everything that, that evening he said, "Can you afford this?"  And I said, "Yeah." "How much you make?" And I think at the time I was making 250 [dollars] a week and that was more than he made.  And he was like, "You making what," and I said (laughter), "I'm doing 250 a week." "Well how much is rent there?"  And the rent I think was like two hundred a month, so my father said, "You making 250, 200 or 250 a week to play records, what kind of job is that?"   And so in the meantime he never said, "I'm real proud of you," he just said, "hm," that was it.  And, but I never will forget that, that was forty years ago and I still remember that, or fifty years ago.
Speaker 2: You exceeded his expectations of what he thought was possible--
Speaker 1: Well I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for you and even for himself you know and--
Speaker 1: Absolutely I mean there were, there was, there was some jealousy involved there, but that kind of money to play some records, are you kidding me (laughter)?  I mean he and I had our differences, we had major differences but we you know after a while we, we got over that.  And you know--
Speaker 2: Well all, all right, well I don't wanna spoil the rest of the story but, but that's, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 667586
Speaker 1: Now you take more, more after your mo- mother [Flavia Sloan Payne]. Now can--tell us about your--you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about them and start with the oldest to the youngest, and tell us a little bit about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're the first.
Speaker 2: Yeah and then my brother Ray [Raymond Payne] who is deceased now, he had pancreatic cancer and, and he died I guess oh god, it's been fifteen years ago by now, yeah, yeah.  It's exactly fifteen years but--
Speaker 1: And that's a sudden death too (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well he had been a junkie he was, he was doing heroin, the whole nine yards, he got cleaned, he got cleaned he was doing very, was very smart, oh god was he smart.  He was much smarter than me, but he was, he was so smart that he would outsmart himself (laughter) sometimes.  But anyway he got off, he stopped doing the, doing drugs and whatnot and was into real estate in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  He owned, god he owned four or five different buildings, apartment buildings and whatnot, and that's when he married this girl.  And I don't know, I, I don't to this day I, she's my nephew's mother, but she wasn't good for him.  Excuse me (cough), and anyway they started doing drugs together and next thing I know I mean he was really into it, he moved to Los Angeles [California].  And I went out to his house never will forget, I was, I was on the air at this time, but anyway I went to L.A.  And I went to his house and he had one, one son at the time, Keith [Keith Payne (ph.)] and he, nothing in the refrigerator, there was nothing in the refrigerator at all, except water.  And I said, "Ray what, what is this?"  And he looked at me like it was, he was half high then and he looked at me like I was crazy.  And said, "Well, what do you need food for?" I said, "Well you got this little kid here, this little three year old kid what, what, what are you talking about what do you need food?"  But that's where he was at then, and soon as he got clean, I guess he was clean maybe five years.  Got a beautiful home, he had a, bought a house in Penn Hills [Pennsylvania] right outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and a, had a hou- had a swimming pool in his house (laughter) he was doing very well.
Speaker 1: What was he doing for a living at this point?
Speaker 2: He had four or five different jobs but he was a real estate mogul by now you know but I remember he started out, he got a job with the transit authority.  And he was working with transit authority and he got, there was a robbery on a, on a bus.  And he got hurt trying to defend somebody else's money (laughter) and he got, well actually he got shot in the arm.  And when he got shot in the arm and he was half high then, they gave him some kind of disability.  And he got the disability and that's when he got into real estate and he got off the drugs, 'cause he was still doing drugs while he was doing the bus.  Or working at the bus company but he did very well, and unfortunately, you know, he got, got cancer.  And by this time, he and his wife, him and Alexis [ph.] they had split up and he was living with Angie [ph.].  Angie was, if you follow basketball, you remember Bill Cartwright, played center with Michael Jordan?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Well Angie was Bill Cartwright's sis- sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was living with, with her and she was a good girl, she was nice I mean she, she helped to get him off of the drugs and the whole bit.  But he passed away, he has, he had three sons, totally different, I mean they're, they're still around.  Keith is, Keith has his own construction company, and he's doing okay, Shawn [Shawn Payne (ph.)] is an attorney, maritime law, he works in New York [New York] doing very well, and Mario [Mario Payne (ph.)] is crazy.  Mario's the baby and he want, all he wants to be, ever heard of a jitney?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well he's a jitney so long as he can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A jitney driver, yeah.
Speaker 2: Long as he can have enough trips to buy some weed [marijuana], he's happy.  We, weed and a forty ounce, he's cool (laughter).  So (laughter) I guess Mario is, well he's twenty-eight, twenty-nine by now, so that's what he is.  Then there's Gary [Gary Payne], my brother Gary, another smart guy he's an attorney.
Story_ID: 667587
Speaker 1: Okay so one attorney did come out of the family.
Speaker 2: Well my daughter's [Amy Payne] an attorney--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --(laughter) and he's, he's an attorney, his daughter is an attorney, she just graduated from Duke University [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] last year.  And China [China Payne-Lee], her name is China, she's doing, him and his wife, they lasted long enough to make China and then the girl decided, Loretta [ph.].  And I if you know Roberta Flack, you remember Re- Roberta, Re- Roberta Flack's sister is Loretta's mother, okay?  So she has a house, matter of fact she's only about fifteen minutes from here [Punta Gorda, Florida], she lives in Burnt Store [Burnt Store Marina, Florida].  But anyway Gary [Gary Payne] is doing very well, he's still in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he came down here when I guess it was January of this year.  And he's getting sick of the snow and the whole bit (laughter) in Pittsburgh, he came down here he said, "Man I think I'm a buy me a house down here."  'Cause this is ridiculous so, I talked to him the other day and he was still talking.  And now he's I don't know if I wanna go through another winter and he's doing pretty good.  China is doing well and he was, I think he was there, there, he and Loretta split up.  But he got custody of his daughter, so he stayed in Pittsburgh and now he's, he's at a point now where he's time to go.  'Cause everybody's grown, mom's [Flavia Sloan Payne] dead and my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.] is dead so there no, there's nothing really to stay there for.  Then it's my youngest brother, Tony [Anthony Payne], Tony's a linguist. He speaks Asian languages and he can speak Chinese, Vietnamese, Japanese and he just retired.  He re- he was working up at Fort Meade [Fort George G. Meade] in Maryland and he was, he retired from the [U.S.] military, came out of the military after twenty years.  And came back in, he left on Friday, came back in on Monday as a contractor.  So he was back and forth to Vietnam, he was in Hanoi [Vietnam] quite often, he was there I guess every couple of months he was going back and forth to Hanoi.  And he, he just got tired of the traveling.  He said it was just, it was crazy.  His son, he has a son Robbie [Robbie Payne (ph.)], I'm his god- I'm Robbie's godfather, he plays football, he's playing for what's the name of the school?  Not University of Maryland, Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Robbie plays for Morgan State.  He's, he's not NFL [National Football League] material but he's pretty good you know.  So that's, that's my family.
Story_ID: 667588
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Do I have one (laughter)?
Speaker 1: An earliest.
Speaker 2: I've got several (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well the earliest thing that you remember you know?
Speaker 2: The earliest thing that I remember probably is kindergarten; I went to Dilworth- Dilworth's Elementary School [Dilworth Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I went to kindergarten there and at that time of course kids, kindergarten was, you went half the day, and you played games.  You didn't, you didn't learn anything you (laughter) you just played stuff, and you took a nap, and you remember?  You were in the school around the same time I was at that time you took a nap you know.  If you were at the, class was unruly, the teacher made you take a nap.  And I remember that, that's when me and Bobby Snyder [ph.], we're still friends today, and that's when it, when I hooked up with him.  And we talk about that quite often.  And he was real small, he was very little for even for five years old, and I used to beat him up all the time (laughter).  And then I guess we got to be maybe in eighth grade or something and he, it turned around a bit you know, Bobby said, "Well I'll fix your ass," (laughter), so.  But I mean all the way through school tremendous memories, great mem- Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was a great place to grow up in.
Story_ID: 667589
Speaker 1: There were always--we lived in the projects, and at that time everybody lived in the projects.  It wasn't about being poor; it was about the fact that this is where you lived, especially black people.  And there were always a lot of kids to play with, we had--
Speaker 2: Yeah the projects were different then weren't they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: For those I mean today as we speak in 2014 you talk about the projects--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --talking about place of despair, where people don't have eating money, no jobs--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --single family home is mostly, but that wasn't the case with you?
Speaker 1: No not at all, I mean as a matter of fact in the building we lived in, I think everybody's father was there, you know it wasn't like single family or single mother raising a bunch of kids and all that sort of thing.  Everybody had a father, and you know it was just a good place, there was always kids to play with, we had Little League.  We had prep league, pony league, all kind of different leagues to play ball, we had swimming pool you know, we had a community swimming pool.  One thing about Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and I, I and I appreciate it now that I live in Florida part time.  The fact that everybody had to learn to swim, I come down here and everybody got pools and nobody knows how to swim (laughter), it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really now?  That, that's surprising.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's weird, I've got friends, we had a party for Labor Day, it was a, well it was the Sunday for a Labor Day, it was last Sunday, and nobody knew how to swim.  I mean it was only me and my wife [Connie Payne] (laughter) we're the only ones in the pool, right?  And that just was amazing to me, I said all y'all come from, you know evidently they got money, and they all have pools and nobody can swim, it's weird.
Story_ID: 667590
Speaker 1: But as far as young memories yeah I mean you know all of those growing up in the projects, playing ball.  I remember coming to Hagerstown, Maryland, we came down there for the semifinals of Little League World Series [Little League Baseball World Series].  And it was a kid named Randall Warren [ph.] and myself, we're the only black kids on the team.  And they wouldn't let us stay, and I knew nothing about segregation prior to this you know, my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] was always you know always hid it from us whatever problems we may have.  And I remember that like it was last week, 'cause when they pulled up at the, bus pulled up at the Holiday Inn or whatever the hotel was, and they, they wouldn't let us stay there.  And we had to drive all way into D.C. [Washington, D.C.] which is about forty miles away before we found anywhere we could stay at, I remember that.  I guess I was eleven then, eleven years old but--
Speaker 2: Yeah so in those days that, that wasn't unusual in Pennsylvania or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Ohio or a lot of places in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so called North, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 667591
Speaker 1: And, and then of course it was high school, lot of great memories,  I remember I was going to Gladstone High Sch- Gladstone [Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] had just, you know, each school progressed.  I mean the schools that hadn't been high schools beforehand, progressed.  They do a ninth grade, then next year there would be a tenth grade and so forth and so on, and we were in ninth grade and I had a teacher named Ted Soens.   He was a former drill instructor in the [U.S.] Marine Corps (coughs), but he was our history teacher.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: S-O-E-N-S, Soens, he's still alive too he's in his nineties now.  Ted Soens was a white teacher and he, not only took an interest in me but all of us, he took an interest in all the kids.  And he said anybody who can't afford it, don't worry about it, and what he was talking about was Time magazine.  So we, he got each kid that couldn't afford it a su- a subscription to Time magazine.  And our, instead of book learning, instead of us learning stuff about this war and Civil War and the blah, blah, blah, we deal with current events.  Things that were happening that were in the magazine, and I think what he did by doing this, he taught a lot of us to read.  Not to read, so to speak, but to read and enjoy it, and to this day I still read Time magazine every week.  And that's the kind of guy he was Mr. Soens was just, oh he was a great teacher, he was a wonderful teacher.  And like I say he still lives in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he was, I think it was '96 [1996] last, couple years ago, I talked to him.  And he re- it was funny he remembered me (laughter) 'cause my wife [Connie Payne] came along after me.  And I wrote her, her term, her term pro- paper, and he said to her, "I'm a give you an A, but I know Marshall [HistoryMaker Bobby Bennett] wrote this paper," (laughter) so, and we're still together.  And you know she, she turned it in, she got an A for the course but she didn't know anything 'cause I did all the work, you know.  But son- it Mr. Soens was a great teacher, wonderful.
Story_ID: 667592
Speaker 1: That was, that was one. And then there was the memory of I worked in a clothing store part time to get a little spending money, I guess I was fifteen or so.  And on the weekends I was working on at, I can't think of the name of it now.  But it was in Homestead [Pennsylvania], so consequently by me working there on the weekends, the guy that owned it, his name is Lou [ph.].  And Lou would let me buy clothes for like half of what they were, like if something cost ten dollars, I would get it for five.
Speaker 2: So these are kind of clothes that young peop- people wanted to wear?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, I mean oh man you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what was in then? What kind of clothes were you wearing? This is like, like 19 what '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: This was '60 [1960], 1960, '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know I mean khaki pants for instance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know you wear khakis and of course we had the peg pants at that time you know 'cause Elvis [Elvis Presley] was wearing peg pants, so everybody was wearing peg pants.  And then we had, I don't re- there was a, I remember this jacket I had, it was black and pink.  And it had like these pink, they were like checkers turned sideways, and that, oh man that was smoking.  With a pair of black slacks, peg pants, snap jacks, you remember the snap jacks (laughter) well we had in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], we had snap jacks.  They would have like the tongue on the outside, and it would snap down and your shoe would be instead of strings that's the way you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --they would be.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And we would wear them bad boys, and I mean I was cleanest guy in school 'cause I got all my clothes from, dog I can't think of the name of it now.  Harvey's [ph.], Harvey's, Harvey's, that, yeah that was the--
Speaker 2: Interesting 'cause there's a store in Dayton [Ohio] that appeal to young black men was Harvey's [ph.].
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah run by two Jewish fellas.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: You know I don't know if the owner was a Jewish guy or not.
Speaker 1: This guy Lou was the owner.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This, this guy that I was telling you about Lou, he was the owner of, of Harvey's and he, he basically dealt with the younger clientele you know and so he would always have whatever the kids were wearing, you know.
Speaker 2: Were they wearing the high felt hats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --on and--
Speaker 1: Yeah and the Big Apples, we had the apples then when--they still have them.
Speaker 2: Leather beanies like--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --and those--
Speaker 1: Yep (laughter) yeah, so that was another fond memory.  Memories of--
Story_ID: 667593
Speaker 1: I played--I remember my uncle, my uncle, Herbie [Herbert Lewis (ph.)], he's my, he would've been my father's great uncle.  He was Grandma Payne's brother, but he was in that same age group, you know he was like the youngest brother, so he was the same age as my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.].  And my dad worked three to eleven [o'clock] when he was working in the steel mill, and in, and in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] too.  'Cause he worked the post office la- later on, but I was playing, playing baseball and I guess I was in pony league by now, I was thir- fourteen or fifteen.  And Uncle Herbie used to come and he had this voice he, you, you've probably been to an event where one voice, I don't care if it's thirty thousand people.  You can hear this once guy (laughter) and Herbie used to talk like that he, he had this thing in his throat, 'cause he smoked all the time, he smoked Chesterfields.  And he used to talk and oh god was he loud.  And we were playing, and I never will forget we're playing at Munhall stadium [West Field, Munhall, Pennsylvania] and Herbie just performed, he, I stole like four bases that day, and Herbie went out of his mind and everybody in the joint knew I was his nephew (laughter) because he told everybody.  And there must've been ten thousand people there; I mean it was a big game.  Herbie was a trip, well he was always my favorite, Herbie was, 'cause Herbie would tell us stories, and he always supported you.  He you know I, I think as I look at the kids now, the one thing that we had that they don't have, we had parental support and if you weren't getting a lot of support at home there was always an uncle or somebody that, that's supported whatever you were doing.  At least I did you know, we did and, and Herbie and Uncle Craig [Craig Payne] and Uncle Donald [Donald Payne] they used to come to all my games, everyone.  He took, take off from work, course take off, they'd get drunk by the time the game was over (laughter).  But they were a lot of fun, they were a lot of fun, I miss them to this day.
Story_ID: 667594
Speaker 1: You were a good baseball player, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was pretty good.
Speaker 1: You go, so you're selected from the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area to go to the World Series? Little League World Series (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we went to Little League World Series [Little League Baseball World Series], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so--
Speaker 1: --now this is, so this is citywide team I gather because the--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was all-star team.
Speaker 1: All-star team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: Well back then at that time I was playing center field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: That's what you wanted to be a center fielder for the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah oh that was my hope that was my dream, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite player in those days?
Speaker 2: Vada Pinson.
Speaker 1: The Reds [Cincinnati Reds], that's right Vada Pinson.
Speaker 2: Vada Pinson and the reason why Vada Pinson was my favorite player was because I was playing Little League at the time.  And I caught a ball from a guy, you may not, I remember ev- everything as far as baseball is concerned.  They, the Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants] had a pitcher, I mean the Reds [sic.] had a pitcher called Mer- Merv Grissom [sic. Marv Grissom] and he was a relief pitcher.  And Merv Grissom they were, you know we got there early, not, it was not whole day.  And Merv was like I'm outfield running whatever the case be, and he got a, a practice ball.  Somebody hit a long drive, they were in batting practice, and he just threw it up in the stands and I got it.  And Vada Pinson was a rookie at the time and I waited, I met, I let all the other kids go, I didn't know how I was gonna get home to have my ball signed.  And I got it signed by Vada Pinson and Vada was only about nineteen at the time, it was his first year in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball].  And he was hanging out with Frank Robinson and Pete Rose.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he signed my ball, and he, he became my favorite player (laughter).
Speaker 1: Vada Pinson from McClymonds High School in Oakland [California] that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: All the stars.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was my favorite guy man, I loved Vada Pinson, I mean when he died a few years ago, I almost went to the funeral.
Speaker 1: I didn't know he passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah he passed some years ago.
Speaker 1: I know he was the coach for the White Sox [Chicago White Sox] towards the end.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he died about it's been about three years, three or four years ago.
Story_ID: 667595
Speaker 1: So you were talking about baseball. So, so did you really were you courted, when you were in the pony league were you courted by any of the baseball, Major League teams [Major League Baseball]?
Speaker 2: St. Louis Cardinals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: St. Louis and it was kind of weird because St. Louis at that time, they only had two or three black players.  And you know they weren't--you wouldn't think of them as one of the teams that wanna be, you know wanna have black players.  But I was, I was dealing with them, at that time, like now we have a team here in Punta Gorda [Florida] called the Stone Crabs [Charlotte Stone Crabs].  Owned by Cal Ripken, Jr., but at that time, they had Class D, C, B, A, Triple-A, so there was maybe four or five or six different Minor League teams affiliated with this one big league team.  St. Louis wanted to hook me up with their D league team and of course (laughter) back then I mean seventy-five dollars a month was big deal you know, unless you were a bonus baby.  And I said, "No, we can't do," but I found out early, very early the Major League curveball, I went to, I never will forget I went to Forbes Field in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] when the Cardinals came to town.  And they had I, and I don't know who the pitcher was at this point, but he wasn't a big star type he just you know was regular pitcher type guy.  But he threw me a curveball and it went vroom (gesture) and I figured right then, I said, "Oh lord, this guy ain't even that good, I can't hit," (laughter), "his curveball.  Big league is not for me," and I didn't wanna waste my time, I didn't wanna you know a lot of guys went ahead and signed with various teams and whatnot.  And I didn't wanna waste time, five or six years playing in Minor League Baseball and never really make it big in the pros.  And a there's certainly not as much money now you know affiliated with Min- Major Leagues as there was then.  Back then I mean it was you know Willie Mays was the highest priced player and he was making a hundred thousand [dollars] and that was it.  Well now you make that much if you playing you know Class C ball, but well they don't even have Class C now.  It's only three, I think three different leagues (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah you're right--
Speaker 2: A, B, A Double B [sic.] and Double-A and Triple-A, and that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah looking at the salaries for instance, Vada Pinson as a rookie was making twenty thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah right, you know.
Speaker 1: Which you know far exceeded my father's salary but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but yeah, Frank Robinson was making forty.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They listed their pay in the program book, I know at Crosley Field in Cincinnati [Ohio] I saw how much they made.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and the average man working man working a job at U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation] or General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] bringing home maybe a hundred dollars a week.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In, in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that, that the fact was you were expected to feed your entire family and, and you could on you know some --
Speaker 2: Sure, I mean gasoline was only twenty-five cent a gallon (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: As opposed to 3.50 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah so it puts it in perspective.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 667596
Speaker 1: So, so you went to Gladstone High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I went there for a while, and went to Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]; I went to two different schools.
Speaker 1: So did your family move or what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah we moved to Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We lived in what the, what it was then called Glen Hazel Heights [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]; Glen Hazel was where the projects were.  And Glen Hazel was, had three streets, three major streets, Roselle, Roselle Court, Rivermont Drive and Broadju- Broad, Broadview Drive, and then there was Johnston Avenue.  But that was like the main thoroughfare, but went to Gladstone there.  Gladstone progressed as it got you know, Gladstone started off as a junior high school, then it progressed as it got older.  In other words every class that you know, the first class, the ninth grade class became the tenth grade class and so forth.  But then we moved to Homewood so it didn't make any difference.
Speaker 1: So Homewood high school was Westinghouse?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 667597
Speaker 1: Now you were student athlete of the week once (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that earlier. So this, was this, how old when you made that?
Speaker 2: I guess about sixteen.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: This is in baseball?
Speaker 2: I was, I think I was student athlete of the week in basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you played ba- basketball too?
Speaker 2: And would play whatever what was in season.
Speaker 1: Well I, okay, so what were you guard on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: Played guard and forward, right now if we were playing today it would be two guard and played the three pos- three forward you know.  And I didn't shoot that well as I look back at, but I could jump, I could really jump.  And all my teachers used to--he said, "Boy this guy can jump" (laughter).  But you know I, I didn't shoot that well, but I was pretty good, I could jump and I look good in a uniform (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well you must've done fair, fairly well to be athlete of the week now you, you did you score a lot of points?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did, I did, but there were, there was guy on our team [at Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] that was really good who was a better scorer than I was.  But I could ju- I mean he was just sit outside he was a, a guard, but I think he was about 5'10" 5'11" and he would shoot set shots.  You remember back then we had good two hand set shot, and he would just set a height he, and you know, he would shot a hundred and make eighty you know.  I mean he was good, he was really good, and he went on, I think he went on to University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And he stayed there a couple of years and he got involved in drugs and boom, you know.
Story_ID: 667598
Speaker 1: What were your--I read that you always wanted to be a disc jockey.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So one question is: who inspired you to that profession? I mean who were you looking at as a kid to even know what a disc jockey was or what that profession was about?
Speaker 2: We had a guy he used to call himself Sir Walter, Sir Walter Raleigh [John Christian] like the English whatever he was.  And this guy had been stationed in Europe during World War II [WWII] and he was able to emulate the British accent.  And to see a black man that could speak in that British accent and he always, he, he wore stuff like the, the Brits wore.  You know he, plaid jackets and he portrayed this, this great image, and he was a far- he was a father of a good friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so this was actually cool back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--
Speaker 1: --in the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: I mean that, that was his that was his shtick.
Speaker 1: I just thinking, I mean nowadays I don't know if that--
Speaker 2: Oh that was his shtick; he was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the man Sir Walter, but there were three guys, four guys on the local black radio station, Sir Walter was one of them.  There's a guy named Bill Powell who I, he, he his speech wasn't very good.  There was a guy named Harold, Harold Brown and there was a white guy named Porky Chedwick; Porky just died like, about two months ago.  But anyway I used to watch this guy and he'd have a new car every year and he always had, he was always dressed very, very nice.  And he went to work like at twelve o'clock noon (laughter) he'd be back home by four, I said (laughter) I wanna do whatever he's doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what, what station did he?
Speaker 2: WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: WAMO oh, WAMO.
Speaker 2: Yeah (pronunciation) WAMO.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sir Walter was like my inspiration. He didn't know. I told him later in life after I became successful at it--successful rather.  But he was my inspiration, I mean all the other guys I knew, they all went to work, they all came home all dirty, and worked in the mines or the mill or somewhere or possibly in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], but Sir Walter didn't.  He had a new car every year, he would have a new Cadillac and I, you know at that time black men in a Cadillac, are you kidding me?  And Sir (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pimp or funeral director.
Speaker 2: Sir Walter was doing very well.
Speaker 1: A pimp, funeral home director or a preacher.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Preacher (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and so there was this one year, I never will forget [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy was just starting Motown [Motown Records].  And Berry I think it was one of Mary Wells' song, 'You Beat Me to the Punch' or whatever, and Berry didn't have enough money to have a promotion crew.  So Berry would promote his, his record himself out of the trunk of his car, he had a, a Packard, a green Packard.  And he, when he come to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he would stay with Sir Walter, and sta- at that time what was Sir Walter's wife name was Bee-Bee [Lois Christian].  He would stay with Bee-Bee and Sir Walter and Dave [David Christian], Dave was his son of course.  But I didn't know that was Berry Gordy at that time, I was a kid you know.  But Sir Walter knew everybody, he knew James Brown, he knew everybody all the big boys would, were Sir Walter's buddies.  And so they, he was the guy that I wanted to be, I wanted to be, if I wasn't gonna be baseball player I was gone be him (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he was the guy.
Speaker 1: Can, can you do any of Sir Walter?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: Can you, you remember?
Speaker 2: No I don't have that British accent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had it done, I mean he had it down to the point where you would swear he was from there, you know, he would go (unclear) he used to say (adopts British accent), "All righty, dighty," (laughter), "all righty, dighty," (laughter).  He had quite a few things that you know little sayings he would have you know.  But I used to listen to him, Sir Walter and I used to look at the--say this guy is cool man, he's really cool.
Story_ID: 667599
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] is a music town, I don't think people think of it that way so much, but there's a lot of music in Pittsburgh, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, George, Georgie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --Little Georgie Benson.
Speaker 2: George Benson gave hey.
Speaker 1: He used to play on the street, right?
Speaker 2: George went to Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], okay George used to play behind back in the back doors, he used to go back and play.  They put him out of school, said get out of here, you don't wanna go to school, you just wanna be, play guitar.  But oh there was quite a few, I mean back in the, my mother went to school with we know him as Ahmad Jamal.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And his real name is Richie Jones [sic. Frederick Russell Jones] and Dakota Staton lived down the street from my aunt, there was with Lena Horne, Lena Horne lived in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  Billy Eckstine and I gotta tell you a story about Billy.  Billy was as, as you, as you know Billy was a very handsome man, and so when Billy, they opened a club in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], down on K Street.  I can't, I'll think of the name of it in a minute, but Paul Cohen [ph.], Paul became like he was a Jewish guy.  And he owned a restaurant, he was married to, you remember Peaches and Herb?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well the second Peaches, the first one was Francine Barker, Francine lost her mind, and but the second one her name was Gloria something [sic. Linda Greene].  She was, she was drop dead beautiful.  And Paul married her, well anyway Paul opened this club, so the first night he sent a limo for me 'cause he wanted me to be there, I'm, I'm gonna broadcast his opening act.  So his opening night was Billy Eckstine and Mercer Ellington, that was and the club was called TOPS [ph.], TOPS. So--
Speaker 1: This is in?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh--in D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In D.C.
Speaker 1: In D.C. okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought it was D.C., yeah.
Speaker 2: Was in D.C.
Speaker 1: You mentioned Peaches, I know Peach, Herb, Herb was a police officer in that area, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In D.C. area.
Speaker 2: Yeah Herb was, yeah.  And so anyway I, I go in the club me and a, me and a guy named Gerry Bledsoe, Gerry was my morning man.  I was program director at this point at WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.]. So I walked in me and Gerry we had a limo and the whole bit, we had our tuxedos on and all was, were at, we were on fr- and I meet Billy Eckstine, oh my god.  Now I don't know Billy up to this point, but you know I mean he was my mother's hero, and all the women that came along during that period.  So I said Billy, or I got to tell you this.  Me and Mercer and, and Billy and Gerry we go back in the dressing room, the dressing room is huge, and they got this Johnnie Walker Blue, I don't know nothing about Johnnie Walker Blue.  Now I know about the red, and I know about black, but blue I don't know nothing about that.  So anyway (laughter) Mercer said, "Hey, have a drink" so we have a drink, so I got up my courage I said, "Hey Billy you know what would be a monster man?  It be unbelievable if I call my mother and you got on the phone and talk to her," 'cause you were her--and I went on to tell him what a big hero he was to mom.  And he said, "All right, fine," and he, and he was very gracious, so I called mom and I put him on, I said, "Mom I got a guy here wants to talk to you."  So (laughter) here's Billy, Billy, "Hi Flavia [Flavia Sloan Payne], how are you?"  And she said, "You sound just like Billy Eckstine," (laughter).  And (laughter) and she said, "I wish you was him," and hung up (laughter) she hung up the phone, I called her back, I said, "Mom that really is Billy Eckstine."  And she was embarrassed of course and she apologized to him and he laughed and everything.  And up until the time he died every time I'd see him. I, he would remind me of that particular, that night.  But he was a nice guy.  But Pittsburgh getting back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Everybody that came from Pittsburgh, Horace Silver, Horace was another one who came from Pittsburgh.  So we had, we had two clubs back then, Crawford Grill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which is owned by a lady named Birdie Dunlap.  And Birdie was a good friend of my aunt Myrtle, her name was Myrtle Steward, she worked for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] she was one of the reasons I was employee of the week (laughter) but.  Birdie, Birdie and then there was another club called the Crawford Grill they just reopened maybe a year ago.
Speaker 1: Now is that the grill that they named the Pittsburgh Crawfords for?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well the guy that owned, at that time the guy that owned the Pittsburgh, the Crawford Grill he owned the Pitts- Pittsburgh Crawfords also.  And they used to play jazz every week, so that's why you would see so many jazz guys or jazz people would come there like Ray Prysock [sic. Arthur Prysock] and you know his brother I forget his name now.  But they used to all, all of them Lou Donaldson and you know all of them would play in Pittsburgh.  And you know of course that's when the mills were doing well and everybody had money and--
Story_ID: 667600
Speaker 1: Now the Courier itself is a national phenomenon in the black community. One time it was the--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the most widely distributed and sold black paper in the United States.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh, Robert Vann's [Robert Lee Vann], Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah so this, this is and, so a lot of people got their cultural information from the Pittsburgh Courier.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the guy that was Jackie Robinson's main guy because there was no other black players was his first year, I forget his name right now.  But he was a writer for the Pittsburgh Courier he was sports writer; he became Jackie Robinson's, Wendell Smith (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wendell Smith.
Speaker 2: --that's his name.
Speaker 1: Wendell Smith.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and he became Jackie's confidante, main man, road manager you know what you call it roommate, the whole bit you know.
Speaker 1: And you know what about the photographer Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris]?
Speaker 2: Oh Teenie Harris yeah, I remember Teenie, Teenie was, Teenie was cr- cram, he was, he was a guy, he was, he, him, Teenie and my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] and father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] were real tight.  And Teenie came; he came down to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for the Pittsburghers' thing a couple of times you know.  And yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would take a one shot, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One shot Teenie.
Speaker 2: That's it, yeah Teenie was quite a guy, but hey those days are gone, you know.
Speaker 1: So this was, it was kind of in its heyday though when you were in high school [Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was still in its heyday.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 667601
Speaker 1: You were patterning yourself, you wanted to be a disc jockey and so it's--now how were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: Wonderful I, I made honor roll everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what kind of counseling were you getting I mean about you know your career, did anybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) My mother [Flavia Sloan Payne] (laughter) was my counselor, my mother, my grandfather [Mark Sloan, Sr.], my dad [Marshall Payne, Jr.], I had a teacher one time, I never will forget.  Her name was Dorothea Peeler, and I had her in ninth grade [at Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I had algebra one, two, three and four was tenth grade.  And she used to date my dad before when they were kids, and I don't know what happened, I don't know whether he, well obviously he broke up with her.  But she held that against me, she did, she really, she told me when I was in ninth grade she said, "I'm gonna pass you," and I was smelling myself.  I mean I was you know big time ninth grade, I was an athlete, I you know I'm playing varsity ball and I'm in ninth grade.  And she told me she was gonna flunk, she was gonna pass me in algebra one and two, so I'd have to redo the whole year.  Take it all, all over again, simply because I was my dad's son, she told me that.  She said, "And if you tell anybody I, you'll never repeat it, I'll never repeat it."  She did (laughter) I had to go to summer school that year.  I went to Schenley High School summer school [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so I could pass, 'cause my dad told me if I came in there with a failing grade he was gonna punch me out.  So I went to summer school (laughter) so I wouldn't have no failing grade.
Speaker 1: That is, that's cold I never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --heard a story that cold.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That story is really--
Speaker 2: Yeah she was cold, Dorothea Peeler, I never will forget her, but now that she did it, I'm glad she did it. Because it made me, I mean like I say, I was smelling myself, I was this, I was that.  And she woke me up; I mean it was like if you don't pass, you won't pass you know.
Story_ID: 667602
Speaker 1: Were you involved in high school activities like student council and that sort of thing or did you?
Speaker 2: I was, I was in the student council, I didn't participate very much because of the fact that I was, there was always something in season.  And I always played something so there was always some, but I did, I was on the student council, and I was representative for my homeroom.  They call it a homeroom rep and there was a girl I remember her and Linda Cruz [ph.], as a matter of fact I saw her at the reunion.  We had a twenty-five year class reunion and I went and Linda was really, really outstanding in high school [Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I mean not only as a student but physically, she was bad.  Now at the (laughter) twenty-five reunion Linda weighed about 350 pounds (laughter).  I said, boy I'm glad I didn't mess with you (laughter).  But I that was it, I, there was a couple other clubs I belonged to but I don't remember anything that, you know, outstanding that at this point.
Speaker 1: So did you, when you were in high school did you get a chance to work in a, in the radio station or, or do anything with the radio station?
Speaker 2: I would you know I was one of those guys what they call them gofers, when I, when I had an opportunity usually would be on weekends.  I would go by the local radio station and the guy said, "Go get me coffee," or, "Get me a Coca-Cola," or whatever the case may be.
Speaker 1: Now this is WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would, I would be the guy to do it.
Story_ID: 667603
Speaker 1: Gi--give us a little history of WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] now when did Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] get its first--now Pittsburgh, lot of people don't know that Pittsburgh had the first ra- radio station in the country KDKA [KDKA Radio], right?  The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty, 1920, so WAMO is, was that the first black station or--
Speaker 2: Yeah but it, it was--
Speaker 1: --orientated station.
Speaker 2: --it was known as WYLD [sic. WHOD Radio] then at that time.
Speaker 1: WYLD, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it became WYLD and it was in Homestead, Pennsylvania, it was located which was right across the bridge from Pittsburgh.  I don't know what year, I know it was in the, in the la- in the '50s [1950s], but I don't know what year it became WAMO.  But like prior to that it was YLD and Mary Dee [Mary Dee Dudley] was the big dog, Mary Dee and her brother, her brother became, he was the first black news reporter.  He was before Max Robinson and what was his name?  Oh man, Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode], Mal Goode (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mal Goode okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah Mal Goode, he became, Mal became the first black reporter on national radio and something huge happened, something catastrophic happened, and he was able to, he was the only one there.  And he reported it to all the other stations and that was his claim to fame.
Speaker 1: So this the same [HistoryMaker] Merri Dee that went to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah [sic.].
Speaker 1: The one that had--was in that horrific abduction and she was at Channel 9 and I know she was on the Oprah Show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'].  Talking about you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't think must, must be two different people.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's a light skinned woman?
Speaker 2: This lady was light skinned--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but sh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, don't think Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was around when she passed, 'cause she, she was working at WM- YLD and then she went, I think she went to New York [New York] or Chicago.  But she was, she died, she died before I became a disc jockey.
Speaker 1: Oh really okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not the same one 'cause--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --there's a, the Merri Dee in Chicago had, was shot in the head in the park by somebody and left for dead, but she survived.
Speaker 2: I don't think so, could've been but you know like I say, I don't, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: She was associated with Channel 9 in Chicago, WGN [WGN-TV], but okay, so Mal Goode, and so they were on WYLD in the beginning.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this a black owned station or black oriented which--
Speaker 2: It was black oriented; I don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --think it was black owned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: All right, so on AM dial all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah Dynamic Broadcasting [Dynamic Broadcasting, Inc.], that's who owned it.  And I think there was some white guys out of Buffalo, New York 'cause they had, they had a station in Buffalo also.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you would, you would go in there and, and go get coffee and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I was a gofer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so did they ever let you do any engineering or anything--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --like that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was still you know I was sixteen or seventeen, whatever the case may be, and but later on I did.
Story_ID: 667604
Speaker 1: Now let's just go on to graduation 'cause now was anything special about graduation?  And what was your plan about grad, graduation from high school [Gladstone High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: It was nothing, oh you know it, there was, there was college of course, but I, I don't know, I you know it wasn't really on my mind.  Making money and playing baseball that's all I wanted to do.  I didn't, I didn't want any more school, I remember I told my mother [Flavia Sloan Payne], I said, "Ma, let me aw- off for a year, I," you know, "before I go to college.  Because I just don't, I, I'm burnt out, I, I don't have anymore, I don't have anything else," and fortunately I got a job before that happened.  And the, was it--NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] they, this was in 19--around 1965 I guess.  They got a jo- they had a thing with Western Electric Company, which became, of course was part of the Bell system, Bell telephone.  And they were able to get me in, I got in as a, boy I forget what they called us at that point but we--
Speaker 1: Some type of internship program?
Speaker 2: It was an intern program but we were getting paid, we made seventy-five dollars a week, and we were sort of like, those of us, there were six of us.  And you know if you did well and you wanted to stay come September, you did, and I did very well, and I stayed.  And I said, "Hey, I'm getting paid, I'm making money, I'm you know doing my thing," and that's how I got involved in radio.  Because there was a guy, Al Germany and Al was working at WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and he knew that I was you know I was a radio guy, I wanted to be in radio.  And Al used to, he was the only other black employee and we used to have lunch together during the summer, we'd have lunch.  And he would tell me he said, "Man you got a good voice," and blah, blah, blah, "and I'm gonna let you be on my show."  So I said oh wow this is great, so I got all dressed up one night and went down, and I was on Al's show.  I was only on for a couple of minutes, but that was enough.
Speaker 1: Now was his show on, on WAMO?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, so anyway I was able, behind that little five minutes that I was on Al's show, they had a program director named Kenny Reeth; Kenneth Reeth said, "I heard you on the radio the other night."  And I said, "Oh yeah." He said, 'Well how would you like to be a newsman," and, "I would love it,' and (laughter).  But it was on FM, nobody had FM (laughter) nobody had FM at that point, this is 1967, and you know my mother went out and bought an FM radio.  I never will--she bought a whole; it was combo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's how you could get them then you couldn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had to buy like a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a console--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to get an FM radio.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: There, there were smaller ones, but most of time it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --wooden console.
Speaker 2: So I'm I was on that bad boy, I went on I guess four or five weeks after he had mentioned to me, and I was doing the news.  And the news you know, well how much news you gone do on Saturday night, you know I was only on, on weekends.  And so Al got sick, Al Gee got sick one night, and he couldn't come in, and I came on the radio and the first song I did was [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and The Miracles.  And I Porky Chedwick this guy I was telling you about the white guy, Porky came on in front of me.  He was on AM but then they switched over to FM after you know they went off on AM 'cause it was a daytime station.  Porky said, "Ah it'll be about a hundred thousand people listening to ya."  And I, I couldn't talk, I mean I was just, and my mother called up and said, "Are you there?"  "Yes ma'am I'm here" (laughter). "Well how come you ain't saying nothing?" I wasn't much I could say.  But anyway I got over that and the first song like I say was Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, 'Who's Loving You.' That was the first song I played.  And no, it wasn't, that wasn't the first, it was That's- 'That's the Way (I Like It)' or something like, it was up tempo.  And anyway, I did good, first after I got over that fear of talking and I did okay, and about a ye- six months later, they called me and wanna know if I wanted a regular show.  And I quit Western 'cause I was working at Western Electric then, I went on the radio full time.  And a month after that a new station opened, WZUM [WZUM Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and WZUM was paying and they were full time and they came after me.  And I worked there for about a year.
Speaker 1: Now was ZUM A- AM or FM?
Speaker 2: AM.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everything was AM then.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I they gave me afternoon drive, I was working from three until six, and--
Speaker 1: And you're still, you're about nineteen?
Speaker 2: I was twenty, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was going on, I was nineteen then when I got hired I was twenty by the time I left.  And there, there was a girl by the name of Andrea Bray; she calls herself the Hat Lady now.  She's in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], she followed me, she was on the radio, this is in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and Andrea was the gospel--they didn't know she was like, at that time she was maybe twenty-five.  And Andrea, I was using my regular name, but I'm going to this new station, I can't use that no more.  I was like MSP III, okay?  I can't use my regular name, Kenny Reeth was gonna sue me, so J. Psihoulis [James Psihoulis] was the owner and program director.  He said, "What do we call ya?" He wanted to call me Bobby Rock (laughter). I said, "Naw I can't be no Bobby Rock" (laughter).  So Andrea was dating this guy who was in Vietnam, he had just been shot, he had just been killed, and his name was Bobby Bennett.  And that's where I got the name, she said, "You, why don't you be Bobby Bennett?"  I didn't know the guy was dead (laughter).  So that's why I got the name from, and I've been him ever since.
Story_ID: 667605
Speaker 1: So you went from WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to WZUM [WZUM Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I guess.
Speaker 2: WZUM yeah.
Speaker 1: ZUM and what, did they call it Zoom Radio?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, everything was zoom, the Zoom Top 40, the zoom the end of the week you know at that, at that point you had your number one record of the week and your find of the week.  The record that was gonna be a biggie you know and everything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is something, let me ask you about this 'cause I, I was reading ahead, this may be getting ahead a little bit, but you have a reputation of playing the hits but also reaching into an archive of pulling something out that you like that people have forgotten about or never heard before--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that is of quality that, that's to the point that people comment about it and they, that, that's become like a trademark of yours, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah absolutely.  You know if you remember radio at that time we would have let's say fifty records, we would have fifty records and they would be in stacks in different you, the, your hot records here, your fifteen hottest records.  Then fifteen records that were bubbling up, they were good records, but they were just bubbling, and then you would have fifteen of basically new records.  And then you would have the flipsides, you would have the B sides, okay, and so you know nowadays you better play the A, A side 'cause everything's on, on the computer.  Anyhow, but back then if you happened to listen to the B side and the B side was saying something and nobody else is playing it, you sneak it in there.  And that's what I would do, I'd man B side of James Brown is--B side of [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson whatever the case may be I would play it.  And all of a sudden the guy that came on after me he would, somebody would ask him for it, and he'd be like, "I ain't never heard of that," you know, it's.  It was somewhat somewhere in that regard, but then I just kept doing it, I, I did it throughout my entire career you know.  And--
Speaker 1: What was some of the most rewarding B sides that you played, some of the better ones that you?
Speaker 2: Well I don't remember the songs per se but I remember the artist, I mean James Brown had a lot of them. There were a lot of B side records that we would play, here's James Brown doing 'I Can't Stand Myself' ['I Can't Stand Myself (When You Touch Me)'], but on the other side is this and that.  And Smokey Robinson had a lot of B sides that were hits; The Temptations had a lot of B sides that were hits.  And we would play them and they, all of a sudden they would be- become hits.
Speaker 1: I remember the, the B side of a Temptation record I, I think it's 'You're My Everything' that, the one that where the bass player sang the lead.  'I Truly, Truly Believe'?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Singing) I'm sending, roses and violets (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hey I got a story about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Melvin [Melvin Franklin] the bass singer of The Temptations called me up, he said, "Hey man, I heard you been playing my song," and I said, "Hey."  I said, "Melvin I'm a tell you something man, that should be the A side," all right?  And Melvin said, "Man you only one in America is playing my song," and the next thing I know man I looked on I, we were looking at Billboard at that time.  And Billboard had it charted at, and that was the only record to this day I mean of course Melvin is dead, but (laughter) but at--it, it was the only record that he ever had that charted you know.  And I think it went up in the top ten.
Speaker 1: They didn't let him sing lead.
Speaker 2: No, he never sang lead.
Speaker 1: I mean this is the sad thing 'cause he really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was a talent and--
Speaker 2: Oh Melvin and Melvin was a nice guy did you know Melvin?
Speaker 1: No I never met him.
Speaker 2: Oh he was a, he was a wonderful person, they all were.  The only one I didn't like was David [David Ruffin], I didn't like David, well by the time I met David, David had had a few hits and he was acting stupid, you know.  But I mean Dennis [Dennis Edwards] I talk to Dennis once a week now, you know and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah they were just in Chicago [Illinois], Labor Day they did a fantastic show.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: The, there's a kid that's the, he's not a kid he's a grown man but he; he was a neighbor of Melvin's that sing the bass--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Detroit [Michigan] from, from Detroit and he, he does a good job and I was hoping they would sing 'I Truly, Truly Believe' but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't do it?
Speaker 1: --they didn't do it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They per- performed for an hour and a half and were, they exceeded in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sound quality of the original Temptations.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought they did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were older than the original Temptations, but they, they been singing the songs for thirty years (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, sure.  Yeah they were that that was my group that was my group The Temptations, everybody wanted to be with them.  And everybody wanted to be one of them (laughter), all the girls wanted to be with them, and all the guys wanted to be one of them you know they were something else.
Story_ID: 667606
Speaker 1: You know back then as I think of it, I'm getting off the beaten track a little bit here, but you know back then we were, we were friends with the artist you know.  The deejays and the artists, especially us that were fortunate enough to be in big cities, you know they were, it was like they were your buddies.  So you didn't mind playing their records because, you know, that's your bud right here you know.  And so it was, it was a different type of; it was different, in all, every environment, radio stations.  I mean guys that worked on other stations from the one you might be on, they were your friends.  Now you know, it's like your enemy, you wanna shoot this guy you know, 'cause he's on another station.  We don't own any of them so what's the big deal (laughter)?  But Temptations [The Temptations] were, they were special, they were very special.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now the flipside of a lot of James Brown cuts like 'Cold Sweat,' 'Papa's Got a Brand New Bag' were actually part twos.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which were--
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely, I mean James, they used to take you know and on a 45 [45 rpm record], now if you bought the album you got a bad part, A and B were together.  But on the 45s of course they were different, you know be flipside you know, but James Brown is another guy that was my guy, I loved James Brown.  And I mean I listen to Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] talk about him quite often, and he was a perfectionist, he was definitely one of those guys that if you didn't do it right, you wasn't gonna be there long.  But I mean he was, I watched the movie ['Get on Up'], I went to see the movie, just before I had surgery on the knee.  And you know they left off two of the people that I'm saying wait a minute Charles Bobbit was his main man.  Charles Bobbit was with him from 1964 until the day he died, and he wasn't in the movie.  Same way Danny Ray was the guy that put the cape on him all the time; Danny Ray wasn't in the movie.  And you know, James was quite a guy, he was quite a guy.
Speaker 2: What, what did you, we can, we can spend some time on this somebody that knew James Brown and, and came up during that era.  Did, what, what did you think about the movie's overall trajectory you know, I know the, I, I think you know a lot of people think that the actor did a tremendous job playing him.  But, but what about the, the storyline?
Speaker 1: Well I, I didn't like it that much simply because to put a guy's life, to put fifty years in two hours is difficult, it's very, very difficult.  And James Brown had so many different--which they--he had so many different facets of his, of his personality were left out.  Because the movie was only two hours long, you know James one of those kind of people he was a guy that you do a documentary on you know.  Four or five hours you do something like 'The Sopranos' or something (laughter) but you don't, to do it in two hours, I, I just felt it was an injustice.  The part that Dan Aykroyd, I mean this guy was in James' life for five minutes.  And then all, he was in the movie you know like he was a big deal, I didn't particularly like that part, I, I love the way that what's his name Chadwick, Chadwick Bose [Chadwick Boseman] the way he portrayed him.  I mean you know he learned how to do the dances and so forth, but as far as the movie is concerned.  But there again I was I, I was happy that he was portrayed in some kind of way, you know.  I went to see, I went up to Sarasota [Florida] if you, well of course you don't live in Florida.  But if, if you ever get an opportunity they did a, what's probably in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or New York [New York] by now production of Marvin Gaye.  'The Life and Times of Marvin Gaye' [sic. 'Marvin Gaye: Prince of Soul'] and they were just you know rehearsing it so to speak.  Up in Sarasota there's this little theatre up there, holds about three hundred people, and it was like, it's like a black repertory theatre [West Coast Black Theatre Troupe] type thing.  And they did this Marvin Gaye and it was really good, the guy that portrayed Marvin Gaye sounded just like just him.  I was astounded, I mean I was just amazed, because I only went 'cause my wife [Connie Payne] wanted to go.  'Cause I'm saying, "Ah, how good could it be, it's in Sarasota, big deal." I went to see it and I was amazed.  So anytime I see anything when in the, anybody black, I feel like you know okay, making some progress here.
Speaker 2: Yeah there's, there was a show in Chicago [Illinois] by Renelco Jaheim [ph.] about you know Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: You know its like patterned after his book you know that one character played Marvin Gaye in all white with the white knit hat on.  The other played (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --all black.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah you know different sides of Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 1: Yeah right.
Speaker 2: But yeah he's a figure that's as life lends itself to the dramatization, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh sure, absolutely so I was, I was impressed with that and, and the James Brown movie I was glad just that they did something you know.  So but it wasn't as good as it could've been.
Story_ID: 667607
Speaker 1: What you think about movies like 'Five Heartbeats' and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Dreamgirls' and that sort of thing, you, you think they portray the music industry in its proper, I mean a, in a realistic way?
Speaker 2: Yeah to a certain extent yeah you mentioned 'Five Heartbeats' first; I thought 'The Five Heartbeats' was very well done.  There was parts of it that to me were like okay I was living in that time, I remember you know what kind of person this might've been.  But it was just a good movie from the standpoint that they had all the humanistic drama, and the guy getting strung out on drugs.  I mean that seem like it was The Temptations at first and then I find out it's supposed to be The Dells, and The Dells were you know.  But yeah it was good.  The 'Dreamgirls' movie that was the one Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles Carter] was in?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah right, that was, that was good, I enjoyed that, I enjoyed the acting, I enjoyed Jennifer Holliday [sic. Jennifer Hudson], I enjoyed Jamie Foxx, I just you know.  It was good from that perspective.
Story_ID: 667608
Speaker 1: Tell me how you got to WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.]. What, what happened, now you're at ZUM [WZUM Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], you're twenty years old.  What happens?
Speaker 2: Well they had a program director by the name of Bill Sherard, and Bill Sherard, his mother and father lived somewhere in Pennsylvania.  And I'm not sure, it was northern Pennsylvania.  But he heard me, he was on his way home 4th of July for the 4th of July holiday and he heard me on the air on a Saturday afternoon.  So soon as he got back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that Tuesday, 'cause I think the holiday was Monday.  He got back on Tuesday, he called me up and I had heard, I had been to D.C. and I had heard WOL and I said oh may I would love to work there, them guys are smoking.  Well at, WZUM we had people that were really good, I mean we had two guys that left there and went to New York [New York], but, and I had an opportunity to go New York.  But I'm saying well if Al's going to New York, this guy that started me in radio, Al Gee he went to New York and Jeff Troy who's another one and Frankie Crocker.  Frankie went to New York also.  So I said well I'm going to D.C., so anyway make, get back to the original.  He heard me on the air, he called me said would I be interested in coming to D.C., "Are you kidding," (laughter), "yeah definitely."  Said, "Well I might have an opening in a couple of months to do the a- the overnight show."  Now overnight was midnight 'til five in the morning, I didn't wanna do overnights, but I'm a kid.  I'm just starting in this business and I'll do whatever you want.  So I go on the air and I said okay, and I didn't expect to hear from again, him again, I thought it was you know possibly a joke or what.  He called me two weeks later, said, "All right, I'm ready, come on down."  So me and my brother, Gary [Gary Payne], Gary was about ten years old I think, twelve years old, we get in the car and go down to D.C.  And, and he told me what they were gonna pay me and I almost died, I almost, I fainted.
Speaker 1: How much more was it than?
Speaker 2: Well it was I was making seventy dollars a week, and I went from seventy-five to 250 [dollars], so you do the math, that's about 175 difference.
Speaker 1: Just for playing records (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Just for playing records (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what your father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] said.
Speaker 2: And my show was sponsored by Ben's Chili Bowl [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: The famous Ben's Chili Bowl?
Speaker 2: The famous Jim- well wasn't fam- it wasn't that famous then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were sponsored, they sponsored the first two hours, so they would, every night they would call me and see what I'm, how many hot dogs or half smokes I wanted.  And they would bring them up to the station, and I was so full, I mean that was my diet for about six months I guess.  And I got the job, and in D.C. and I was doing overnights and it was, it was a great experience.  So then I got drafted, Vietnam [Vietnam War] was smoking by then.
Speaker 1: So how, how long were you there before you were drafted?
Speaker 2: What six months, eight months.
Story_ID: 667609
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, before we go any further now did you do any broadcast school in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah I went, while I was, while I was working--
Speaker 1: At Western Electric [Western Electric Company]?
Speaker 2: Yeah I went to broadcast school 'cause Al told me, you know, I, I was on WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] on weekends and you know he said you need to go to broadcast school and this, get your papers and get your.  And at that time of course you had to have a third class license too and you get your license and the whole nine yards.
Speaker 1: So, so which, which one did you go to?
Speaker 2: George Hyde school of radio and television production (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Hyde school okay, all right I had to get that out of the way first before.  So, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you got drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah I got drafted and--
Speaker 1: Well I guess I should ask this question too, is there any particular person or mentor at George Hyde and anyb- and anybody that really made a difference in your career?  Or was it just, just (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well Al Gee, Al Gee made, he made the difference, I mean he kept me going, he, 'cause he kept on telling me what a great voice I had.  And I should be in this business and I wanted to be in the business, so it didn't take a whole lot.  But he was the motivational factor no question about it.
Speaker 1: So Al, Al Germany?
Speaker 2: Al Germany and he had a bunch of brothers and they were all really big guy, his one brother's name was King Germany.  And now he's probably dead now 'cause shoot he'd be about ninety years old but, King Germany he owned, I think he owned the first black auto dealership in Pitts- in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  But Al was, he was the only guy and, and my wife [Connie Payne], by this time we were going steady and she was telling me you know you, you can be anything you wanna be and the whole my--and the whole nine yards.  But that was it as far as inspirations are concerned.
Story_ID: 667610
Speaker 1: Okay so that's exciting so, so you're at D.C. [Washington, D.C.] WOL [WOL Radio] at night sponsored by Ben's Chili Bowl and you get drafted, and so--
Speaker 2: Well here, here's what happened, I got drafted the first time and I had moved from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to D.C.  So they lost my records and it took them like a year and a half to find them you know.  We're talking government here, I guess they're slow, they're very slow.  So in the meantime I go, I, I continue to work, John Pace who is the general manager at that time.  John Pace told me he said, "Listen, doing good, and if you get, if you get drafted whenever they do find your paperwork don't worry about it.  'Cause when you come back you'll have a job," well hey that was cool you know.  It took about, when I got the second notice, it was about a year later, by this time I had gotten married, my wife [Connie Payne] was pregnant.  I didn't wanna go to Vietnam.  I didn't even know what Vietnam was.  And on the bus going down to Fort (Unclear) in Baltimore [Maryland], I never will forget.  There was a class of kids they were like seventeen, eighteen, by this time I'm twenty-one, I didn't wanna go to war, I had a good job, I had a good wife, I had a kid coming.  And we gets down there to Fort (Unclear) now I had met, well I, I, we had a guy named Dewey Hughes.  And if, if you saw the Petey Greene movie ['Talk to Me'] you'd know who Dewey, Dewey is.
Speaker 1: Yeah he's former husband of [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Dewey was our community affairs director, Dewey told me, Dewey said, "I want you to go see this doctor." I ain't gonna tell you the doctor's name 'cause I think he's still living and it might be a problem (laughter).  I went to see the doctor, I told the doctor what was up, he said, "Ah, don't worry about a thing."  He wrote up these papers and said I had asthma, which I did have, I had it, when I was a kid years ago.  And when I got down to Fort (Unclear), they said, "How in the world did you make it down here, you ought to be," (laughter), 'in the hospital" (laughter).  So in the meantime I get out, I stay down there a week, 'cause they kept waiting on my pressure to go down you know my blood pressure.  So finally they gave me a, it was a 4-Y [sic. 4-F], my con- whatever the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 2: --classification was.  4-Y.
Speaker 1: Yeah medically--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ineligible, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I came back and I went directly I, I left D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and went to New York [New York] and stayed up there a week, and you know just in case they changed their mind, they wouldn't be able to reach me (laughter).  I don't know what I was thinking about.  Anyway I called my wife and I told her what was going on I, and I got, came back to the station and I got an, I got a job.  So he put me on, we had seven full time disc jockeys and he gave me three hours, I was on nine, I'm sorry, noon until, noon 'til three.  And I raised so much hell that they took me off of that after about four months and put me on afternoon drive, three until six in the afternoon.  And I was, I was from there I you know things start happening, things really start happening for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah noon to three is kind of a--
Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That time--
Speaker 2: --kind of quiet you know kind of quiet, but I was on the daytime, it was daytime, 'cause before I was on the nighttime, so you know people were asleep.  So, but when I got, when he put me on three to six--
Speaker 1: That's drive time--
Speaker 2: That was that three drive, then everybody started to know me (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: Now thi- what year is this, this is 19 what?
Speaker 2: This was in 1969.
Story_ID: 667611
Speaker 1: Now you, did you get to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] before the riots or after?
Speaker 2: Just, I came there, just like--I came and they started (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: Now here's a, here's a, you referred to the movie about Petey Greene, now 'Talk to Me,' (unclear), I know a lot of people criticize it not being the real Petey Greene story 'cause they know Petey Greene.
Speaker 2: Not that wasn't.
Speaker 1: But what, what really happened, you know do you have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Petey was, Petey was a good friend of mine, Petey was in Lorton [Lorton Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia], he was a, he was in jail, but he was out by the time I met him, he was out.  But he was like, he was, he was big in the community, he talked plenty stuff and he was big in the community.  So John Pace was general manager [of WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.], John said, "Get this guy, put him on, on one of the Sunday shows, Sunday community affairs shows."  Dewey [Dewey Hughes] went, he and, him and Petey became real, and Dewey was the producer.  Petey was on from I think it was six to seven on Sunday, and the shot got big.  And, and nobody listened on the community affairs shows, but when Petey came on they listened.  And Petey did that for oh I guess couple, three years and all of a sudden he was on TV.  He was doing a community affairs program you know on Sunday morning they have their little community affairs pro- he was doing Channel, Channel 4 [WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.] I believe it was.  And he, you know Petey at, he would call you whatever was he'd call you, he'd say it on TV, say it in person, he was a trip.  And, but he never did a morning show, I mean in the movie they had him doing the morning and it was, that was a bunch of crap.  But Petey did very well until he start drinking again, and when he started drinking again he would come in there being, he'd be blasted, he'd be (laughter)--and Petey he cleaned himself up, got his, got his, got off the, the alcohol and he started doing a show on a gospel station WYCB [WYCB Radio, Washington, D.C.].  He would do the show from Faces [ph.], now Faces was a bar, a nightclub (laughter) he would--
Speaker 1: So you say he did the gospel club from the nightclub?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, he (laughter) he would do the show, you come in there like on Friday nights and there's, there's Petey doing his show.  Talking about people that drank and smoke wasn't work- worth a dime and this and that and the other, and everybody loved him.  It was the funniest thing that you ever seen, he would do the show on Friday nights, only one night.  He would do from Faces and he'd be talking about drinking and smoking being bad for you 'cause by this time he'd got off the drugs, I mean off the alcohol and he was living very clean.  You know he didn't cuss a whole lot the whole and it, it was fun, but the show it worked, for some stupid reason it worked.  And so in af- from there Petey went to Channel 20 [WDCA-TV, Washington, D.C.] I believe it was it was a, one of them stations that they don't have news and whatnot.  But they have all these goofy shows and he started doing the show ['Petey Greene's Washington'] and the show really got big.  And then something happened, he said something on the air that somebody big didn't like and that was the end of it.  Petey was finished, now he, Petey got a good job out of it 'cause he's working for the city, I believe.  And he was doing his comedy at various clubs and whatnot, but he wasn't on the air, he was off the air for at least a couple of years.  Then all of a sudden he was back on again, you know, you know, now I don't know what happened, why he, he went off and came back and the whole nine yards.  But he was a heck of a good guy, heck of a dude man, and he and I used to, we had, we had a good relationship.  'Cause he loved what I did, he used to love, he may see, he used to say, "Man I wish I could do that, I wish I could do that," you know.  And it, talk about being a deejay but that was his thing you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I thought about it terms of the riot and all that they had him playing a major role in the riots in the movie.
Speaker 2: He didn't do nothing with the riots.
Speaker 1: I, I didn't think so.
Speaker 2: James Brown did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: James did, James came in, I never will forget this long as I live, Ja- James came in and he knew me, I knew him because I met him in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] through Al Germany, Al Gee.  And he was on Bob Terry's show and at, at that time 7th Street was being burnt down I mean you could see the flames all over the city.  And James got on the air and he said this is crazy, this that, this just dumb, we burning our own places down, blah, blah, blah.  And the next thing you know it stopped, everything stopped, and I, and it was funny I used to have to, I would, I was doing an all night show at that time.  And I would have to carry a, remember we had survey sheets back then, and they had the pictures of all the jocks [disc jockey] on it.  And I had a picture of me on it, 'cause my real name, and my radio name were different names.  And I would have to carry one to prove who I was, because they had the curfew on, at that time.  And so I would you know carry the survey sheet; I'd have it in my pocket, and if the, the National Guard who was actually they were out in the city at that point.  "Who are you, where you going?" "I'm going home," boom, there it is, so it was, it was quite a, quite an experience (laughter) quite an experience.
Story_ID: 667612
Speaker 1: So flash forward back to up to 1969 so, so '69 [1969] you got a deferment from the draft you're, you're on, on WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.].  And oh let me go back to something else, you said like Frankie Crocker did, did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yeah sure.
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], okay.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: So Frankie Crocker legendary I think it was a review a rank best disc jockeys of all time he was either number one?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, yeah which was, I, he was good, he was very good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he and I we split that, you know one year he'd win it, one year I'd win it, one year, but he was in New York [New York].  So New York got preference, but yeah Frankie at, the people who owned WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] they owned a station in Buffalo [New York] also, WUFO [WUFO Radio]. It's still on as far as I know.  It's AM playing, I don't know what they're doing now.  But in the meantime (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) WUFO (laughter).
Speaker 2: WUFO in the meantime, Frankie came down from Buffalo. There was Frankie, Al Gee, me and Jeff Troy, and we had a guy that came on like from six until signoff named Mad Mike.  Mad Mike was ZUM's [WZUM Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] answer to Porky Chedwick, he was a young guy that played B sides, nothing but B (laughter) he played songs that nobody ever heard before, but they loved him you know.  He died I guess Mike died about ten years ago, but Frankie was there, he didn't stay long.  None of us stayed long, we only, I think I was there maybe a year before I came to WA- WOL and Jeff wa- Jeff was there maybe a year and a half.  Then Al, and then Frankie, Frankie was only there like six months.
Story_ID: 667613
Speaker 1: You were on WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] I guess what '68 [1968] to '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now this and in, in while on the air you got the nickname the Mighty Burner.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now you're one of three Mighty Burners I've found so far I know one being Charles Earland, the organ player.  They call him the Mighty Burner, were you aware of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I only know one other and that that's Sonny Hopson up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah the disc jockey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: That's the other one.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So but they cha- they call Charles Earland the organ player the Mighty Burner too.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's you know, I found it out after he died, I read it in it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --the obituary.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but how did you get the name Mighty Burner?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was on the air one day and Bob Terry, Nighthawk came into the studio and he said, "Boy you burning, you," yeah well I, I forget what, what I was playing on I had.  And he said, "We ought to call you the Mighty Burner," and there it was.  I said, "Hey that's pretty good," and at that time everybody had a name you know, the Big Boss Bird that was Nighthawk.  Bob Terry his real name was, we used to call him the Big Boss Bird--oh, and so everybody had a name.  Sunny Jim [James Kelsey] was what was Sunny's na- name, he was the gospel guy and the afternoon guy.  Bill Heywood [ph.] was Mr. Freeze.  We, everybody had a name, so that was my name.
Speaker 1: So Mr. Freeze because he was so cool is that it?
Speaker 2: He was so cool (laughter).
Story_ID: 667614
Speaker 1: So WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] so, so you took off you know on the afternoon drive show.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did you remain in that slot the entire time you were there or?
Speaker 2: I was in that slot for the next ten years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --did pretty good, won a few awards and had a ball, had a blast I mean, you know that's when radio was fun.  It was a lot of fun and you know met a lot of wonderful people and just had a good ol' time you know.  I said, "Man I get paid and do this," (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So it's like your father [Marshall Payne, Jr.] said (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And well it, it does sound like for a lot of people really I mean to think about having that, that kind of job you know being on the air, being well known, meeting celebrities constantly.  At least super talented people and, and be among the town to do something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah that is an interesting--
Speaker 2: Um-hm it was--
Speaker 1: --job.
Speaker 2: It really was.
Story_ID: 667615
Speaker 1: So what were some of the highlights of your, your ten years at WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.], I know you're a legend there, pe- people still talk about you on the Internet.
Speaker 2: Oh it, there was just you know so many of them it, it's very difficult to, I mean I think meeting people of you know people you, you've heard about.  People that you, you'd listened to their songs on the radio or whatever the case may be, and all of a sudden boom your meeting them.  And, and you're as big as--they know about you too, you know.  I think at that time and we, as we go back and we remember most of the records company up until Motown [Motown Records] came along, didn't have black staffs.  They didn't have promotion guys, you know there were very, very few, all of a sudden black guys became per, and girls became promotion people.  And each one of them had a story I mean there was, it was so much fun to be around people.  I remember one guy he just passed away I guess about ten months ago, that worked for Motown his name was Weldon McDougal, III, and Weldon was out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  One thing that Motown did that most companies patterned themselves after, Motown conducted themselves much differently than any other company.  Their promotion guys were all stars, they looked like stars, they weren't stars per se, but they looked like the.  You know they dressed and they did all the right things, they, was most of them were really good looking guys.  And Weldon was one of those people and he took a liking to me, I think a lot of people sort of liked me because I was young.  I was much younger than the average deejay who had, con- achieved that type of acclaim.  And I used to pattern myself after Weldon, Weldon would dress, oh man he would wear some stuff, you'd be saying "Where did he get that?"  I remember when he, he didn't discover 'em, but he was the first guy to handle The Jackson 5, he handled them.  I mean it that was his group, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], said "Weldon you take The Jackson 5 and you make them whatever you know."  And they became of course big stars, but you know I, I remember the first time he brought them to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And Michael [Michael Jackson], you know, to meet Michael, I mean Michael was a kid man and I, you know and all of us where tripping out over Michael, right?  But it was, it was just a good time and or, and Barry White was another one, I loved Barry.  And Barry, I don't know for some reason or other, we just the two of us really clicked and I got a picture I hope I get it to you or scan it or get it, get it to you.  Me and Barry and I think Glodean [Glodean White] is in the picture, Glodean of course became his wife, and she wasn't married to him at that point.  But Barry was a, was a good guy.  There were some, Kool and the Gang; I used to love Kool and the Gang, still do (laughter), The Whispers and the Four Tops.  The Four Tops are one of my favorite groups, Duke Fakir [Abdul Fakir] was one of my favorite people of all time, I mean this guy he's such--I don't know if you know him or not but Duke is just such a gentleman, such a wonderful guy, great golfer he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's someone we should interview I'm, I'm sure I, I he's someone we should interview.
Speaker 2: Who Duke?
Speaker 1: If you have his information you know, please share--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got his home phone number--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --cell phone number, I'll give it to you before you leave.
Story_ID: 667616
Speaker 1: What was Levi Stubbs like?
Speaker 2: Levi is gone now.
Speaker 1: Yeah I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what was he like?
Speaker 2: Levi was full of Levi (laughter) he was he, you know he was Levi, he, I went to, Levi I think was his fiftieth anniversary party and at that, at that point Levi was, was rath- rather sick.  And he was in a wheelchair, and he was still acting like Levi, you know he was, he, he gee, he was one of those kind of people I'm sure you know them.  That you either like him or you don't and I liked him, you know he was a good guy.  Johnnie Taylor was a, oh man street a dude but definitely all right.  What's the kid's name, Al Green, Al Green another wonderful guy, I mentioned Barry White before, Marilyn [HistoryMaker Marilyn McCoo] and Billy [HistoryMaker Bill Davis, Jr.] they were great.  But even when they were, I met them the first time I met them they were in the group 5th Dimension [The 5th Dimension] and they were wonderful.  There were just so many people, James Brown was one of my favorites of course, Booker T. [Booker T. Jones], Booker T. was just a great guy.  And a very intellectual type dude, I mean this guy you could sit down and talk politics with this guy you know, whatever you wanna talk about.  Music was the last thing on his agenda (laughter), but and it was first, but that was you know, he was, he was a doctor, I don't know whether you knew it or not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I did not know it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I did not know he was as young as he, he is.
Speaker 2: Who, Booker T.?
Speaker 1: Yeah Booker T.--
Speaker 2: Yeah he's--
Speaker 1: --I thought he was a much older man because of the style of his music.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And then when it came out all the instrumentals, I thought that was an older guys doing it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: --but he, he's not that much older than we, we are--
Speaker 2: No I think Booker may, he may be seventy-two or seventy-three--
Speaker 1: Yeah. I, I thought he was much older for some reason and I saw him in Detroit [Michigan] at the jazz fest [Detroit Jazz Fest] two years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he played a number of tunes, 'Green Onions,' a lot of tunes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He got to the end I said well he hasn't played 'Time is Tight,' you know, because I remem- remember that.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I associate it with the, the riots in '68 [1968] and the movie 'Uptight' became--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Hough ri- riots in Cleveland [Ohio] and that's the last thing he played.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he gave a little talk about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That led up to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he start playing 'Everybody' [ph.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, did he have Steve Cropper and the rest of the guys with him?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah and he's--
Speaker 2: Now what's his name Duck Dunn [Donald "Duck" Dunn], Duck, I think Duck passed away.
Speaker 1: Now that's the Memphis sound guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, but I did, I did the, I was XM [XM Satellite Radio, Inc.; Sirius XM Radio, Inc.] at the time I did the, we broadcast Stax record company [Stax Records], their fiftieth anniversary.  And they did it at the Orpheum Theatre down in Memphis [Tennessee], and I was the emcee that was, I guess about six or seven years ago now.  And [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes was on it and da- it, wonderful guy I mean I knew I Isaac though 'cause Isaac used to date this girl that I.  She lived downstairs from me when I lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but Isaac was, he was sick at the time.  And he came on I, oh god I never will forget it, I introduced him, place went crazy, and Isaac came on and he did the theme from 'Shaft.'  And it was fantastic, and he just about collapsed after he finished would doing that, he was that sick, just, just before he died.  You remember the movie ['Soul Men'] he and Bernie Mac did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he just was right after that, and--
Speaker 1: They both passed away.
Speaker 2: Yeah they died within I--weeks of each other.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but Isaac, I mean there was just so many things man.
Story_ID: 667617
Speaker 1: I you know--
Speaker 2: Now let me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) going back--
Speaker 2: Now here's the kind of sad kind of story but I, I heard, heard this story from a friend of mine at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that they were standing--they were working WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] and a fella was standing out front and when he walked by said, "Do you know who I am?"  And he said, "No," he said, "I'm Sly Stone."
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) said, "No, I didn't, didn't know who you were."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he walked, kept on walking, now what happened to Sly Stone, did you ever meet him when you were a disc jockey?
Speaker 1: I was possibly (laughter) the cause of his downfall in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (laughter). I'll give you the story, quickly.  Sl- Sly was at the height of his powers, Sly was smoking, he had produced a couple of, a huge hits and we had one under Little Sister, you remember the group Little Sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah right, I'm the One--You're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'You're the One,' and he was doing, and Larry Graham had a thing that was coming out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he was doing Larry, Larry was in the group of course.  Anyway Sly was supposed to be at Constitution Hall in D.C., I was the emcee, it was a, a Bill Washington show, Dimensions Entertainment [Dimensions Entertainment Inc.], they became, they were Dimensions Unlimited [Dimensions Unlimited Inc.] at that time.  Sl- Sly had this reputation already and this came from Woodstock [Woodstock Festival; Woodstock Music and Art Fair] all, just followed him around.  Sly wo- he might show up, he might not show up, he might show up really high, might, anyway we kept the crowd intact.  It was about eleven o'clock when he showed up, show started at 8, 8:30, he showed up and he was high as Cootie Brown on a weekend.  He was, and he looked, I knew this guy, this guy was a deejay at KSOL [KSOL Radio] in, in D- in San Francisco [California].  He looked at me and he said, "I don't want no niggers on the stage," and [HistoryMaker] Richard Prince was writing for the Washington Evening Times [sic.].  And Richard Prince was standing next to me and Richard Prince heard that, well Sly went on and did two songs, and then left.  Now I mean the crowd was just you know, they were blaming it on me, like it was my fault (laughter).  So anyway the next day I got to this station [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] this was on a Sunday when this show was, the next day I get to the station and Jim Kelsey [James Kelsey] who was the general manager at this point.  He said, "Is this story correct that I hear about Sly and you and," blah, blah, blah, blah?  And I said, "Yeah," he said, "Take all the god damned records off, take them off, anything that Sly is affiliated with, take it off."  This, I said, "Well Sonny we can't take-- the man gotta meet--his music is hot, you know."  About five minutes later Jerry Boulding called me and I don't know whether you had the opportunity to interview Jerry over the years.  But anyway Jerry was in New York [New York] at the, at, the Sonderling station in New York [WWRL Radio].  Jerry called me Jerry said, "Hey man is what Sly said at that, is that true 'cause I heard about it," said, "Yeah, it's true."  Sly, he put, took all and at that what started this, this effect of everybody took Sly's music off, he was on Columbia Records at the time.  It was, he was on Epic [Epic Records], actually Columbia was distrib- distributing, and they said wait a minute this is crazy.  This is costing us money, so in the meantime, I get a visit from Carl Proctor, Carl and his brother, he had a brother named Ronnie [Ronnie Proctor].  Carl Proctor was like, this was in 1969 I believe and at this point Carl was like the bagman.  When you saw Carl you ei- either gonna get killed or you were gonna get rich (laughter) I can laugh about it now.  So we were living in Marbury Plaza [Washington, D.C.] at the time, me and my wife [Connie Payne] and my little baby was about this big.  And I got a call from Jim Kelsey I, general manager, Jim comes over he says, "Hey man listen Carl Proctor from Epic is gonna come by and see you.  And I'm just making sure he don't hurt you," and I'm like, "Come on what you talking about," but it, that's the way the record business was back then.  I mean if he didn't do it Dick Clark's people, we had a whole bunch of people that would, would mess you up, bust your legs the whole nine yards.  Anyway--
Story_ID: 667618
Speaker 1: Now, now but okay this raises in- this raises a question to me.  If Jim Kelsey's [James Kelsey] the one who told you to take the records off the air you know why wasn't they gonna mess him up, did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --he, he--
Speaker 2: --they would--
Speaker 1: --he wouldn't pay him too?
Speaker 2: --they were gonna get him too, but I started it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the one that's you know, they didn't know about him at this point, so but he wanted him to know about him.  Because he wanted to be paid you know for what he had done, so he comes over my house, I tell my wife [Connie Payne] I said, "Look you better take the baby and go, go in the back, go in the room, go in the bedroom."  Carl [Carl Proctor] knocks on the door him and Ronnie [Ronnie Proctor] him, he comes in, he's got this briefcase, he comes in he say, "Hey man, you know we can't have this.  This, this n- negativism that you're laying on Sly [Sly Stone]," blah, blah, blah, said, "Man I didn't do nothing to Sly.  Sly's the one that made the statement and [HistoryMaker] Richard Prince, printed it."  Well Carl got up he said, "All I'm a say is this. I better see Sly's music back on the bur- on your list by the end of this week."  He left and he left the, the case there and the case was full of money (laughter) and i- the statute of limitations is over so I guess I can title him, and so he left the money.  And he left and Sly, and naturally went back on the air about two weeks later.  But it was, it was quite a harrowing experience, but Sly just, he got that reputation of not showing up or showing up half assed blasted, and promoters stop dealing with him.  And record companies stop dealing with as, as far as his music was concerned and when that happens, you're in big trouble.  And he had made, I didn't know this until I guess couple of years ago, Sly had such a catalog of music that he had written.  Stuff that wasn't on a Sly and the Family Stone, The Beatles, the Rolling Stones and various other groups and whatnot.  He had, he had such a huge catalog of stuff, he was a wealthy man, he became, and he just let himself go to the point now if you see him now you don't recognize him.  Now I understand that he and George Clinton are back out, or talking about going back out on the road.  Now evidently he's got a clean himself up tremendously to do that.
Speaker 1: But these guys in their seventies now.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah have you seen George lately?
Speaker 1: I, I saw well, I saw if this if you're referring to I saw a picture of George Clinton at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah right.
Speaker 1: --dressed like an Englishman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --almost like the--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --like Sir, Sir Walter Raleigh.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: And he, and he looks terrible with his big fat guy man, well him and Sly he had on his gear the other day somebody had posted it on Facebook.   Him and Sly are supposed to be on the road or going on the road together.  So now you know that'll be something to see, I might go see that just to see if Sly slow- shows up (laughter).  But he's, he's still living in the same house, he still has, and he's got a Winnebago that they say he, that's where he lives.  That's where his recording studio is and he just recording songs, I don't know but he looks totally different.  I seen a picture of him, I wouldn't know who he was, wouldn't know you know it was one of them situations where, "That's not Sly, that's somebody else," (laughter) okay?
Speaker 1: Yeah that's how, I think about how 1977 he was out of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, out of the picture pretty much.  I know he was supposed to show up in Chicago [Illinois] I think in '75 [1975] or something he didn't show up for the concert, they tore up Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah a lot of stories like that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and he's I'm, I'm, I'm amazed that he's still alive, I am totally amazed 'cause Sly did more drugs than me, you and Kurt [Kurt Cobain] could do to- together you know, unbelievable guy, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was a good jock [disc jockey]--he was good on the air, but now.
Speaker 1: Yeah super talented man you know (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 667619
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean the statute of limitations is up as you said I mean what is that, is the payola thing a big, is that, that was a, was there a lot of pressure on you to play people's music that--I mean or, or lot of money in playing certain people's music?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you know but stuff happens I mean Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] you know all you got to do is look at all the guys on Capitol Hood are getting paid (laughter) you know but there were, there were a few records.  But one thing and I, I don't wanna, I don't wanna sound like I'm somebody special, but one thing I did and I always did.  I was, I was honest with people, I was fair, I mean I would tell ya- I remember, wasn't Ingram.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] James Ingram (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) James Ingram.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not James Ingram, Lut- well I, the other guy.
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Osborne or?
Speaker 2: No his, his last name is Ingram.
Speaker 1: Ingram?
Speaker 2: '(If Loving You is Wrong) I Don't Wanna Do Right' [sic. '(If Loving You is Wrong) I Don't Want to be Right'].
Speaker 1: Oh right, right.
Speaker 2: I forget his, his last, first name--
Speaker 1: Luther Ingram.
Speaker 2: Luther Ingram.  Well that record came out and I was doing, I was picking the music, playing the music, I was program director and the whole nine yards.  And Johnny Baylor was working for Se- Stax Records at the time.  And Johnny came down and Johnny was one of these guys man Johnny wore a suit and tie all the time, but he carried a .45 [.45 caliber] all the time, all the time.  And he carried it right here (gesture) and it would be inside his suit coat and he'd let you see it, if you didn't do, do what he would, wanted you to do.  So he came down (laughter) with this record, and I said to Johnny I said, "Johnny," I said, "this is a great record."  I said, "But it's a great record for down south." I said, "Now I'll tell you what you do."  I said, "You come back with this record when you start picking up some northern type stations."  But D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at that time D.C. was the joint, D.C. and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I mean you know in order to get a record played in New York you had to have D.C.  So he had this Luther Ingram record and he said, "Man I got to get this record played."  And he took i- it must've been a couple thousand dollars, he put it on my desk, just like I said, "I don't want your money, I'll play the record.  Let's play it," I said, "I'll tell you what we'll do." I said, "Let's see, I'm a see how the audience likes it.  If the audience likes it, I'll play it, if they don't like it, I won't play it, simple as that.  You can kill me you can do what you gotta do, but you--it--that's the way it's gonna be."  So anyway that afternoon I went on the air at three o'clock around 3:30, I said, "I need you to do me a favor.  All y'all listening do me a favor." I said, "If you like this record," you know, it's a question and answer type thing, "if you don't like it," blah, blah.  I played the record, phones lit up people calling like crazy, I must've took fifty calls, forty-eight of them were yay.  So we had a, and I, I think it proved to him that you know I mean I was, I don't want your money, I, I was really doing good at this point.  And I don't need your money, but here's the bottom line, I'm not gonna do anything to hurt my station [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.].  Now there were a lot of people that would play anything if there was some dollars attached to it.  Whereas I didn't which is why we maintained our credibility for such a long time, it was like no, unh-uh no I will, I can't play that.  That's sh- just not where I wanna be.  I remember this guy, (laughter) there was a guy named E.T. White (laughter).  He was a, he was a local D.C. guy and he made a record every month and he was terrible, he was just bad, but he, he had a lot of money, and he made these records.  And he had his own studio somewhere Northeast, D.C. and ev- and he would come through every wi- every month with this, one of these records.  And I remember he had this record E.T. White and the Great Potential Band [sic. E.T. White and His Great Potential Band], and the record was ha- was horrible.  And I told him I said, "E.T. I'm a tell you what. I can't play this, I just can't play this record, it's terrible."  He got an attitude, he got mad and he was waiting on me when I left that evening.  He was way, he wanted to punch me out, I said, "You can punch me out, but I don't think you can do it," I said, "I'll kick your ass and, and simple as that."  I said, "'Cause I'm a disc jockey don't mean I'm soft," and E.T. I think E.T. looked he thought about it again, and if, I was ten years younger than him.  And he looked at me and said hm maybe I better leave this guy alone. I never had another problem out of him, never had another problem out of E.T.  We became the best of friends and he never brought me another record (laugher).  You know, so I don't know it was just that, like I said at this point you know to me my job was more important than you know five hundred bucks.
Story_ID: 667620
Speaker 1: What, what was some of the, I guess management dynamics of WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] when you were there did, did you have the same station manager all the time or?
Speaker 2: No. Well when I first got there of course John Pace was, was the guy and WOL was different than what folks had to listen to prior to WOL.  WOL had came in, into existence in 1966 I believe it was, and prior to that it had been an all news station.  And it was, you know, some guy or some girl whatever doing all news, and then all of a sudden, it became a (unclear) station.  And they brought in disc jockeys from all over the country, these guys that sounded like big time guys you know.  I mean they, they didn't sound like little county bumpkins which the station across the street they had, that's what they had a bunch of country bumpkins.  And they had Rudy Reynolds who was the, they called him the tall, tanned Texan, Jim Kelsey [James Kelsey] who had come down from, from New York [New York].  Jerry Boulding, Jerry was in New York also I believe, Dave Crawford he was in Memphis [Tennessee] and he was a demon.  And he was sort of like you know one of them really hip slick guys, and then there was Fred Correy.  Fred was, Fred was from, from New Jersey Joff- WNJR I believe in New Jersey [WNJR Radio; WNSW Radio, Newark, New Jersey], and Fred was just, he just played music at night; I replaced him as a matter of fact.  And it was, it was different, it was new, they had jingles you know (singing), "WOL soul radio."  And you know the other stations they were like old and tired and these guys and the disc jockeys were out in the community you know.  The, each there were a lot of clubs in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at that time and he, every night was WOL Soul Brothers would be here, would be there, you know.  And consequently it became a, a thing with the community you know this is your radio station blah, blah, blah, blah.  And it, it was a big deal, it was a big deal that was the first time I had ever been anywhere where the disc jockeys were stars, I mean these guys were stars.  Like wow, man (laughter) you know I mean the people in the street, you could ask some guy walking down the street who's your favorite disc jockey and everybody knew him.  And everybody knew their name you know?  And it stayed that way up until about the mid-'70s [1970s] at, and this was through two different administrations.  In the mid-'70s [1970s] FM came and we went to Jim Kelsey, he was the general manager at the time.  And we said, "Hey Jim there's an FM station getting ready to kick our ass, they getting ready to run us off the radio," because they're FM.  And at that time all the cars were doing XM- FM, rather, all the, you know people who had that, FM radios.  And of course that was WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] and HUR was, they had students working at the time, these were communication students.  And they were playing this cool jazz and they were being just very cool.  Now you remember this was the time when everybody was smoking grass [marijuana], and if they wasn't smoking grass, they were doing coke [cocaine], and the whole nine yards.  And it was really cool to listen HUR because--
Speaker 1: Now yeah I remember HUR (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, I was in D.C. a couple of times.
Speaker 2: So we had an FM--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We had an FM, Kelsey told Chuck McCoy [ph.], I never will forget it, "Ah, man they ain't nothing, they ain't gone be nothing.  Yeah don't worry about them," blah, blah, blah.  So John Pace was a big dog now, he's like one of the real big guys in the chain.  John came to town and then of course John wanted to hear this from Kelsey before he put us on FM.  He wanted to hear it from Kelsey.  What do you think Jim, "Man they ain't nothing, they ain't gone be nothing," blah, blah, blah, blah.  Well we know what happened, and when Cathy [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and, and Dewey [Dewey Hughes] bought the station and it, 1980 it wasn't worth you know half million dollars.  But the reason for that is because of FM, it's not because of, you know the disc jockeys lost the power or anything like that.  It was just Sonny, we called him Sonny Jim Kelsey and he lost his ability to reason with the fact that it was gonna be.  WOL still could be the powerhouse if it was FM you know, well could be now 'cause they got rid of everybody.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause you had like competition from not only HUR but WKYS [WKYS Radio, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah well KYS came along right after that and then WOL went FM, everybody went FM except and, and when, when Cathy and Dewey you know they came to us in 1980.  And said, "Well we're getting ready to buy the station, and we'd love you--have, have you come on board, please come on board."  But they, they didn't wanna pay nobody nothing, they were starting off, their starting pay was less than what (laughter) our starting pay was ten years ago you know.  So I said, "No that'll be like going backwards."
Story_ID: 667621
Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Dyana Williams?
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Over at WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah Ebony Moonbeams, that's what they used to call her, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah and, and did now when did you meet Og- Oggi Ogburn [HistoryMaker David "Oggi" Ogburn], now he was--
Speaker 2: Oh god.
Speaker 1: --HUR photographer and--?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I don't, you know what I, I it's like I've known Oggi all my life, I don't even remember when we met.  I, I know at that time Dyana, myself we're all around the same age.  When all the, at that time disc, disc jockeys from HUR, disc jockeys from KYS [WKYS Radio, Washington, D.C.] everywhere, we all hung out together, we do- liked each other.  And Oggi, I was doing a thing on Sunday night, Redskin [Washington Redskins] night, and I would do, after the Redskin games I would do Ed Murphy Supper Club [Ed Murphy's Supper Club, Washington, D.C.].  Do you remember Ed Murphy used to have the Howard Inn before it became the Howard Inn okay?  Well Ed owned the supper club and we would do a thing, and Dyana and I, she was doing something.  Because they called her Ebony Moonbeams, she was a student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the time, and one Sunday we hooked up, we hung out man.  We hi, after the thing was over at nine o'clock we hung-out her and Melvin Lindsey and myself and Jesse Fax and Sheila Eldridge.  You re- have you met Sheila?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh Sheila she was one of the students back then she was on the air too, she's, she has a thing called Orchid, Orchid Productions [sic. Orchid Communications], and she's doing very well.  But and you know HUR was, was different, it was very different at that time.  Because rather then like you were saying about you know there, there was different things in the mixing the whole bit.  But and they, they were starting to gain some momentum; they had a thing called the Quiet Storm, which, you know, Cathy [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] keeps taking credit for.  But it was Melvin Lindsey that actually did it, and Melvin of course he died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  He was one of first, first people I remember to die of AIDS back in the early '90s [1990s].  But it, it HUR, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was popping then, D.C. was--mayor--[HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was the mayor, and we were doing good you know we were doing good.
Story_ID: 667622
Speaker 1: Now, now what about Chuck Brown?  Now that's--he's a figure that emerges.
Speaker 2: Chuck Brown.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Chuck, I miss him to this day, I met Chuck I think it was the first thing I did when I first came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] And Chuck was playing with a group called the Los Latinos, and they played, they played a conglomeration of Latin music and black music, and they were good.  And around 1970, '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] I think Chuck formed his own group, Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers.  And I had a band and I used to work with all the time called The Young Senators.  And Chuck (laughter) invaded my band and, and took a couple members from my band (laughter) well it didn't make any difference 'cause we replaced him, we did well.  But I, I knew Chuck, I mean from 1968 day I started 'cause he was one of the first groups to call me up when I was doing all night shift.  And Chuck, I went through both his families, 'cause he had older kids and he had younger kids, the whole nine yards.  And he was a, he was a great musician, he was a great, he didn't read, he was like James Brown he was one of them guys.  If he heard something one time, it was done, you know and, and he didn't, he was funny man, he could've been a big star.  When he did 'Bustin' Loose,' I don't if you remember that song.
Speaker 1: That that's the one everybody remembers, I feel like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That song went to number one went to number one of Billboard's Top 100, and there were record, there were record people around Chuck trying to get Chuck to leave D.C.  And Chuck said, "I'll never leave my home," he stayed in D.C. the whole time, now he would go out and do a gig somewhere else, but he'd always come back home.  And he could've been much bigger than he was, but he, he wanted to stay in D.C., he loved D.C.  So he was, he was just a nice guy very nice guy, and you know, I, I miss him to this day, I mean I, when he died, I went to his funeral.  And his funeral, [HistoryMaker] Pookie Hudson, I don't know if you remember Pookie (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've heard that name yeah.
Speaker 2: Well Pookie had a group The Spaniels.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were, they were before our time of course they were big.
Speaker 1: We've interviewed Pookie Hudson.
Speaker 2: Yeah Pookie, Pookie and The Spaniels, well Pookie had the biggest funeral I'd ever seen, and Chuck was, Chuck was second.  'Cause between the two of them boy they must've had everybody in the city come out you know unbelievable.  But Chuck Brown was a good guy, you've, could've been much bigger, but he wanna be, he was a, he was a big fish in a small pond, that's all he wanted to be.  And you know what his car was, you know what he drove, a limo (laughter).  He drove a white limo and he would rent it out on the weekends, (laughter) he'd rent it as a, as a limo (laughter) so he made money on it and he drove it, you know.
Story_ID: 667623
Speaker 1: When the Hughes couple, Cathy [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and Dewey Hughes bought WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] in 1980, the prospects weren't very bright for the disc jockeys that were already there, right?  In terms of salary so you, is that what some (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't know how many other guys I, they offered me a job, I don't know how many other guys they did.  Because at that point, it, it there was, it was breaking up, I mean the, the old gang of mine so to speak was breaking up.  And I, like I told you I went to WTOP [WTOP Radio, Washington, D.C.].  Program director there said, "I'm gonna, I'm gonna make you the next Bryant Gumbel" 'cause I knew sports.  And at that time Bryant Gumbel was the only guy, the only black guy on television nationally that was doing, he was doing foot- NFL [National Football League] football as a matter of fact.  And I went to WTOP and Al Koken and myself we did a show at night, eight until midnight, except when the Orioles [Baltimore Orioles] were playing.  'Cause we had Orioles baseball, we'd be at, were on after the game or before the game or whatever the case may be.  And I, they, they acquired the Washington Bullets [Washington Wizards] and then Dave McNamee who was a program director the one that made me all these tremendous statements, made all the promises.  Dave up and left (laughter) he, he came down here to Tampa [Florida] (laughter) he started his own production company.  The guy that replaced Dave didn't like sports, he told me Al [ph.] and Phil Wood he said, "I don't like sports; I'm not a sports person.  I don't like sports and soon as the Orioles get on, you know the season is over and our contract is up, I'm getting rid of them.  I'm getting rid of the Washington Bullets, but right now I'm getting rid of you."  "No you can't do that, I got a contract."  So and make a long story short I used the, the, used my leverage that I had and you know we didn't have to go to court or anything, they paid my contract off.  And I started doing produc- promotion, independent promotion, and there was me and a guy name Ron White [ph.].  And I did that for about a year, year and a half, and I loved it, I enjoyed it because I can make my own hours.  But I missed being on the air you know 'cause I really, that's what I wanted to be I, you know the money wasn't important, I just wanted to be on the air.  And so from that point, I think I went to WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] as program director.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now how, how did that opportunity emerge?
Speaker 2: HUR was getting killed KYS [WKYS Radio, Washington, D.C.] was like beating their butt (laughter) HUR the excitement had grown off it you know it people were, they're tired, they're old, they're this and that.  And they needed a new program director. Jesse Fax was the program director at the point and he was old and tired, and part of the old regime.  And I came on board; I got a call one day from the general manager, Jim Watkins and he said, "Listen I'm looking for a program director and your name came up," and blah, blah, blah.  So I went in I spoke to, talked to him for oh, two or three hours, next thing I know I was there.  I didn't particularly like it, it was a lot of power, it was a lot of, but it wasn't what I really wanted to do.  Plus you had to wear a tie every day, and I didn't like that (laughter) so, but I, you know I hung in there and did it for I guess seven or eight years or, y- whatever.
Story_ID: 667624
Speaker 1: Program directors basically oversaw the operations of the other disc jockeys in the programs and?
Speaker 2: Yeah well the one thing about HUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] that I, I did not like was the fact that radio is a spontaneous occupation, I mean entity.  I have to react for what you're doing and you have to react to what Curt's doing and whatnot.  And at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] you couldn't do that, because it all had to go through the superintendent.  And you had to wear, not only did you, you had three or four people that you had to please before you got it done.  So if you came on with a promotion you're giving away thus and so, I would have to go through all these people before I could get the okay to do it.  By that time, it's over.  It was just, it was an exercise in futility really, I hated it, but like I say the money was good, the power was incredible.  I enjoyed it for a while but then I went to a, a convention in Los Angeles [California] and a guy named Sal Licata was there.  And I knew Sal from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] because Sal had started; he was working with national record mart at that time.  And Sal said, "What you gonna do?"  I said, "I don't know," I think I had about six or, six years in with HUR, my contract was coming up.  And I said, "Soon as my contract is up, I'm going back on the air somewhere," and Sal said, "When you get back home, come to New York [New York], I'm a send for you one, wanna talk to you come, come up to New York."  So I went to New York and he offered me a job, he said, "Radio is changing.  I need somebody in my national program director office that knows something about radio, I'll teach you what you need to know about promotion and, and record promotion and so forth."  So I already knew a little bit about it, because Ron White [ph.] and I had done some independent work.  And I started with Sal the, like I say the money was fantastic, the perks were incredible, but I had to live in New York four days a week, I didn't like New York.  I stayed on jo- on the job I loved the job, once I got, I had like twenty-six people that I was in charge of.  Once I proved to them that I could do it, 'cause they didn't, they hated the fact that a radio guy was coming into their domain.  And he was gonna be the boss and here I been doing this job for three years or five years or ten years, and this guy's gonna be in charge of me, so they hated that.  They hated me, they hated, but then I proved to them that I could do it, and then they became some of my best friends.  And it was, it was quite an experience, I enjoyed pretty much every minute of it. I didn't enj- enjoy New York too much.  But I would always find ways to go somewhere else; I would always find ways (laughter) to go back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] the whole nine yards.  What I would do, I would go up there on Monday morning catch a train, and I would come home on Thursday night.  So it, it was, it was a trip but then--
Speaker 1: This, this 1992?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and how, how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years this is WXTR [WXTR Radio; WPRS Radio, Washington, D.C.] or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no, I, I went there after I left, I left the record company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After, after I left I- Capitol Records.
Story_ID: 667625
Speaker 1: I went there but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Capitol Records?
Speaker 1: Sal [Sal Licata] got fired. We won all, we--you know at the what they call it Amer- American Music Awards, we won like fifteen Grammys [Grammy Award] and whatnot and this guy got fired.  Well that's when I found out about there are certain reasons, tax wise that companies let companies expire.  Because they don't want you to make money, they want you to do you know--this a tax write off.  So the company, the main company in Europe wanted us to, to be unsuccessful, the only success we had was Nat King Cole's record, 'This Christmas' or 'I'm Dreaming of, of a White Chris- ' ['White Christmas'] that was it (laughter).  It was, we won all these Grammys, Phyllis Hyman was rolling at that time and we had two or three UMC.  Every time I look at 'Martin' on TV I see the, in, in his apartment he [Martin Payne] has a little sign that says UMC's [The UMC's], that's one of our groups, one of our rap groups.  And so they fired Sal so when they fired Sal they decided that they wanted, they wanted a new; they had let me go and Glynice Coleman.  Because we part, we were part of that whole regime, but they paid us you know I always made sure I got paid.  And so (laughter) what they paid us it was good you know, that's when XTR [WXTR Radio; WPRS Radio] came in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: XTR is back in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is F, FM, right?
Speaker 1: FM.
Speaker 2: All right and you're the morning host for XTR.  Now, so by that time what, what was the format for, for your show?
Speaker 1: We played basically oldies.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were playing, but we just didn't play black oldies, we played oldies, we played The Beatles, Rolling Stones, the whole nine yards.  And we did the morning show from the Watergate Hotel [Washington, D.C.], so we would have an audience.  And it was great we didn't have, never had to go to the radio station, just drive down the Rock Creek Parkway [Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway] and, and go to the Watergate (laughter), it was great (laughter).
Story_ID: 667626
Speaker 1: So you were, you did that from 1992 to--now, now did you was there, is there a fan base somewhat through the whole days of WOL [WOL Radio, Washington, D.C.] and WXR- and WXTR [WXTR Radio; WPRS Radio, Washington, D.C.]?  I, I know it couldn't be as big as the old (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: But there was a--?
Speaker 2: No it, it, it was nice, it was very nice but it wasn't nowhere near the excitement, I mean you gotta remember now I'm not on a black station anymore, I'm, I'm on a white station.  And Johnny Holliday was, still Johnny's doing something D.C. [Washington, D.C.]; he's doing the Washington Nationals baseball team now.  But Johnny, myself, we did the morning show the program director at that time decided that this was gonna be a good mix, Johnny and myself.  I was the biggest black jock [disc jockey] in you know in East Coast and Johnny was the biggest white.  So put them two together man you got a monster going on right, so we, we, Johnny and I did very well until (laughter) Johnny, Johnny said something.  I mean very derogatory to the new program director, they brought in this guy from Kansas City [Missouri] and the guy, he was okay for Kansas City.  But he was not a primetime player, so Johnny said something to him to that extent, and he said, "Well you know, that be the case, you're fired."  Now he didn't know that we had contracts, Johnny had a huge contract, Johnny's was bigger than mine.  Johnny had a big contract which means he got a pay, that's one of the mistakes, the reason they're not on the air right now (laughter).  But he had to pay Johnny, I lasted about a, a year more by myself, I was doing the morning show by myself.  And I lasted about a year more, and then finally I said I don't need this, this is crazy you know. And they didn't need it, and they figured well we'll pay this guy off you know and they paid me enough that I could do nothing for about a year.  And then the next thing I know I was at WPFW [WPFW Radio, Washington, D.C.].  So I went there and I think I was there for two years next thing I know I was at XM [XM Satellite Radio, Inc.; Sirius XM Radio, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, anything, well WPFW you played like you know what you wanted to basically (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did anything I wanted to, anything I wanted, my program director was a guy named Lou Hankins and Louis he was on, on Sundays.  That show I was telling you that Petey [Petey Greene] did awhile back, he did, he took over from Petey nice guy, real nice guy.  And he loved me to death, he said, "You can do anything you want" (laughter); I don't know why he did that.  But in the meantime, I said, "Anything?"  He said, "You can do anything you want," and that's what I did.  I had a ball, I had a ball and I became number one in the city doing (background noise) anything I wanted.
Story_ID: 667627
Speaker 1: But in the meantime they had a--they would, I started doing boat trips, I would have once a month--
Speaker 2: This is the cruises, right (unclear)? The big cruises (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah huge, I mean you know the boat, boat'd hold six, eight hundred people, and what I would do, I would get local bands, you know.  I would get a local band like Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers, The Orioles, [HistoryMaker] Pookie Hudson and The Spaniels, depending on what kind of audience I wanted to do, to deal with.  And I would include dinner, now the dinner would cost about fifteen dollars per person and that's what I would pay the people that ran the boat line.  And then I would, I would charge maybe forty dollars, you get your dinner, you get entertainment you know the whole nine yards.  So I would get to keep maybe fifteen dollars per person out of each one of them, and that went very well (laughter) and it and we sell out.  We got to a point man after the first one, people had such a good time that I mean all I had to do was go in there one time and say I'm having something on November fourth and it be sold out in two days.
Speaker 2: And where would the boat go like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would go down, down the Potomac River, back up, what the place used to be called Marshall Hall [Maryland].  Would go down to Marshall Hall, Marshall Hall was an amusement park, but by now it's closed.  By the time I was doing these, but it would go down there and the boat would turn around and come back up.  And it would take around four hours for the whole trip and we had, we just had a really good time.  So then when I was getting ready go to XM [XM Satellite Radio, Inc.; Sirius XM Radio, Inc.], (laughter) I said well, what can I do, I'll do something here.  So I'm having this big thing, I, we go out to the, to this, what's the name of that place, I'll think of it in a minute.  But it held like fifteen hundred people and we had Ben E. King doing 'Stand By Me,' we had Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers, we had The Spaniels, The Orioles and Je- The Jewels, and James Brown came.  And James wasn't on the announcement, he was just there, he just showed up, and boy people paid seventy-five dollars a person, and we had at least two thousand people, it was incredible, it was totally incredible.  And that was when I was getting ready to leave, I said, "I'm leaving them, I have this last big thing," 'cause when I get to XM I won't be able to do this.  'Cause we'll be doin' national audience and so forth, so we did that.  And--
Speaker 2: That's incred- that's, that sound like really.
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: Yeah great.
Speaker 1: It was.
Story_ID: 667628
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about go-go music.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Some of Chuck Brown's music was considered go-go but what did you, you were a witness I guess to the rise of go-go music in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] which is a distinctive music to the D.C. area.  I don't know what, whatever you wanna say about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah go-go was, was huge, I mean I wasn't a go-go proponent so to speak, but it was big for you know that group of people that really enjoyed that.  Radio wise (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was it first of all I mean this, can you give us just a, a D.C. area's description of what it was?
Speaker 2: I don't know how to describe it, I mean it was, it was a music that basically had this beat, was a different type of beat.  It was almost like Reggae, and it was a different type of beat and it came up only in D.C., it did well in D.C.  In Baltimore [Maryland] it didn't do well, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] it didn't do well, and they tried to take it in various places.  But in, in D.C. there were bands; there were a lot of bands as a matter fact younger than me, that, that's what their thing was, to play go-go music.  And --
Speaker 1: I think, I think an example maybe would be what, what E.U. [Experience Unlimited] the band (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) E.U., 'Doing the Butt' [sic. 'Da Butt'].
Speaker 1: In 'School Daze,' 'Doing the Butt.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a go-go song, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And said that was strictly--
Speaker 1: Kind of had a procession--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --kamba drum.
Speaker 2: Um-hm and Chuck did a lot of, a lot of go-go music most; I mean he's attributed to him and Max, Maxx Kidd who was a promotion man.  But go-go was not at that time, didn't do well on the radio.  Now there, I think KYS [WKYS Radio, Washington, D.C.] or P, PGC [WPGC Radio, Washington, D.C.] one of them has a go-go three hours every day, they do just go-go.  But then it wasn't doing well at all and, but it had it, this little segment of the community that really enjoyed that music, you know.  And like I say I wasn't really a proponent, it all sounded the same to me.
Story_ID: 667629
Speaker 1: Okay so I thought I'd ask you about it before we moved on to XM radio.  This is, so XM's in 2001, right, you go to XM is that?
Speaker 2: No we went in 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000]?
Speaker 2: Yeah we didn't go on the air 'til 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So well XM now this is satellite ra- radio?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And well, well tell us about how, how you got the opportunity and what you were trying to do.
Speaker 2: Well I was doing the show on, on PFW [WPFW Radio, Washington, D.C.], and Hugh Panero who became the general manager of XM Satellite Radio [XM Satellite Radio, Inc.; Sirius XM Radio, Inc.], Hugh used to listen to us every Saturday he would listen.  'Cause he'd be off and, he would le- he loved hearing the old R and B music and so forth.  And I got a call one day, I'd just put a book out what was it, 501 Ways the R- to Listen to R and B Radio [sic. 'The Ultimate Soul Music Trivia Book: 501 Questions and Answers About Motown, Rhythm and Blues and More,' Bobby Bennett and Sarah Smith].  I'd just put, but he bought the book (laughter) and then he read, he went through the book and he cal- I had, they had me down for an interview.  So I came in, at that point they had hired like three people, and I spoke to Lee Abrams, Lee was the guy that in charge of programming period, all 100 stations.  And I convinced him that I knew more about R and B radio and R and B records than anybody else.  So they, they said okay and you know this is what we want, this, "Now you're gonna have to be with this radio station until it, it," you know, "you're going have to build it from scratch," which is what I did.  I, at that time I hired two other, two other jocks and what we would do would record, we do one show live, and then we would record another show.  Say like you would be on twenty-four hours well twelve of them would be live, and twelve would be recorded.  So that's what we did, did that for ten years, had a ball.  It was, it was tough because this came along in two- in the year 2000 and all of the new technology was just coming about at this point.  And I mean you're talking about me, I was a fifty year old jock, you know at that time, and you're trying to teach me new ti- all this new technology.  And I'm like oh wow, so I remember one day riding down New Hampshire Avenue which I had to come on, do New Hampshire Avenue to get to work.  And I'm like I'm quitting today 'cause I can't do this, I just can't do this, this is crazy.  Something happened that day, I don't know what happened, and I still don't know what happened.  All of a sudden all of this information that we had been de- being taught for the last four months, all of a sudden it all came together.  And (laughter) all of a sudden I became the guy doing all this new technology, it was really, really wild.  But after I got it, you know, I finally had it by now, and after I got it and build my station and the whole nine yards, then I really had a good time.  Until the end at the end, they started hiring people that were really not ra- radio people, they were people, they were money people.  And it, it didn't make no difference how you sounded as long as your station was making money.  And as long, mean they would, they would play the same records like you know five times a day you know it was just crazy.  So I remember Charlie Logan, Charlie Logan saying back in 2000, you know, "Those of us who build these radio stations won't be here ten years from now."  And he was absolutely right, but it's funny how things happen.  The, we had a new general manager 'cause our old guy he had left and his name was Jim Davis [ph.] and he came aboard and he said, "I'm a take care of all the people that helped to build this, this whole network."  So what he did all of us are program directors, they offered us a year's salary, we got a year you know for not being there (laughter) that was great.  Plus another year of here's a, another year, boom.  So you know nobody was mad, we walked out, we said okay that's fine, they hired all new guys, they're out of New York [New York] now basically doing most of the shows out of New York.  At that time they were doing everything in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but it worked out very well and you know we were happy, and that's.  That was ten years of my life that you know I really had a good time, and it was, it was fun to see something that had, didn't have legs before, all of a sudden it does now.  That was fun; it was your baby it was you know.  For the first year that this, this happened in two, two o-elev- '11 [2011] I believe.  And I couldn't listen for the first year, I couldn't listen to my station, you know I just didn't wanna hear it.  I didn't wanna hear what somebody else was doing with my station.
Speaker 1: I know they changed the name of the show from 'Soul Street' to 'Soul Town' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it became 'Soul Town,' well 'Soul Town' that was the name of, what they you know when I left, they just changed it around.  Instead of the street 'cause we had a patent on the street, 'Soul Street,' they changed it to soul, 'Soul Town' so they wouldn't be sued (laughter), so.
Story_ID: 667630
Speaker 1: Now if you were starting out in radio today knowing what you didn't know then would you still do it?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I--well let me, let me back up on that a bit, I wouldn't go into it as a disc jockey, I would go into communications in some other capacity.  Whether it be news or production or whatever, but no, as a disc jockey--and, and the reason why, it's unless you're a street jock.  Unless you're you know one of them kids that do the (makes sounds) with the, with the hip hop music it's not the same, its, it's not you're not creating an experience that I wanna hear.  Now you may be creating an experience to somebody who like say pop music, but I would into it in ano- another capacity now.  I don't see the longevity, there's no longevity in it now anymore, and I see peop- people on the air who to me are just people who play music.  They, they're not radio people so to speak.
Speaker 1: I know with the consolidation of all these stations since the federal communication act of ninety--was it '97 [sic. Telecommunications Act of 1996]?
Speaker 2: Yeah right.
Speaker 1: Yeah I mean it's consolidation of all the stations you, you know you got a great personality, Tom Joyner but he's on like half the stations and no local (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --people, I mean do you see that Steve Harvey and others you see that trend as a, as continuing or where do you see the industry in five years?
Speaker 2: No, Lord well hopefully Joyner won't be on (laughter) and, and Steve won't be on, because you know let's face it; they'll be seventy-five, eighty years old.  But in the meantime, I don't know, I think we're becoming so technical, there's so many things going on from a technique standpoint.  I don't see music being or records being or radio being what it was, di- you disc jockeys now you don't have to be talented. If you know how to mix the music that's all you need.  I don't see people listening anymore like they used to listen. It just doesn't have the same affect now that it had twenty, thirty, forty years ago.
Speaker 1: So what do you think is the toughest part of changing from terrestrial radio to satellite radio?
Speaker 2: From which standpoint, as a general manger, as a program director as a--?
Speaker 1: Well I guess, I guess as consumer in some ways I mean what?
Speaker 2: Oh well having the proper equipment (laughter) that's a, that's basically all it is, it's, I have satellite in my car.  And I think all the cars now are equipped with satellite radio. One of the things that I enjoy about it is the fact regardless whether I drive from here to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or where, wherever from here to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I can listen to the same station.  I can listen on satellite because I'm always getting that satellite signal in my automobile, same thing I have satellite here at the house.  And I can listen now--I don't have to worry about terrestrial radio, what they're playing.  Or I don't have to listen to commercials, and that's basically the difference between the two of them, it's commercials.
Speaker 1: Is there any future in well I, I know when we first started before we started, I asked you about [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith and also from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who's broadcasting her talk show ['The Bev Smith Show'] from her home right now, is there a future for that kind of thing, I mean in terms of economic future, do, do you think?
Speaker 2: You know I, I say this, I don't wanna offend Bev because you know she's doing what she does but from a financial standpoint, I don't see it, no.  I don't see, I mean the way radio was and has been, it was controlled, so to speak.  I don't know how you control that, you know somebody goes on the air because they got a little studio at the house, I got one here at home, in my home.  But I don't know how to control what goes out in terms of what I'm bringing in commercial wise and so forth.  And consequently I think it's basically for people who just wanna be on the air, you know.  And they don't care about the money, they just wanna be there, that's, that's the only reason I'd do it.
Speaker 1: Activity for a dilettante for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --somebody or hobby.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so well when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, now you're still doing, you're doing voiceover work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And are, are you doing any the pro- promotional type things like the cruises and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no I think when you retire from that, you retire from that. I had a wonderful time, but I'm having a better time now.
Story_ID: 667631
Speaker 1: You're a--a Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] person that had a wonderful career in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. How--I mean was it hard to move to Florida?  I mean I'm looking right, you have a beautiful place here and everything, I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know I don't think you're suffering but I just was, was it difficult to get out of D.C.?
Speaker 2: No, no because D.C. is changing too, I remember the D.C. of the '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s] you know when it was, traffic wise, it wasn't as bad.  You know I had kids then and consequently I'm looking at schools and the whole nine yards, but it wasn't as difficult as I would think to move.  Be, and I think of it has to do with the fact I had place in Florida for you know seven years before I moved here.  So I knew people, I knew the town, I knew the pace of the town and I can go back to D.C. anytime I want to you know.  But I just don't live there like I used to live there you know.  I enjoy the climate here in Florida, I really like that (laughter)--my last year in D.C. I remember the snow, we had so much snow that year it was incredible.  Around 2011 or '12 [2012] I'm, I'm, I think it was '11 [2011].  And I'm saying what am I doing here, I got a house in Florida what--what, what am I in D.C. for?  And you know that's, that's one of the things that, that I don't miss, I miss D.C., I of course I do miss it no doubt about, but it's changed considerably.  Some of the people that used to be in control of things are no longer there, there's a whole new crew, I enjoy where I'm at you know.
Speaker 1: You, you make a good point I mean you, I mean it's, it's the D.C. of the, the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] is, is not the same D.C. this--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) now I mean you know 'cause it's true, I mean I think it's true for every town.
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so you can't go back to that era.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 667632
Speaker 1: So we always ask this question.  When, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Well no, no from a standpoint of the work world and so forth no. I, I, I've been extremely lucky. I, I don't like to call, to call it luck, I, like I say I prepared for everything that happened (laughter) but, but we all know you need some luck.  I had some luck, I met a lot of incredible people, I had a wonderful time. There's been a few times that I you know would've done something different, but I can't recall what they might be at this point, now that I think about it; I just had fifty years of wonderfulness, you know.  And, and I'm still enjoying it, I mean I'm still having a really good time, I got my health.  You know, it's funny, we go back and we think back and you remember grandparents and whatnot and they'd say you know stuff like (imitates), "Oh I still got my health, I'm doing good."  I'm on this side of the ground, or whatever the case may be, and at that point you're wondering what in the hell is he talking about (laughter). As you get older, then you know.   You said, "Uh-huh now I know what he's talking about," so I got great friends, I got a wonderful wife [Connie Payne], beautiful children, wonderful grandkids, what else I need?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: Now as a, as a per- person that used his voice most of his life for a living, do you have any advice about how to take, take care of the voice?  You have a nice voice and--
Speaker 2: I, I'm a tell you exactly what my grandfather told me when I used to smoke thirty years ago.  He said, "You use your voice to make your money, right?" I said, "Yes, sir," he said, "What are you doing with a cigarette in your hand?"  And at that day, that day I said, "You're right," and I quit smoking, and the way that you control or keep your voice to me was don't smoke.  So that's a, that's my only advice, I don't have any other secrets that one needs to know. Any of you know something that would enable you to talk 'til you're 110.  I don't know you know but right now, doing well.
Story_ID: 667633
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well you know I guess my main concern is I would like everybody to grow up like I did, where I understood the meaning of certain words.  I understood what those words meant, I understand what a man or woman had to go through to get to the point where he, he or she gained the respect that- it was necessary at that time.  Unfortunately we're in a time where people don't really realize what happened to get to the point we're at right now.  I just, I wouldn't you know I would like for us to pay more attention to our children.  And for us to give our kids the reason why the--it's important to be you know what you are and who you are, and I you know you can't go back again.  You can't go home again, we understand that, but the fact that you know we have to appreciate each much more.  And I see now we don't do that as much as we should, that's it.
Story_ID: 667634
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. You have children right and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and grandchildren.
Speaker 2: I got a wife [Connie Payne] that I love probably more today than I did the day before yesterday, I got a son and, and a daughter [Amy Payne].  My son Eric [Eric Payne, Sr.] is a sergeant major in the [U.S.] military, he's doing extremely well, he's over in Germany right now.  He's been to Vietnam, not Vietnam what you call, Iraq, three times, Afghanistan twice, and I hope he doesn't have to go back anymore.  I've got a daughter in Maryland who is a, an attorney, she's a lawyer with the Peace Corps; her country [sic.] that she runs is Africa.  She runs most of the lay, legal situations that they have over there and I got seven grandkids.  My son has four sons, well the oldest one Eric Jr. [Eric Payne, Jr.] is, he's at University at Texas, El Paso [University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas], the other three boys are in I think one's in ninth grade.  One's in sixth grade, one's in fifth grade, and I've got three granddaughters.  Sydney [ph.] is going to the Olympics in 2016 she's a gymnast oh god is she good, she's only seven right now, but boy she can do things that, and she's a twin.  Her twin is Jasmine [ph.], Jasmine is not a gymnast she's smart as she can, she can, she can be and she can fix any computer (laughter).  She's a computer genius, and Zoe [ph.], Zoe is eight, she'll be nine shortly, Zoe is very pretty and she loves puppies.  She loves (laughter) dogs and she loves to get dress up and, so they're doing good, so and their grand- call me, grandfather's G Pop, I'm G Pop, so what can I tell ya?
Story_ID: 667635
Speaker 1: Once again when you look back at everything you've done today what would you consider to be your legacy in the radio business?
Speaker 2: Ah, I don't know I mean it's, it's different than being a basketball player or baseball player and you know you scored so many points or you hit so many homeruns.  It's, my legacy is that I survived, I survived the business, I did very well in the business, I became an inspiration in the business.  I've been doing commercials since the '70s [1970s], the mid-'70s [1970s] which black artists didn't do until that time, I'm still doing them (laughter) and sometime my producer, my producer lives in West Palm Beach [Florida] as a matter of fact.  And sometime we'll be on the phone 'cause we talk every day and you know it's like, "Do you believe we're still doing this at this age?"  And for some reason, God only knows why, my voice hasn't changed, so I still sound the same today as I did twenty years ago.  That's part of the legacy, the longevity of the business or and the person doing the business, I, I think I, other than that I don't have a legacy.  I'm, I've been a pretty good guy, and I got a good family, and I had a wonderful career.
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I think you covered everything.
Speaker 1: All right okay well I don't wanna think about something tomorrow probably or tonight.
Story_ID: 667636
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, you know I--just, the people, the thing that we're doing right now, this is forever, for I mean my grandkids and your kids will be able to look back and see what G Pop was doing in 2014.  It, the bottom line is I would just like to be remembered as a guy that did what he could do not only for his family but for the people around him.  If I wasn't anything but an example, you know if kids they knew it and I didn't know it, that, that is important to me.  To be an example of what can be done with somebody who follows their dream, who has a dream and follows it forever.  And I did that, so I mean there's been a lot of roadblocks, it's been a lot of things that you know you could say well here, this was in the way.  He could've quit and went somewhere else, but that, I didn't, I continued to do what I wanted to do, and I did it.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
