Story_ID: 91207
Speaker 1: Napoleon Brandford, III.  That's N-A-P-O-L-E-O-N, B-R-A-N-D-F-O-R-D, roman numeral III, and I was born February 23, 1952.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have today's date and our location?
Speaker 1: Okay, today is July 24th, 2003, and we are at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your profession?
Speaker 1: My profession is investment banking profession.
Story_ID: 91208
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone that are People Magazine-ish, and I'd like very short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, French.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite French dish or just French food period?
Speaker 2: My favorite dish is foie gras.
Speaker 1: I'd like to have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is probably late--late summer, early fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: French Riviera.
Speaker 1: And, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying is from my grandfather [Eli Harris], which was, "Never pass up the opportunity to keep your mouth shut."
Story_ID: 91209
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you like-do you speak French, by the way?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Anyway, I want to start out by asking you about your mother's-your mother, and if you give what you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Cora Brandford] was born in Hurtsboro, Alabama and moved to East Chicago, Indiana, when she was maybe a year old.  And they just grew up and she grew up in East Chicago.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother, what kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: Very strong, very domineering.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about her growing up at all in East Chicago?
Speaker 2: She talked about it a little bit, but now a whole lot.  I had 1500 relatives in this area, so I knew about more people than my mother probably.
Speaker 1: And what about your father, can you give his name.  You're the third, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father is Napoleon Brandford and he was born in Atlanta, Georgia, and my mother and father got divorced when I was like four years old.
Speaker 1: And did you know anything more about his family?
Speaker 2: Yes. I know a lot about his family, 'cause we kept in touch with all the uncles and aunts throughout the years.
Story_ID: 91210
Speaker 1: And what--can you describe your earliest memory as a child?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory as a child.  I'd say probably when I was a couple of years old and I think we were living in Atlanta, Georgia at the time and I remember just running up a little hill, it's probably the first thing I remember, with my younger brother.
Story_ID: 91211
Speaker 1: And your siblings, can you give their names and you know in your birth order?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Darryl Brandford, that's D-A-R-R-Y-L, Brandford, and he was born February 16, 1953.  And then my other brother's name is Emery Lewis, and that's L-E-W-I-S, and he was born March 23, 1956.
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in East Chicago [Indiana], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give the address that you lived at and sort of talk about, you know, the community that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I grew up at 4856 Melville Avenue, and we lived in that same home probably 80 years, same phone number.  When I was a kid, it was five digits, 82901 and now when I became like four or five, it became like 398-2901, and it's still there.
Speaker 1: So is your mother [Cora Brandford] still there?
Speaker 2: Yes, she's still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's still there.
Speaker 1: Now, can you take yourself back to those early years and just describe what your block or your community was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When I grew up in East Chicago, it was a very small community.  The Calumet section of East Chicago, and it's 17 blocks and bordered by the Canal on one side on the west side, the rail road tracks on the east side, an industrial plant to the north and also to the south, a land plant.  And it was a working-class community, and it's a community where people kept their doors opened except at night and everybody knew everyone.  It was a great environment to grow up in.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your neighbors, who they were or who your friends were?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, actually, mostly family members.  We had four families living--my mother--my grandmother and grandfather lived upstairs, that's Eli Harris, Sr. and Alice Harris was my grandmother and then my brothers and my mother, we lived in the basement.  And in the back house there were four units and my Aunt Rachel (ph.), who's the oldest living aunt, her sister passed when she was sixteen, but her and her family, which is Hugh Thomas, Jr., Houston Thomas and Effie Thomas lived upstairs on the south side of the building.  Right next to them on the north side of the building lived my Uncle Hugh's father, Hugh Thomas, Sr. and Minnie Thomas, their mother.  And then down below that lived my Uncle George Harris, with his kids, Karen Harris and Michael--Marcus Mack (ph.).  And then next to them lived my Aunt Queen with her three kids, Delores Sanders, Sylvia Sanders and Willie Sanders.  So we all grew up in this yard, and so most of my friends growing up at a very early age were cousins.
Speaker 1: So you guys owned the street?
Speaker 2: Literally 500 kids within--500 relatives within that 17 block area, that's where I grew up with.
Speaker 1: So there was a great sense of community in many ways?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 91212
Speaker 1: And tell me, can you just sort of share some times that come to mind about those early years of growing up, anecdotally, maybe around holidays, maybe you know an event?
Speaker 2: The thing I remember most about growing up is well several things.  We always ate dinner together and then my favorite days were the days my grandmother [Alice Harris] would make lemonade in the old tin pitchers and then she would make ham and cheese sandwiches with sweet pickles and those were just like days to die for, I loved those days.  But most of our days were driving around every event, even on Sundays when my grandmother cooked for the whole family, and so we never sat down and ate by yourself. And so I could remember just growing up and what I tried to do was to sit around and listen to the older people and try to gain wisdom and experiences about what life was outside of that 17 block area.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things, do you remember any stories that sort of struck you what were told when you would hear, you know, the stories of the older people?
Speaker 2: One of the things I did was when I was in graduate school, I took Black history.  And what I would do is, is I would read a chapter, I would sit down with my grandfather [Eli Harris] and kind of walk me through what it was really like (unclear) what the book said.  And he mentioned that when my grandmother and he got married in the 1920s they jumped across the broom, even though they had legal marriage too, but they did all the traditional things.  And-
Story_ID: 91213
Speaker 1: One of the things that we did in our family, we kept our family history.  And on my grandmother [Alice Harris]'s side, we knew our original ancestor that came over from Africa.  His name was Patrick Noone (ph.) and his brother came over too, Willie.  And so that was like in eighteen--almost the same year as Amistad, 1838 or something like that.
Speaker 2: Now, how do you know that information?
Speaker 1: It's all written in the bible.
Speaker 2: It--was a family bible passed on?
Speaker 1: Family bible passed on.  And then they give me my--when I was born I was the first boy in probably four years, my mother [Cora Brandford] being the first child kept a detail of our family history on my father [Napoleon Brandford]'s side and then on her side, and so all the history is there.
Speaker 2: And so you grew up with these stories is what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now, where did the family--tell me about you know what happened to, did you say Paul?
Speaker 1: Patrick Noone.
Speaker 2: Patrick Noone, what happened and do you know where he was from?
Speaker 1: We don't know that, I think he was from western part of Africa.  We believe--in my next project, after I finish my--after I finish my book is genealogy, we think was probably the Fulani Tribe because all the men in my family in the 1900s--1900 they were my grandmother's brothers were all six-five and 220 pounds which were like giants back in the day.  All the women were five-ten over 150, and so it was a big family, so we believe one of the Fulani Tribe or the Watusi Tribe or something like that.  We have several seven footers in our family.
Speaker 2: And so he came and then where did--do you know where, was it by the Carolinas?
Speaker 1: The best I can--I think they were actually sold into slavery in Augusta, Georgia, and then the family was dispersed to--that was on my mother's--on my grandmother's side.  That's where I understand about Patrick Noone.  On my grandfather [Eli Harris]'s side, my understanding is that they came--came through the slave trade to Brazil up through Guyana, cause see my father--my grandfather spoke as an Indian, he's always say "how" until the day he died, and came up through Cuba into Alabama.
Speaker 2: Are you talking about American Indian when he would say, "how," or are you talking about--
Speaker 1: I think it was a combination, I think it was the Guyana, but it was French Guyana back in those days, so I think it was something like, I don't know, the South American Indian.
Speaker 2: Now what--were there other things that you learned about your family, you know, sort of background and that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Trying to think of what, it was a lot because there was fifteen brothers and sisters on my grandmother's side and there was sixteen, I think, on my grandfather's side, so it was a whole bunch of stories about a lot of things.
Story_ID: 91214
Speaker 1: Now, let's take it back just in terms of you know what you were like as a-you know what, before I ask that question, you talked about the-your--was it lemonade that your grandmother [Alice Harris] made--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And I would like you to describe even what other sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up in East Chicago [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms food is probably the (unclear) most in our family.  My mother [Cora Brandford] started that tradition where all the meat is cooked on top of the stove, turkey, ham, roast, there's no meat cooked on top of the stove and then the oven was used for baking and then there were great dessert makers of cakes and pies and turnovers and homemade ice cream.  And so that was my most vivid memory.  When I grew up as a kid, we were impoverished, but I didn't know it.  My whole thing was athletics and just spent majority of my time focusing on, as my mama would say, ball, all I wanted was a ball.
Story_ID: 91215
Speaker 1: And, and at that time what were you attracted to first, was it basketball at the time or was it football?
Speaker 2: It was actually baseball.  I wanted to be Ernie Banks [HM], that was one of my heroes growing up as a little kid, and then it became football and eventually basketball, which I actually played.
Speaker 1: Now what was your--do you remember you know going to your first baseball game at home, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my first baseball game I went to was probably eleven or twelve, and a church picnic took us to a [Chicago] White Sox game every year and so I remember going to Comiskey Park.
Speaker 1: And do you remember how you felt during that time, you know, going to your first game?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was exciting I mean to leave East Chicago [Indiana].  It was like going to a new world.  And so those two events were the Riverview Park back in the day, I'm not sure exactly where that was located, but that was a big day to go to Riverview and then to come to Lincoln Park to the zoo and then to go to either a White Sox game or a Cub [Chicago Cubs] game.
Story_ID: 91216
Speaker 1: Did your family--were those annual outings once they began or were they--
Speaker 2: They were actually church outings.  See our family was very geared to the church.  It was--our church was St. Mark African Methodist Episcopal Zion at, I think, 4200 Alder Avenue in East Chicago [Indiana] and that's where it is now, but it moved over there.  But all our events were geared around the church.
Speaker 1: --And you were active as a young person in the church?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Had to as a kid.
Speaker 1: Sunday school?
Speaker 2: Sunday school, little usher, little greeter, trustee, I was everything.
Speaker 1: And who was your minister at the time, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Reverend T.J. Tipp, T-I-P-P.
Speaker 1: Was St. Mark's, was it a very predominant church in--
Speaker 2: In East Chicago?
Speaker 1: --Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, we have about a church on every corner, so we had at least about 50 churches in East Chicago.  But it was the only African Amer-A.M.E. Zion Church in East Chicago.  There was one in Gary [Indiana] and then the rest were over here in East Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now is A.M.E. Zion different from A.M.E.?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Is it different because of its teachings or--
Speaker 2: According to my minister who's a good friend of, man, what's his name, George Edgar Riddick, who used to be a Bishop passed away years ago, whereas the difference between A.M.E. and A.M.E. Zion was the Hudson River.  A.M.E. was set up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] by Richard Allen in 1786 and then shortly thereafter, A.M.E. Zion was set up in New York by Bishop [James] Varick, if I remember right.
Story_ID: 91217
Speaker 1: Tell me what you were like as a young person.  Now you are the oldest child?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest child.
Speaker 1: And so was that sort of drilled down in terms of your, you know, expectations although you did have a lot of cousins around you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a kid I was the oldest and so my mother [Cora Brandford] instilled in me responsibility of taking care of my youngest brother [Emery Brandford].  And so whatever I did, he was attached to me.  And so it was like--I was the only kid, but he was like he was more than just my baby brother, and so I was responsible for his well-being.
Speaker 1: And you took that role seriously?
Speaker 2: Had to.
Speaker 1: Now as a person were you shy, you were probably a very--were you shy, were you--did you have--were you introspective, were you--
Speaker 2: According to my mother I was very shy growing up until about, I don't know, eight or nine and then I was in an accident.  I was riding my bicycle down the street, and then there was an alley right before the street, there was a blind corner, and so I was going as fast as I could and then a gentleman, who was Chinese descent, pulled out and I ran right into his car.  And so I hit it head on and didn't--after that she said I never stopped talking and I started stuttering a little bit.
Speaker 1: You started stuttering?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you started talking?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 91218
Speaker 1: Now, but were you--besides sort of the love of baseball, like school, let's take you--what school did you attend for elementary school?
Speaker 2: I attended Carrie Gosch Elementary School in the--I was supposed to attend Garfield [Elementary School] that went from the fifth grade to the seventh grade, but it burned down that summer before I was supposed to go there and so I went to mobile home, right down the street from my home and then two years later, Carrie Gosch was built, and so I attended Carrie Gosch.
Speaker 1: And that took you up to the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: The sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that you know influenced you?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, my first teacher was Miss Bryant.  She was my kindergarten and first grade teacher.  And the amazing thing about my mother [Cora Brandford] is that I had all my report cards from kindergarten to twelfth grade.  And so Miss Bryant--I had to go back and read some of them sometime and the first report card was that he's very nice and very well-behaved, and my second report card, which I just still deny, but it said, he's beginning to show signs of meanness and stubbornness, so she's my favorite teacher.  And I actually gave scholarships away last year in her honor, a Miss Eula, E-U-L-A, Mae Bryant and then also my fifth grade teacher, who became my assistant basketball coach was a guy name Hank Zawacki, and Coach Zawacki taught geography.  And so I really got into travel and those kinds of things and wanted to see the world based upon that class.  But those are my two favorite teachers.
Speaker 1: So Miss Bryant, why did you like her so much, what about her?
Speaker 2: I think she was my first teacher and I would say that she was also very smart, but she's also very beautiful.  And unfortunately she had a coma after her second child, she was in a coma for thirty years before she passed.  But she was a beautiful lady.
Speaker 1: And were you at that time attracted to you know math or science or you talk about geography?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was more interested in geography, I was good in basic math, which are additions, subtractions, multiplications, division, but I hated algebra, geometry and the rest.  That was not my forte.
Speaker 1: And you're saying Mr. Zawacki, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was your fifth grade teacher and then later your coach?
Speaker 2: And then when I went to high school, he was the freshman coach and then became the assistant, the junior varsity coach or assistant coach for the city varsity basketball team.
Story_ID: 91219
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what appealed to you about history, what was it that sort of you know, besides opening a world and what was the world that he [Hank Zawacki, fifth grade teacher] really opened up for you?
Speaker 2: Well the history became a subject because of my family sitting around listening to my grandfather [Eli Harris] and all of the other cousins in the neighborhood that lived around the corner or next door, and so I just became fascinated with our own history and I was only interested really in American history, I didn't care anything about European history, which I wish I had focused on that a little bit more as much as I travel.
Speaker 1: And were there any--so your family--well then school was American history, do you think it was taught well, did you learn a lot in school or was it more your--the African American part of that you learned from your family?
Speaker 2: I learned the African American part from my family, I didn't learn--I didn't take any subjects regarding African American history until I got out of high school.  And so it was really focusing on American history.  One of the things that we had to do was join a book club 'cause you had to go and read a book at least once a month, and so I would try to find things that I was interested in.  And so my favorite book, I remember reading was, as a kid, was John Paul Jones, the great naval captain during the [American] Revolutionary War, and so I enjoyed that story more than most of the others.
Speaker 1: And why did that story appeal to you?
Speaker 2: I think it's because it was adventure and I've always been a--I don't know what it is about me, but I always felt I was bigger than my hometown and I wanted to get out and see the world and I entirely forgot where that came from.
Speaker 1: Isn't John Paul Jones wasn't he--
Speaker 2: He's the captain of the--
Speaker 1: --Captain of the ship.
Speaker 2: --Of the ship.
Speaker 1: Of the ship, that's right.
Speaker 2: Of the [U.S.] Navy, yeah, the Revolutionary War.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 91220
Speaker 1: So, now are there other things like before we got to high school, you know, events or sort of things that are childhood stories that you remember?
Speaker 2: Was just very active in a lot of things.  Very active in the boy--Cub Scouts and so we did a lot of that with the kids in the neighborhood and mostly just playing in the yard with my brothers.
Speaker 1: See what I'm trying to understand is what helped form you during those years, you know, either within your neighborhood or your community or your schooling, you know, a church, you know, what things really sort of helped form you?
Speaker 2: I would say it was all the same, church and school and family were all the same. I mean, people who were instrumental in--teachers from my community taught elementary school and they taught at church, and you grew up with their kids and so you knew everybody, you knew everyone so it was more maybe a tribal-type community, if you envision what West Africa was like, having been over there, it was sort of like that.  We were all this Calumet tribe, and there were a couple of chieftains and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now did people--do you know at what point adults saw something in you or recognized?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure they ever did.  I was not--I was told by most people I would never be anything or I was not encouraged, almost any regard.  But I had--and I have been trying--and that's why I want to go back and do my genealogy and see what this Patrick Noone (ph.) guy was like, because I always had this drive that I was going to be--I was good, I was successful, I never had any self-doubt about anything I ever wanted to do.  I decide I wanted to do it, I figure I could do as good as anyone.  And I've been trying to figure out where that came from cause I--I haven't been able to see it in my family yet.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like people were choosing you and saying you were the appointed one, is was that you--
Speaker 2: No, it was my brother, 'cause my brother was much smarter than I am.  Darryl [Brandford] was much smarter and he was also, when he came out of high school, he was chosen as the most likely to succeed in the whole school.  And so I was viewed as, I'm not sure what, but I never really focused on that, I always focused on what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: --And so academically, how did you do?
Speaker 2: I did very well in what I wanted to do and I didn't do anything in what I didn't want to do.  And so I got As or I was in the Cs, Cs or Ds.
Story_ID: 91221
Speaker 1: And what were your, like high school, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: East Chicago Roosevelt [High School, East Chicago, Indiana].
Speaker 1: And, at this point, now what time do you start playing basketball, do you start playing it on the neighborhood court and--
Speaker 2: It started on the neighborhood court and so we started when you get busy, pick up a ball.  But I started playing organized in the fifth grade, and so we played fifth and sixth grade at Carrie Gosch [Elementary School] and then went to Roosevelt.  Roosevelt was unusual in today's school, it went from the seventh grade to the twelfth grade, so it was like a junior high.
Speaker 1: --So you didn't have a junior--okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't a junior high school.
Speaker 1: So you started in seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They had--how are the teams done?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade, eighth grade, ninth grade and then--seventh grade, eighth grade and then the freshman team and then the junior varsity is like tenth or eleventh and the varsity is, depending how good you were, tenth, eleventh or twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you--when did you--was that a progression that you felt that you got sort of better as-'cause you were with the team that won, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your historic team.  And I just want to talk about the progression of that.  There was in your, what senior--
Speaker 2: Senior year.
Speaker 1: --Senior year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think what had happen was my first basketball game I ever saw on TV was Loyola [of Chicago] Ramblers upset Cincinnati [Bearcats] in 1963.  And so that's when I decided I really wanted to go after being a basketball player.
Speaker 1: And who was on that team, that historic team?
Speaker 2: Leslie Hunter [Les Hunter], John Egan and it was another gentleman [Jerry Harkness, HM], I can't think of his name right now, he's a left-handed guy who was the star of the team, but that was a real big upset that year.
Speaker 1: Wasn't there an African American that was part of that?
Speaker 2: Yes, Leslie Hunter was--
Speaker 1: Leslie Hunter, okay.
Speaker 2: --But it was also the other guy from--
Speaker 1: It's another guy--
Speaker 2: Holly Hunter, I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: And so can you describe that game, you know?
Speaker 2: That game was--they were favored by 20 points Cincinnati, and somebody thought it was going to be a big--a big blowout and so my cousin, Willie Sanders, we call him Butch, said let's go watch this game with me and so I sat down and watched the game and as you can see, Cincinnati had the majority Anglo ball players and there was at least three starting on Loyola, maybe four.  And so I was having to pulling for those guys, but I've always pulled for the underdog, cause I always felt I was the underdog, so out of that, when they won, I was just thrilled to death.  It was a very close game too.  It went to the last thirty seconds, I think, before they won the game.
Speaker 1: Now at that point, that this game happens, 1963, you're thirteen, right.
Speaker 2: Just thirteen.
Speaker 1: You're 13 at that point.  No, eleven, '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: Fifty-two, right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Eleven, right.
Speaker 1: Right, you're eleven.  And so you are--are you seeing yourself in that game and saying you know I want to go on and be a basketball star?
Speaker 2: I think when I saw that game, I decided I wanted to play basketball.  I didn't think about being a player or anything up until that time--before I wanted to be a baseball player.
Speaker 1: And that was--so up until that point, were you playing basketball and baseball at the same time?
Speaker 2: In the summertime you played everything but by season, but I played basketball and baseball growing up.
Speaker 1: And so Ernie Banks [HM], had you ever had a chance to actually meet him?
Speaker 2: No, I have not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not even to this day?
Speaker 2: No.  I've talked to him on the phone.
Story_ID: 91132
Speaker 1: You said you started playing basketball in fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did you start seeing that you had some talent there?
Speaker 2: I think I saw it probably in the seventh grade, more likely the eighth grade, 'cause our eighth grade team was undefeated, and so it was at that point and time where we thought we could win the state championship.  By time we became a senior and I shifted my focus from baseball mostly to basketball because I had a local hero that I actually got a chance to meet.  And that person was Cazzie Russell, went to Carver High School [now Carver Military Academy] in Chicago [Illinois] and he might have been the first black star in the Big Ten [Conference], the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And so I saw them, him and Oliver ["Ollie"] Darden and Bill Buntin lose in a championship game, I think that Bill Bradley upset and so on and so forth.  But he came to one of the banquets as a guest speaker, and I never saw anyone that eloquent.  And he actually talked about a philosophy that I adopted then and still follow today.  And like to meet him still one of these days.  I'm a try to track him down and let him know what he did for one kid.  And his philosophy was--the top of his speech was "think, then act and as you act, that's who you are or what you are."  I never wrote it down, I just remembered it.  And so everything I do of significance or whatever I do in life it doesn't (unclear) my subconscious, I go back to the Cazzie Russell statement, "think, then act, and as you act that's who you are or what you are."
Speaker 1: And that day, why did that have such a profound effect on you, do you think?
Speaker 2: I think because I saw this guy on TV, he was articulate, and it's like man, I'd like to be like that guy when I grow up.
Story_ID: 91133
Speaker 1: And what--who was on your team and what position did you play?
Speaker 2: On my team was Jim Bradley [James Bradley], he played center.  This high school or freshman?
Speaker 1: You can start--you can start in eighth grade?
Speaker 2: I can start in eight grade and then Pete Rancifer [Woodrow Rancifer], he played forward, I played forward, guy, an Italian guy name Jim Rossi [James Rossi] who had played with--all the way for four years, Tony Avington, Mac Washington, Bob Warner [Robert Warner], Jim Kroll (ph.), and a couple of guys, I don't quite remember their names.
Speaker 1: And did that team pretty much stay intact or was it--how did it get--
Speaker 2: The four of us, Rancifer, Bradley, Brandford and Rossi played together for the next four years.
Speaker 1: That's pretty--does that happen often though that teams are formed that early and they stay together like that?
Speaker 2: I think in Indiana it is because you don't get, you know, whatever school you go you go to, and so I think it is, that's one of the advantages of being a small town school.  And the thing I remember most in the eighth grade is, and it's all in my book, is we sat down on the floor, three of us, Pete Rancifer, Jim Bradley and myself, and we said we're gonna win the state championship in our senior year.  And we sort of made a pact at that point.  I remember like clear as it was yesterday, and we did that.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn about sort of team sports you know during your basketball years?
Speaker 2: I love team sports, I love basketball in terms of the team sport because you have to win as a team, but you still have to play as an individual, you know, held responsible and accountable for your own--for the person you're guarding, but you're also part of a greater whole and so you learn to make sacrifices, you learn to know what it's like to have support and the real commitment to winning.  So that's the thing that I liked about it a lot.
Speaker 1: And what about being a forward, you know, what did you learn, you know, a lesson about being a forward, what to do or what not to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, as a forward that was the scoring position on the team and so you sort of become the team leader and the way our offense was set up.  But shortly after my eighth and ninth grade, I became the center of the team and so the position changed from the standpoint of they needed someone who had good hands to be able to handle the ball and so I fulfilled that role, so I became center.
Speaker 1: And your coach can you talk about him and you know how he influenced, I mean I'm talking about high school?
Speaker 2: High school.  We had a coach in high school the varsity team, was a guy name Bill Holzback, he had been the coach--assistant coach for many years but then became the head coach when I was a junior and a senior.  And so we didn't have a good relationship.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you have a good relationship?
Speaker 2: I think it was because, several reasons, one I was a big guy, was fast and I was quick.  And in high school you had to play football in order to play basketball.  And so I was the first kid of my size and talent who decided not to play football, and so I would think I was blackballed for the first few years by the administration 'cause I wouldn't play, 'cause I wanted to play basketball and so I don't think he necessarily got over that.  But Coach [Hank] Zawacki was always there.  And so that's who I relied upon.
Speaker 1: And when you say you got blackballed, what do you mean in terms of how often you were called into a game?
Speaker 2: Game, yeah, I think so.  I should have been playing much earlier I thought based upon the guys that were playing on the team, but I didn't.  And so I know he didn't care that much for me.  I think had much greater respect after I left the school, cause he saw the desire and the commitment and the effort that I put into it and was never disrespectful or we never had words or anything like that, but it was always tension there.
Story_ID: 91134
Speaker 1: And--now your whole regiment, what was it? Was basketball played differently during those years?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Our basketball team was sort of like, they give the credit to Bobby Knight [Bob Knight], but it's more like bob--Coach Hank Zawacki.  We had a patterned offense, where we had to run plays on every play, sort of like the rules they play under Phil Jackson, the triangle offense, you had plays, it's not up and down the floor, taking shots willy-nilly, you learn the fundamentals of the game.  And even today I'm still playing against these high school kids and I see Coach Zawacki in the back of my head, and in my head every time, you didn't block that guy off basketball, you hit the open man, why did you take that bad shot, and so those are the things that were drilled into you.  You spent all practice running plays and playing defense.
Speaker 1: What did Coach Zawacki, what other things did he teach you that were you know you thought made him such a good coach?
Speaker 2: Well I think he taught you how to be a respectable human being.  He taught you plays but never talked about being a basketball player, talked about what it meant to be like a young kid growing up, what it meant to your family and when I finished my book, I called him, the first thing he asked me was how's your mother [Cora Brandford] doing and how's your family and that kind of thing before we even talked about the book.
Speaker 1: Is he still alive today?
Speaker 2: He's still alive today.  He's living in Las Vegas [Nevada], he and his wife, and his kids are in different parts of the country.
Story_ID: 91135
Speaker 1: Now this is, let's see, we're in East Chicago [Indiana] in the--this is still like the mid-sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Sixties.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Are there any racial sort of overtones at all within you know East Chicago that you're aware of?
Speaker 2: East Chicago was very segregated.  There are two high schools, [East Chicago] Roosevelt [High School] and East Chicago Washington [High School].  And before 1954 Brown v. Board of Education, all of the African Americans from my section of town, which in theory, you're supposed to go to Roosevelt, went to Washington.  And so there was a big following of my mother [Cora Brandford]'s generation for Washington High School Basketball.  And not Roosevelt because no basketball played at Roosevelt and so that was one of the obstacles we fought.  We were like--my team was sort of like step children to the City of East Chicago cause nobody wanted us, the people from Harbor didn't want us and the people from East Chicago didn't want us.  And there were certain parts of East Chicago that you couldn't go to.  There were no signs that said colored and white, but you knew you couldn't go to 'em, and that's all the restaurants.  And I'm just shocked at the places now when I go home that people live all over the country, I mean all over the city, where before it was really, you couldn't live outside of the 17 blocks except a new addition in town which was like 12 blocks, and then brickyard was one block.  Outside of that new African Americans lived on west side of East Chicago.
Speaker 1: How many blocks from the school when you went to--
Speaker 2: I'd say well I think it was 1200 students, my graduating class was 220 and I would say we were probably 25 percent of the population.  So I went to a racially balanced school.  And the school kids were all very close.  There was no racial tension between the kids, but it was the administrators, the principal was a good guy, but the assistant principals and some of their deans, some of the professors, they were still caught back in the Brown v. Board of Education pre-days.
Speaker 1: --And do you think the other coach or coach that there weren't racial overtones with them, not [Hank] Zawacki?
Speaker 2: [Bill] Holzback, I don't think it was.  No I just think it was--
Speaker 1: It's just that he was upset with you--
Speaker 2: --It was an individual thing.
Speaker 1: --Right.
Speaker 2: He loved my brother and some of the other ball players, but especially the ones who played football.  See he liked the ones who played football and then came out and played basketball.
Story_ID: 91136
Speaker 1: But that's a lot of, that's a lot of playing actually to do that.  Why had you made the decision not to play football, you didn't like football?
Speaker 2: Well I loved football, but the head coach was a guy name Chet Lakowski (ph.), I think Chester Lakowski, and they called him Chet the Jet.  Chet was a big guy who's a former, I think, a drill instructor in the military.  And so he ran it like a military school, like a boot camp.  And the thing that I didn't like was it was demeaning to some of the athletes to go to the game and see him yank your helmet or he'd kick you in the butt and stuff like that, you know, get back out there and stuff like that and I wasn't dealing with that.  And so that was the--and plus back in the day you know the climate has changed, but it would be cold, the ground would be frozen in this area by mid-October, and the season went to the middle of November and I just didn't want to risk an injury, you know a knee or a leg or an ankle and then couldn't play basketball.  And so that's why I didn't play.
Speaker 1: Now were you a typical sort of high school star in sports.  You know how the athletes are stars in and of themselves?
Speaker 2: Not back in those days, it was a--there was a different environment.  I think it was so much discipline about all the coaches and administration, you would never like--allowed to be like kids are today.
Speaker 1: Now what else is sort of forming you as a person, you know, in your high school years, are you, you know, what are your interests you know, what's capturing your attention?
Speaker 2: Oh, two things, basketball and travel.
Speaker 1: Travel?
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: Now were you traveling more during this time or were you still reading about it?
Speaker 2: I was still reading about it, but the team would take trips on the bus to various parts of Indiana, and so it was this thrill to go to little bitty towns like Mentone or Elkhart, Indiana or that's about as far as we went, but it was, you know, outside of the Calumet section of East Chicago.
Speaker 1: And what was that doing, you were becoming aware of yourself as a, you know, I mean, you were able to give your desire to travel some?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think it was more--part of the travel came from wanting to play against better competition, different competition, and so I was being very, very competitive.  And so I wanted to see what it was like to play against all these other kids and all these other schools that you read about and you heard about you know and so I wanted to test my ability against other people.
Story_ID: 91137
Speaker 1: Do you remember a game where you felt that you let your team members down.  Was there ever such a game like that?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't think so. Yeah, we didn't lose many games so we lost like three games.
Speaker 1: What was your record at the end of you know the last year?
Speaker 2: The last year we were at 28-0.  Yeah, we were the fourth team in history of Indiana to go undefeated.
Speaker 1: So this is what I'm saying, you sat down, you said in the ninth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The four of you went and decided that you were going to win the state championship?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the night that you won the state championship, can you take us back to that night and talk about you know even the game in the locker room beforehand and the game itself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think parts of the game--well actually, back in those days you had to play two games in one day to win a championship.  So we played the morning game at one o'clock and we ended it like around three and the next game was at seven-thirty.  So I went back to the hotel, I never will forget I was watching UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] against Jacksonville and that was big upset that year, cause Jackson had two seven footers and they [UCLA] had two six-nine guys, Curtis Roe and Sidney Wicks, and they beat em.  And so I was sitting there in my room with my roommate for that one night, was a guy named Pete Rancifer [Woodrow Rancifer], and Pete was just talking about so this is what we dreamed about.  And he kept saying, he wasn't starting anymore, he was the eighth man or something like that.  He said man I don't want no silver ring, do not come back here with a silver ring, only come back here with a gold ring.  And so I've had a chance to watch the game on video tape many times, actually I have a video tape of the two games.  But when the game started it was like it was a suspended state where you didn't hear the crowd, you only saw your team members and evidently it's like slowed down, incredibly slow, and so you can just hear everything.  And so the game was pretty close in the first half and then we blew it open in the end.  And then I remembered the star of that team was Jim Bradley [James Bradley] who was probably the greatest high school basketball player of all time.  I remember we hugging each other as the coach took us out of the game for like the last 15 seconds of the game.  But it was more of a--when the game was over with, it was more like, it's over, it wasn't like yelling and screaming, initially it was on the stage when the game was initially over.  When we got to the locker room, it was just so draining to go four Saturdays in a row and win two games, and what was unusual about our team and one thing that made us close together was that we had 28 (unclear), and we only had one game in our home court.  The rest of the games were either at cross-town rival's court or at a visitor's court.  And so you felt that bond that still exist today among the teams because you had to come together to support because your administration wasn't supporting you, the kids in the class were and the family members, but nobody else was really supporting the team.  And so that brought us together and so that was I think the biggest thrill was to have that kind of long-lasting friendships.
Story_ID: 91138
Speaker 1: After--What are you wanting to do though after that point, are you planning to go on to college?
Speaker 2: I was planning--the draft had taken place and so I was not going to Vietnam and so--and there were a lot of scholarships--there were a lot of letters that were not forwarded to me from recruiters that I found out later, either administration, or whatever, the coach, I never got 'em.  And so the first thing I did was I signed up for computer school at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], full-time, to make sure I wasn't gonna get drafted.  And then shortly thereafter our coach, I don't remember his name, but he was from Malcolm X Junior College [Chicago, Illinois], he came by and asked me to go to school, so I was giving it serious thought.  But I wanted to go to a four-year college, I didn't want to go--I got a lot of letters from Pepperdine [University, Malibu, California] but California I thought was just a little bit too radical for me, growing up in a small town.  I wasn't ready for that.  And so this guy named Jack Spencer, Cactus Jack who's a coach who's from Davenport, Iowa, went to university--he was a coach at University of Nevada [Reno, Nevada] and so I happened to be home and one day he just showed up on my doorstep, unannounced with another gentleman, they called him Pug, I don't remember his real name, but he was a marketing executive here, and he showed up on my doorstep and he said we'd like for you to come to the University of Nevada, we'd like to offer you a full scholarship.  I'd like for you to come out and visit the University.  And so I was overwhelmed by that and they had stopped by and saw one of my other players on the team, John Davis.  And so--so if both of you guys come out and think about going to school there.  And so they gave us tickets and we were gonna fly out to Nevada.  And the only thing about that I didn't like was that it was the day of the championship game between the [New York] Knicks and the [Los Angeles] Lakers, and so I had to miss their game.  But that was my very first flight and the first time I ever saw a mountain.  And so it was interesting to fly to Reno, Nevada, and when I got there, the first thing I explored was not the scheduled books, but what was the travel schedule.  And the traveling schedule was to Seattle [Washington] twice, Portland [Oregon], Los Angeles [California], four games in the Bay Area, Iowa, Duquesne [University] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and St. Joe [Saint Joseph's University] in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I said wow I'm going to school here.  And so that's where I decided to go to college.
Speaker 1: So then your family is excited about this whole sequence of events I bet?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the--potentially the first one to finish to going to college, not go to college, but to finish college of all my family.  My cousin went for three years and two courses to go and didn't finish at Oklahoma City University [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma].  And so right before my grandmother [Alice Harris] passed, I told her that I would be the first to finish college, and so that was the goal, and so I was driven to do that.
Story_ID: 91139
Speaker 1: Now so that summer before going off to the University of Nevada [Reno, Nevada], what were you doing, were you working for the summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was working for the summer.  My first job--I had been working for the A & P Tea Company [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] in school from tenth grade to twelfth grade, but I needed to make more money.  And so my cousin got me a job at Inland Steel [Company], and they had me on the midnight shift.  And I worked one midnight and quit.  I said there's was no way in the world am I gonna do this.  It was midnights and there was all this hot steel coming down this unbelievable ramps and then you had to take this steel and you had to roll it out even and just pull it and to move it to a truck or whatever.  I did that for one night and that was it.  And I was able to get a job at Union Carbide [Corporation] and--but the good thing about those jobs in East Chicago [Indiana], the jobs that I had was they wanted kids to go to college and so they were not--high-paying jobs, much more than you get paid in the mill or anything like that, but a couple of dollars more, but they give you the most menial jobs and so there's this fence that's about a mile and a half long down the main street in East Chicago, Kennedy Avenue, and I had to paint that fence with people making fun of you and stuff like that, kidding you and so I had to paint both sides of the fence, that was my job for the summer, to paint this fence.
Speaker 1: So you said that was it?
Speaker 2: Well I said I'm going to college, I needed money so I'm going.
Speaker 1: But that was better than working in the mill?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't work in the mill.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Can you, just before we leave, you know, East Chicago, and (unclear) the culture, from the standpoint--a lot of people worked in the mill?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was your destiny to go through the mill.  And then we had counselors--it was actually college prep course--college prep track versus the industrial track.  But the goal was for everyone to go through the mill because they needed labor to support that high growth in Lake County at the time was the highest per capital working class community in America.  You could make $50,000 to $60,000 working overtime, which was a lot of money back in those days with the cost of living.  But I wanted more than that.
Speaker 1: But was that--but you're saying the culture, so was everyone encouraged because you could get a lot of money, you know--
Speaker 2: To go to the mill.
Speaker 1: --You know, you could save your money or what?
Speaker 2: 'Cause you can get a car pretty quickly and get a house very reasonable, so that was the goal.
Story_ID: 91140
Speaker 1: Was there anyone that besides, you know, the traveling of the teams that exposed you and your reading, was there anyone else that you saw and said I want to be like that person?
Speaker 2: Well I had a lot of mentors.  But one of them I had growing up was a guy name Jim Bowman.  Jim didn't finish high school, but he was the highest ranking African American at A and P Tea Company [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company], the A and P Store, the assistant manager.  And so my Aunt Mildred got me a job working with him in high school and so he was the first professional I ever met in that sense in running a business.  And so he took me under his wing and basically taught me what it meant to be--to provide good service and things I never forgot, which was the customer's always right no matter what and you know about being courteous and wearing white shirts, still hard for me to (unclear) white shirts, and cleanliness and being on time, so I learned all those things working with him.  And so he was big person in my life but he was killed at early--he was shot on New Year's Day, 1970, he was tragically killed.  And that was a big disappointment.
Speaker 1: Anyone else, you said you had other mentors too?
Speaker 2: I think my uncle Eli.  Uncle Eli was a police officer, but he had traveled all over the world.  He was a former marine and he was Kojak before Kojak and he is still like that.  But he'd been all over the world and he would always bring back cards and sent postcards and so I always wanted--I wanted to travel like my Uncle Eli.  And so he was another mentor for me, and then I had older cousins, but I said people who had direct non-relative relationships those were the main ones.
Story_ID: 91141
Speaker 1: Okay. So you got to the University of Nevada. Is the University--
Speaker 2: Nevada.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At Reno [Nevada].
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: At Reno.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you get there and you're excited.  This is a whole, you know, you're going to be traveling, seeing mountains, you know, you're out of East Chicago [Indiana].  And tell me, so how is that first year, because you've been on this very contained environment your whole life.
Speaker 2: That first year did several things, I had been in the shadow of the great ball player Jim Bradley [James Bradley], and so we had won a championship, so I wanted to step out and see what it was like, what my own skill was if I was going to be on a starting team.  And so I went out there and I still hold the freshman records for scoring 25 points six rebound--points a game and 18 rebounds a game, so I was like freshman all-American.  But the good thing is is that there's a gentleman who is now the superintendent of Harvey-Dixmoor School District.  His name is Alex Boyd.  Alex had just graduated from University of Nevada.  He was a like a freshman coach.  He was going to get his master's degree.  He said, "Napoleon, let me tell you, you need to get an education, and let me tell you why, the reason why is because you get drafted by a professional team and the (unclear) is more than just your ability, you got to get drafted by the right team, you got to have some connections with the right coaches and the scouts."  He said, "look at me," he said, "I got drafted number two by the Chicago Bulls and they only had one spot on the team available.  Well that year they drafted Howard Porter out of Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], the number one player that year in high school and college basketball."  And so Alex didn't make the team, he never got a chance to play pro ball.  So I saw that example and I said as good as he is, he's better than I was.  I wouldn't tell him that, but he was better than I was.  And I said well I better get an education just in case I don't make it.
Speaker 1: And what are you thinking you want to major in at that point, when you came out 'cause you were on a basketball, right, scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I decided very early political science and history was going to be my major.
Speaker 1: Now you know you hear a lot, and I want to know about your experience you know at University of Nevada [Reno, Nevada], I'm wondering because they say, you know, a lot of times when people come on a sports scholarship, there's tremendous amount of effort in terms of playing, you know, not so much on academics and so did you find that the you know it was play, play, play, you know, practice, practice, practice and not much time or--
Speaker 2: I did that but it was plenty of time to study.  There was--you had practice starting at four o'clock, four-thirty and for two and a half hours, but that was it, the rest of time was supposed to be school.  They had folks did a whole bunch of other things other than school.
Speaker 1: --And tell me who was on that team with you, do you remember the people on that team?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  John Davis, who was my cousin, we played the [Indiana] state championship team together, so we were roommates.  And so we both went to school in Nevada and then Van Patterson (ph.) from Houston, Texas, and then John Jackson, he was from Reno, Nevada, and a gentleman from Oakland, California named Tyrone Victor (ph.), those are the main ones I remember, Aaron Geng (ph.) from a small town like Winnemucca, Nevada.
Speaker 1: And so were you surprised at your own progress, or you felt that you had it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Because you had been in the shadow of--
Speaker 2: Bradley.  Oh no, but I know it was good because when I was in high school the two biggest running season games, I was the leading scorer.  But I didn't get much credit because he had been the star for the last three years.
Speaker 1: And then the coach [Bill Holzbach] had been sort of holding you back?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, we got a (unclear) take me out the game.
Speaker 1: Huh.  Is that what he would do?
Speaker 2: Well, he actually told me--he told me before the season started, which I give him a lot of credit for.  One of my good friends is Michael Artis the sixth man, he said, "Napoleon," right before we started the season, he said, "I'm gonna start building for the next year.  And so Michael Artis went and put out a lot, so I want you to know that."  And I didn't say anything, I just said okay.  But I said to myself, once I write my book, I said well why didn't you do that when I was a junior to let me play.  And then I asked Mike about that, maybe six months ago, and he said, "Nope, he never told me anything," he said "I never knew that."  And so that's how I knew what his mind games were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was determined when I got in the game, I was going to perform so he couldn't take me out.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what, you know, because playing like that takes sort of razor-sharp concentration, I'm just trying to describe, how do you get yourself into that mindset, is what I'm trying to understand?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where I got it from, but I knew what we did required a lot of hard work and so I would through, (unclear) the kids in my neighborhood, I would go to the basketball court on my own and shoot jump shots, made a thousand jump shots by myself.  I would go out and do my own conditioning, my own running, so whenever I got the opportunity, I would be prepared to play.  So I knew it was gonna come one day, I didn't know when it was gonna come, but I wasn't gonna miss it cause I wasn't ready.  And I think I did something that--I think one of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s speeches, he talked about being prepared.  And one of the things I found out in this whole book, my mother [Cora Brandford] told me that I used to play every night before I go to bed from like my--when Dr. King died until I graduated, I had a dream.  And I think my dream was to bring the state championship, but I didn't play then so I always had this dream of doing something, I didn't know what it was, but I always had this--
Story_ID: 91222
Speaker 1: Who sat you down and talked to you and said, that first year, who said, you know, I was going--
Speaker 2: Alex Boyd.
Speaker 1: --Alex Boyd, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Boyd.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was the first year?
Speaker 2: First year.
Speaker 1: And he said he was getting ready to go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He had tried out for the [Chicago] Bulls and didn't make it because it was only one spot available and so he went on to get his master's degree, he had enrolled.
Speaker 1: Now, what other--the first year you're playing the start--you said start position?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what other things are happening that first year, you're traveling?
Speaker 2: You're traveling all the time, going down to the Bay Area [California], and that first weekend I went to the Bay Area, I said this is where I want to live the rest of my life 'cause I didn't like Reno [Nevada].  But you know, when I went to school that was the year I got the [Black] Panthers and--had went up to Cal Sacramento [Sacramento State, Sacramento, California], with the rifles and all that so it was just a little bit too wild for a young kid coming from East Chicago [Indiana].
Speaker 1: What did you like the mountains and the ocean, what did you like about the Bay Area?
Speaker 2: The beautiful sisters.
Speaker 1: I was wondering when we were getting around to that?
Speaker 2: That was it, the beautiful sisters.  That's what I love about basketball too, the travel.
Speaker 1: I was wondering.
Speaker 2: I remember riding in Oakland [California], riding with Tyrone Victor (ph.), went to Oakland High School and coming off the freeway on Park Avenue and all these beautiful ladies were lined up on the lawn sitting down.  I said, man, this is where I need to be.
Speaker 1: So you had found heaven.
Speaker 2: I found heaven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91223
Speaker 1: Now, are there other things, what about classes, you said you were taking, that's when you decided to go into--
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Political science.
Speaker 2: It was very interesting, my first class was political science and I loved political science, I got an A out of it and the coach, I mean the teacher's name was Joe Crowley [Joseph N. Crowley], and Joe became the president of the University [of Nevada, Reno, Nevada].  And he thought that--he was the first one that said I think you have a chance--he actually said I thought you have a chance to be a gubernatorial candidate one day because I was so enthusiastic about and knew so much about the history of the constitution and all of the other American history of the early Civil War, pre-Civil War, all that stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And are you--what are you thinking that you want to do though after you, you know, finish school?  Is that sort of on your mind or are you--we're 1960--
Speaker 2: Seventy, [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: --Seventy, '71 you were a freshman?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, that's right, okay.  And so there is still a lot of political activism going on.  Are you involved in any of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were involved, that's (unclear) university.  We wanted--actually my sophomore year, we wanted to have a student office in the Student Union, you know, the white students had one, the Student Union, then the Asian students had one, the blacks didn't have one.  And so you know most of us on the team--it's only seventy African Americans on the campus out of 15,000, and so we're almost all athletes.  So we went over one day and decided we gonna take us an office.  So we took us an office, took everybody else's stuff and just threw it out, and something happened and then we decided, well we gonna go over here to university and demand an office from the president.  And Mr. N. Edd Miller, who's a real nice guy, had just gotten the award from President [Richard M.] Nixon as the safest no demonstration on college campus in America.  And so we went in there and we took over his office and held him hostage for a few hours.  And just a nice discussion talking about what we needed and so on and so forth and then we just went and left.  And so we stayed in that office at Student Union for maybe three, four days, maybe a week.  And then people started complaining.  And so they gave us a deadline to get out like three o'clock the next day.  And so--yeah but they wanted to offer us a space on the other side of campus in the basement, and we said, man, we ain't going up in nothing like that.  But we probably would have left, but what had happened the night before, this white fraternity called the Sundowners, came on TV and said if the University doesn't move them, we're going physically remove them from the office.  And see then our first response was move me.  And so they lined up probably a thousand policeman, where there was county sheriff--marshal county sheriffs, state troopers on the campus, all over the campus.  And they gave us one last warning to come out of the--to come out of the office.  And so some of the guys--so one guy slithered out of there and then they started to break down the door with tear gas.  Well some of the guys--there was a trap door upstairs and so some of the guys went through the trap door and escaped, but thirteen of us stayed.  I wasn't running and so I was shocked when we came out to see all those police out there.  And then there was one black police officer and he just said I want to make sure they don't do anything to harm to you guys.  But they took us down to--and arrested us.  And they eventually had a trial and they just fined us $25.00 and they suspended the fine.  And interesting thing about it is that the (unclear) probably the most famous referee of all time was Mills Lane, did all the Muhammad Ali fights and all that, he was the district attorney at the time.  As a young guy he was a former boxer and all that and so he was a no-nonsense guy, but he recommended that these guys be given--let go, and so they let us go.
Story_ID: 91224
Speaker 1: So can you describe, you know, just the whole tenor-tenure of the times, you know, why you felt that and what was happening on other campuses, what were you modeling yourself out of, you know, some activity that occurred like in the [San Francisco] Bay Area or some other place?
Speaker 2: Well we just wanted to you know--the times were getting your rights and having equal access and so our whole thing was to just have a campus where we can go and meet too, cause we had to meet in each other's rooms, and so we wanted a meeting place like everybody else, there's a Student Union, and they had plenty of offices, why couldn't we have one.  And so we wanted to be like--we wanted to integrate the campus in all respects other than just athletics.  And so that's why we were driven to push for the times, but it wasn't anything radical or anything like that.  We were athletes and we were mostly concerned about playing basketball and travel, but we recognized what it was like for our communities.
Speaker 1: And who were your-who were the people of the day that, you know, were forming you, was Angela Davis [HM], you know, was any of that--you know the free Angela Davis movement, had you been involved with that?
Speaker 2: I was aware of all of that.  I had read a book, one of the books that mostly influenced my life was "Autobiography of Malcolm X" and so I grew up in a community where I was very middle class and didn't know much about what life was like, so I wanted to be like Malcolm X in one sense, and so to experience different types of things and then understand and go back and help your community.  We say that's the most dangerous, a man would be a man that understood his community, understand the ways of the world and came back and helped his people out and so I wanted to sort of be like that.  But really my influence at that time was really more so the athletes, wanted to be like the athletes.
Speaker 1: And did you see any you know in this whole thing because you're doing well athletes that you didn't want to be like?
Speaker 2: No 'cause I think most athletes back in those days were still very respectable.  And so it was different then than it was now.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  Now, what other significant things happened to you during your college years, did you play the whole four years?
Speaker 2: No, I played two years.
Speaker 1: Then what happened?
Speaker 2: My second year they brought in a--at the end of my second year, the University [of Nevada, Reno, Nevada] did not like what we had done, needless to say.  And so they brought in a new coach and so they said that, you know, we're evaluating our team and that we don't want you guys to be here anymore.  And so we have a scholarship, and said now you don't understand you're not coming back next year.  So they took our scholarships away from us.  But our assistant coach, I mean the current coach who was still there helped us get in the university somewhere else.
Speaker 1: In the university system?
Speaker 2: No, the schools somewhere like John Davis, he went Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I had signed up to go to Cal Poly [California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, California], but I wound up going to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and so some of the other guys, Van Patterson went to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], and so but they said that you black folks are out of here, cause it was a predominantly (unclear) school, and that was the first time I had been in a school when I had met a young lady, I can't remember her name, nice as she could be, but she lives in McGill, Nevada, was 50 miles from the border of Idaho.  She'd never seen a black person in her life.  That's hard for me to imagine that period of time that you couldn't experience anything like that.  And so.
Speaker 1: So now what is your mother [Cora Brandford] saying about this, is she upset?
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: That your activism?
Speaker 2: No.  She wasn't upset, she just wanted to make sure that I still wanted--if I wanted to go to school, I could still go to school, 'cause you can always go back home and get a job working in the mill like everybody else, so it was not like that, but I wasn't doing that.
Story_ID: 91225
Speaker 1: Did you choose Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] or did Purdue choose you or was that part of the whole placement?
Speaker 2: Well see I had a chance to go to Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and that was really, from a basketball perspective, where I should have went to school.  But I didn't go there 'cause I wanted to go to Purdue 'cause I thought it was the best opportunity to play ball and still get drafted so I was still trying to fight for that initiative.  And so I transferred to Purdue and one of--the star of the team was a good friend of mine, Frank Kendrick, he's still good friends.  But I went to meet with Fred Schaus who was the former coach of the [Los Angeles] Lakers-excuse me--assistant coach with the Lakers, and he--one of the things I have never had was a dignity deficit disorder, I never had that.  Well he said you could try out, but you gotta try out for their junior varsity team and then work your way up and I said thank you, sir, for your time and effort and walked out.  And then I focused 100 percent on education after that.
Speaker 1: You gave it up?
Speaker 2: Yep.  It was like football in my high school, I wasn't doing that.  So certain things I wasn't gonna do, so I always had--so Mrs. [Eula Mae] Bryant was right, that meanness and stubbornness was there.
Speaker 1: She saw it early on, she did.
Speaker 2: She saw it early.  And at five years old.
Speaker 1: You got such a nice little demeanor.  And you just said, I'm outta here.
Speaker 2: Outta here.
Speaker 1: So-
Story_ID: 91226
Speaker 1: So, so what--so you're still concentrating on political science and history?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] have a good department?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it was a good school, great reputation, but nothing's particular about it, but I was just aiming to get a college degree.
Speaker 1: And are you-'cause you had said that when I was in high school, I was sort of half motivated and not--it depended on whether I liked it.  Did that pattern continue or were you a lot more directed?
Speaker 2: No, I was driven because I had made a promise to my grandmother [Alice Harris] that I was gonna finish college, and so by hook or by crook, I was gonna graduate from school with a degree.
Speaker 1: And what are you thinking you want to do at this point as it nears graduation?
Speaker 2: I decided pretty early on, kind of I don't know exactly when I formulated these ideas, but I said okay, I can't play professional basketball, but I need to find a career that will allow me to travel, that would be competitive and that I could make money like I--as if I was an athlete.  I didn't know what that was, but I was preparing myself to eventually--I'll stumble into it one of these days.
Speaker 1: At that point you don't know?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is that still the case--so where are you working during the summers and--
Speaker 2: Through the summers I was working at Standard Oil and--
Speaker 1: --Here [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: --In here.
Speaker 1: Oh, here.  So you were coming home--
Speaker 2: Coming home every summer.
Speaker 1: --Every summer, okay.
Speaker 2: And they were paying good money, but they had me shovel asphalt all summer, where they put you in these (unclear) crackers and these go through these machines through all this filth cleaning out all of this chemical stuff during the shutdowns.  They pay real good money so you can go back to school, but they wanted to let you know that there are no jobs here for folks with an education.  So that was good.
Speaker 1: So was it your plan that you would return to this area when you finished school, was that your thought too?
Speaker 2: No, my thought was I was gonna live in California.
Speaker 1: And that's what you did, right, or did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after graduating Purdue then I moved.
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother, did she attend your graduation?
Speaker 2: Oh, no she died.
Speaker 1: She died, okay just before?
Speaker 2: No, she died way before.  She died when I was a sophomore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what drove me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she died I think October 28, '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were your friends, were they similarly motivated at Purdue?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They could have been motivated but I never, maybe that's a weakness, I never think about much what other people think or what they do, only what I have to do.  So I never talked about it with people or discussed it--this is, I'm just doing it.
Story_ID: 91227
Speaker 1: And so you graduate and what do you do after upon graduation?
Speaker 2: I decided I want to go to graduate school, and I applied to law school and I applied to two--I applied the University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] and I got accepted and so I was very excited.  I said wow, dream come true, get a chance to move to the [San Francisco] Bay [Area] and so on and so forth.  But at the same time I applied to the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, Califonia] and they accepted me in the law school with a dual degree, with a master's degree in Public Administration.  And my cousin, first cousin that lived around the corner from me, lived in LA [Los Angeles], and so I chose LA over San Francisco.  And the night I landed I said what a mistake this was because I didn't like LA.
Speaker 1: And that program did you--you went for a dual degree?
Speaker 2: No, I went one year of law school and then I dropped out.
Speaker 1: Now what did you find about that that you didn't like?
Speaker 2: Well, the only mayors I knew were Richard Hatcher [HM] and Maynard Jackson, and they both were lawyers.  And so I thought law school would teach you something about how to be elected officials, 'cause in a sense I wanted to be a mayor or city manager or something like that.  And so I decided to go to law school.  And when I went to law school come to find out they didn't teach you anything about that and the thing I didn't like about it was constitutional law, 'cause it tell you, you had to look at the constitution instead of all this legal stuff without considering race.  See it was all based on race and so I had a hard time with that concept and their kind of method of teaching so I just gave that up.
Speaker 1: And you decided to do the master's of public administration?
Speaker 2: Administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at this point though, you're still thinking you're going to be a public official.
Speaker 2: Um.
Speaker 1: Sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that's what the degree is for?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  I was going to be a city manager.  I don't know if I'm going to be elected, but I wanted to work in government.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had no aspirations to run, but you said mayor?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But you know it's part of the concept, the thought of being a mayor but not necessarily running for mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 91228
Speaker 1: Now were you politically active at all, did you get involved in L.A. [Los Angeles] in you know in politics then?  And who was mayor in L.A. at that time?
Speaker 2: Tom Bradley was the mayor.
Speaker 1: Tom Bradley, okay.  So that was sort of an exciting time in LA around that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very exciting, it was very exciting.  The most interesting thing was my first day of school--I saw this young lady that caught my eye that graduated from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] and which happened to be my wife [Sharon Brandford], we met and got married in nine months.  But during the intervening process the person I met that influenced my political career, (unclear)  to get in politics was from your home state of Pennsylvania, C. Delores Tucker, she was secretary of state at Pennsylvania and she came to speak to the black law students.  She was the guest speaker at the dinner and so I got a chance--they wanted somebody to volunteer to be the--her chaperone.  So I volunteered to be her chaperone, so I had Tom Bradley's limo, I had this beautiful lady that was like 12 years older than me on my arm and so it was a great time, and I tried to hit on her too.  She always laughed about that.  I said, "see Delores if I was ten years older" and she said, "if I was ten years younger."  But I took her around and chaperoned her around and then she came back and she spoke and then she gave one of those same kind of speeches that Cazzie Russell did, which was "If you can conceive it and believe it, you can achieve it."  And that was the thing on the speeches you talked about, if you're gonna play baseball, you can't use a tennis racket, you know the rules of the game are different so you have to understand the various rules of the game and so out of that that really created my political activism in terms of interest in being--working in government to help people.
Story_ID: 91229
Speaker 1: Now what was--can you just describe though--the period of time that, you know, that you were entering graduate school, what's happening, there're black mayors, you know, that have been elected, but there--it's now coming into major cities.
Speaker 2: The major cities.  But I wanted to--well two things, one is I hated Los Angeles [California], so I wanted to leave LA.  So I had to try to figure out where could I get a good job in--and throughout school I was going to LA at the time, this tax revolt was taking place, this Proposition 13 which was to cut taxes and limit government and so on and so forth.  Well it passed the year I graduated.  So that was not a good opportunity in government, I think, in California.  Plus I wanted to move someplace else.  [President] Jimmy Carter got elected, there was this myth that the South is rising and all that kind of stuff like that.  Well it was, but wasn't rising for the black folks.  But my wife [Sharon Brandford] was from Miami [Florida] and so I was able to secure a job in this intern program down in Miami in Dade County.  And so the counselors I did have they taught me to be successful--they told me two things that was very good and I listened to them, one was to be successful you have to be willing to move for a better position and then two you should work in government because it will give you an understanding in how to deal with bureaucracy and how to deal with people, and so those are very valuable to you in whatever you do.  And so I decided--I left a $16,000 job at Pacific Telephone [Company] to work as a intern in Dade County making $12,000 with no guarantee whatsoever.  But I knew that it was like a fast-track program for the park sector and I was the first African American they let in that program.
Speaker 1: Now what was the program?
Speaker 2: It's called the Dade County Managers Program.  And they introduced--what they did was they assigned you to five department directors for ten weeks, finance, office of management budget, the manager's office, public works and then personnel.  And then you would choose one of those departments and eventually you become assistant director within a couple of years and then eventually director and then maybe county manager.  And so I was gonna pursue that course.  And the guy head of USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] said whatever you want to do go into finance because with all the bills and all the money come due for this, you get a chance to see everything.  And so over the objection of the program administrator and everyone else had ever been in the program, I was the first to go to finance.  And probably maybe only one ever went to finance.  So I relied upon--this is the guy that I thought was successful and so I did that.
Story_ID: 91230
Speaker 1: Now your wife's name, can you give just a little bit of background about her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name is Sharon Delores Bush is her maiden name.  And she was born in Naranja, Florida, which is like 30 miles south of Miami [Florida], much smarter than me.  She was part of the ABC Program, A Better Chance program, she was one of the national finalists in spelling, she was offered a high school scholarship to a private university-private high school in Vermont called the Putney School and so she went to school as one of you know--(unclear) this model society where you take 200 kids from around the country of all different economic groups and you put them in the same class and give them an education with no grades, but you have them do like (unclear) general stores.  So she went to school with Caroline Kennedy, Gene McCarthy [Eugene McCarthy]'s daughter and people like that.  And so when she came out of that, she went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], and she was four years dean list, made 3.8 all four, then she went to law school at--UCLA she was dean's list and went from UCLA she went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and got her master's degree and her law degree at the same time.  And then she was the first African American female to work for Janet Reno as a prosecutor when Janet was in Dade County [Florida], so we both up and coming young professionals in Dade County.
Speaker 1: So you went there in the public sector and she was in the public sector but in legal?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she's back home?
Speaker 2: Right.  Over her objections, she didn't want to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, I see, it was really your move in this program [Dade County Managers Program]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91231
Speaker 1: Now this is the first time you've really seen inner workings of the government, right?
Speaker 2: Well I had worked the summertime in my hometown [East Chicago, Indiana] and so that kind of politics was much more political than your big city governments.  Small town politics is nothing like it.  And we've had the same mayor [Robert Pastrick] now for 72 years--for 32 years--36 years.  It's a big controversy right now but for the last 36 years, he's been the mayor.
Speaker 1: And so were these positions at home--because I had never heard that come up, I thought you were working at you said Standard Oil?
Speaker 2: But during the school year I would work sometime in the recreation center, Martin Luther King Center, I would work as a part-time person.
Speaker 1: And so when you went to Dade County [Florida], what is different, because one, that is a city manager, it's not--
Speaker 2: County manager, yeah.
Speaker 1: --County manager, sorry.  So you have the managers and you have a city--how large was the city council?
Speaker 2: At the time the county commission was I think eleven members and so it was a strong county manager for the government, it's the largest in the nation, and the county manager ran the county government, and the county commission met twice a month for eight hours a day, so the professionals really ran the organization, so you had a chance to really run the government.  The reason why I chose finance is because finance you could do bond deals for the airport without being at the airport, the port without being at the airport (unclear)--at the port authority.  So you get a chance to see all the cruise ships and stuff like that.  I'm telling-(unclear) in the intern program what you could do and what was the best place to be.  Water and sewage, you get a chance to see all the departments without having to be involved in day-to-day straight-lined positions and get bogged down in one area, you can sort of float and figure out how to get--how to, you know, move up in government, because most people are scared of finance.
Speaker 1: That's true, that's true.  Now who was--was there a comptroller, is this the positioning product?
Speaker 2: There was a finance director.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was a deputy finance director name Bill Erickson (ph.) who sort of took me under his wing.  And Bill sort of--he was impressed because the county had implemented this financial county system and it was a disaster and everybody was ragging on the finance department.  So he was just stunned that somebody actually wanted--he said you actually want to work here in this department, I said I do, and believe me they tried to talk me out of it, but I said I did and he was one of--he was a CPA [certified public accountant] and a partner at Deloitte Haskins & Sells [now Deloitte] before he came to county government.  And so I learned an awful lot from Bill about how county government worked.  The county finance director, Dick Montalbano was also a CPA, but he was much more political.  And I learned a lot from him too about politics.
Story_ID: 91232
Speaker 1: So what are some of the things you learned?
Speaker 2: The first thing [Dick] Montalbano told me was really interesting.  I never forgot these things either, he said, "First of all working in government don't expect anybody to pat you on the back and tell you, you're doing a good job.  Two, don't sign your name to anything other than your check. Three, if I want your opinion I'll give it to you."  So I never forgot those things.  And so that was my introduction into government.  And then I learned from him, he was trying to focus on finance not taking into consideration the political things where the county--the deputy county manager was a gentleman name Dewey Knight and he ran the human resources and the welfare section of the [Dade] County government.  And so this hospital is not producing that much called Lutheran Medical Center and Montalbano wanted to shut it down to save money.  And so he sent me down as a sacrificial lamb to Dewey Knight.  And Dewey Knight became one of my mentors and one of my friends, but he just devastated me with his comments.  See I'm a young kid trying to figure out this is really the thing to do and he said, boy, don't you know what white folks have been trying to do for black folks all these years and yadi, yadi, yadi, ya, had me in tears.  And people couldn't believe that he had done that to me.  But it taught me a very good lesson that whatever Montalbano tell me to do, I'd do the opposite.  And so I lived by that philosophy.  I would never do that again.
Speaker 1: So when you--are you learning at this point, I mean, what kind of deals are you working?
Speaker 2: I'm working on bond deals.  See this intern program, this guy from Springfield, Illinois, his name is Reed, I can't think of his first name, maybe Mike Reed (ph.), but anyway he said, Napoleon, you get out of this intern program what you want, you can skate through and get a good job or you can do exactly what you want to do and get out as much as you wanted to, and so I did exactly that.  They give me assignments I wouldn't do those assignments, I would do exactly what I wanted to do 'cause I was trying to get to the finance department 'cause I understood these bond deals was--I didn't know what a bond deal was, I thought it was like most people, I thought it was either bail bondsman or a performance bond, I didn't know there was securities.  I didn't learn that at school.  So it was strictly on-the-job training.  But there was this tax revolt at the time in Dade County, and make a long story short, the tax revolt was to cut taxes by 99 and a half percent and 43 percent of the people who had voted to wipe out government.  I said wow this a scary thing.  California didn't do this.  I come to Florida so this is obviously not a growth employment sector so I need to get out of this.  And so--and I need to get out of Florida and to get back to California, so how do you do that.  And so I met a gentleman, I met several gentlemen, but I met an African American that was the highest ranking black at E.F. Hutton, he was an investment banker.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: T. M. Alexander, Jr.  And T.M. sort of took me under his wing.  And I sit down and talked to him about what was it like to be an investment banker and he start telling me he said, "man, I just got a $70,000 bonus last year."  I said you got what, he said, "I got a $70,000 bonus."  He said, "I'm making you know close to half a million dollars." I said I want to do what you do.  And so I began to try to work in finance and get out of this-
Story_ID: 91153
Speaker 1: Now what made you interested then you know when you start seeing the investment banking area, was it the one guy [T. M. Alexander, Jr.] saying, you know, I made $70,000?
Speaker 2: No, it was the fulfillment of what I was gonna do the rest of my life.  I found what I-the three things I set out in my life that I wanted to do, travel, be a (unclear) environment, and make money.  Couldn't do it in athletics, couldn't do it in government, so securities industry was the industry that allowed me to do that.
Speaker 1: And so how did you end up at Shearson/American Express?
Speaker 2: The very first investment banker I met was a guy name Arnold Greenfield (ph.).  And Arnold was financial advisor to the county and he sort of became one of my mentors also.  What Arnold said, Napoleon, after I gained all this experience working in Dade County, we'd like to hire you, but we want you to work in Miami [Florida].  And I said, Arnold, I'm leaving Florida.  Well he said how about Atlanta [Georgia], nope, what about New York, I said, nope.  I want to go back to California and I want to live in San Francisco.  And so he tells a story, where he set up this interview for--he's a regional manager in Florida, set up a regional manager in San Francisco and invited the one up from LA [Los Angeles, California].  But there's only an opening in LA.  And he said, Napoleon, I've not seen somebody so bold as yourself, 'cause I said I want to work for you guys and I'll commute to LA, but I'm not living in LA and I want to work in San Francisco, and he says I was so bold for somebody--I think I was probably the first African American actually in American Express in investment banking to be so bold, but I knew at an early age that if you knew what you want, you can get it most of the time.  I knew what I wanted and I wanted to be in San Francisco and so I eventually wound up getting hired.
Story_ID: 91154
Speaker 1: Did you like anything about Dade County [Florida], your wife [Sharon Brandford] wasn't happy she didn't want to be there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked the people and I like it professionally because I learned everything I knew about government, I knew from there.  And so I liked the profession, I just didn't--it was too hot, that's the main thing and it was slow.  And so I just didn't care for it that much, but it's a great place to visit but not to live.
Speaker 1: Now were there--what contacts did you make there at Dade County that have stood you well later in your life and what lessons did you learn there that helped you later?
Speaker 2: Well, Arnold Greenfield (ph.) was the first contact, I mean, he's the first guy I met and he's part of my advisory board that I set up and so he's been a mentor all these years and so out of that he introduced me to people at Shearson/American Experess and sort of a network of people from Shearson that I've kept up with over the years that either I met or worked with.  But also met some other people like Bobby MacDonald (ph.) at James J. Lowrey.  The one advantage I had was Dade County was a big issue of bonds.  And in the wintertime all the top rank people on Wall Street wanted to come to Miami [Florida].  And so I would deal with these guys.  Well I just didn't want to let them take me out to dinner and stuff like that, I would do that when I go to New York, but I would force them to teach me how to do the analysis or how to size a bond issue on a calculator.  At this time there weren't many computers back in those days--so the formulas for that.  I wanted them to introduce me to Henry Kaufman who at that time was the top economist at Salomon Brothers, I wanted to go to their trading desk, I wanted them to show me what it was like to sell bonds, the research department, all of the that (unclear) all of those firms would do that.  So I was teaching myself 'cause [Dick] Montalbano said you gotta teach yourself, I ain't gonna teach you anything.  So I got these people to sort of mentor me and take me under their wings and so I figure eventually somebody will hire me but I spent all my time understanding this business as best I could from the public side of the business.
Story_ID: 91155
Speaker 1: And then when you get hired at Shearson/American Express, now this is your first time really in the private sector as a professional?
Speaker 2: Professional, right.
Speaker 1: So there's a difference, you know there's a different culture, a different sense about things, are you doing any municipal work at all?
Speaker 2: We're financing municipal projects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm talking to people that I used to be.  And so I feel I have an advantage 'cause I knew what impressed me about the person I was trying to hire to get my job done, so I tried to develop those same qualities.  But I had to shift my focus because they weren't let me calling on the good clients, I had to focus in on the African American community.  And so I decided to go after the African American community and a gentleman named (unclear) Harris, the state representative, when I first got to California set up a meeting with [Mayor] Willie Brown at the time the Speaker of the [California State] Assembly, and had a real nice meeting with Willie and then I learned very early on, 'cause sitting with my grandfather [Eli Harris], to ask questions.  And people will share an awful lot when you ask them them questions.  And so I developed this one question I would ask people and it started with Willie Brown.  I said, man, speaking to Brown, if you were me what would you do to start in this business, and he gave me a business plan.  He said, "well, if I were you what I would do is I would go down to San Jose [California], there's a vice mayor down there named Iola Williams, you meet with her. I would go to Alameda County, I would meet with John George that would be the county chairman of the board, his chief of staff is city councilman named Wilson Riles, Jr. Then you go to Berkeley [California], you got [Eugene] "Gus" Newport, who is the mayor of Berkeley, African American" and he said "you got this dude up here sitting on the county (unclear), he's a real Christian, he don't drink or nothing, his name is Osby Davis, you to a meeting with Osby and you just circle the [San Francisco] Bay [Area] and by the time you do a deal here, then it'll be time to rotate back around in a few years."  And so I called Iola Williams, I sat up a meeting with Iola.  I said Iola, if you were me, what would do?  And she would tell me who I need to talk to in San Jose when in South Bay, I would go Oakland, [California] and so I went everywhere.  And everywhere I went I would just say if you were me what would you do?
Speaker 1: And you were really developing relationships and your base at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was setting up base with the African American community.  And most of them have so many issues to deal with, I try to make it very simple.  When you get your agenda and you see bond issue, just think bond issue Napoleon, bond issue Napoleon, that's all you need to know, I'll take it from there.
Speaker 1: So you've got great salesmanship also too as part of this whole thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know where it came from but I learned that from somewhere.
Speaker 1: And your sense about numbers, did you find you had a natural sort of knack for numbers?
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: Or this business is it numbers or is it relationships?
Speaker 2: It's relationships but I could count money.  I don't know all the formulas needed to structure these transactions, but I know what the dollars are in these deal.
Speaker 1: And so who are the critical people besides Willie Brown, I mean, you mentioned some of them, you're meeting all these sort of--
Speaker 2: People.
Speaker 1: Group of people.
Speaker 2: People.
Speaker 1: And politically what is happening in California too you know?
Speaker 2: Well, California is different than other places.  California is not--there's no proclivity to do business with African Americans.  There's no slavery into California, it stopped just before we got to California, but blacks were so few and far in between they didn't need it.  And so the blacks in California--the older generation was very, very well connected.  If you knew one you could know 'em all.  And each one had a commissioner and so like (unclear) was PUC [public utilities commission], Dr. Coleman (ph.) was at the port, Dr. Goosby (ph.) was at the airport.  And so they knew each other because they would tell a story.  When they would walk down the street and they see a black they just wave 'em down, somebody black is here and so that what it was like in California.  And so California business was totally different than doing business back East.  And so trying to expand my business I went to the National Forum of Black Public Administrators.  And I met some people from Chicago [Illinois], [Mayor] Harold [Washington] had just got elected.  And so--but I was looking to leave Shearson/American Express because they brought in a guy who had less experience than I did.  When I started I was assistant vice president, they made him a vice president and paid him like $10,000 more.  So it was at that point in time I decided I was leaving.  But I needed a game plan to leave, just couldn't walk out the door.
Story_ID: 91156
Speaker 1: And what did you do?
Speaker 2: I had decided start my own firm.
Speaker 1: Now was that after much discussion with your wife [Sharon Brandford] or just on--
Speaker 2: Not much discussion, no.  Well see, it didn't make any sense to discuss it, I was doing it.
Speaker 1: And plus you were making money.  You saw the money you were making.
Speaker 2: I saw the money I was making at the Shearson/American Express but there was a lot more money I could make on my own.
Speaker 1: And so who do you join up with?
Speaker 2: A gentleman name Calvin Grigsby.  Now this guy named T. M. Alexander, Jr. at E. F. Hutton had suggested years ago, maybe 1980, '81 [1981], you guys should consider setting up a firm.  And so with Calvin he had strong technical capabilities and money.  And so I told him in order for me to join this firm he had to have at least a million dollars in capital and then what I would do is, I would go to work for this major firm, this is before I went to Shearson we talked about this in general concept, I would go to California and develop a relationship using Shearson American Express credit card.  And I would develop relationships that would be my clients, not their clients.  And so it was sort of like a four or five-year game plan.
Speaker 1: And you had--it was assumed at that point you were going to continue in (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And who are the other things, you know, sort of percolating around the country?
Speaker 2: Other firms?
Speaker 1: Yeah, other firms that are starting around the same time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Travers Bell, he was the first of Daniels & Bell and then you had Pryor Govan and Counts, Malcolmn Pryor, Allen Counts, they had a firm that was going at that time.  Then shortly thereafter Wardell Lazard started his firm [W R Lazard], and some other firms that are around like Dans and Cartright (ph.), but they were not much of a player, United Daniels which is original Willie Daniels of Daniels and Bell, he was doing a little business, business on the side and then Doty Securities and then there was a firm here called Metro Equities, Don Davidson [Donald Davidson].  So anyway there were quite a few firms that were like second tier minority firms and there were big firms.
Story_ID: 91157
Speaker 1: And what are you thinking your client base is going to be, are you concentrating you know among the--
Speaker 2: At Grigsby [Brandford]?
Speaker 1: --Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought my client base was going to be the African American community.  And so the African American community and the you know--the Los Angeles [California] thing encouraged it, but the real champion for African American investment banking community was [Mayor] Harold Washington.  And so it was back during that time a friend of mine was working--this young lady was working for Harold Washington as deputy comptroller named Jane Thompson.  And Jane, I said, Jane, I really want to get business in Chicago [Illinois], she said well, there's a meeting tonight, I need to introduce you to this gentleman [Albert "Al" Johnson].  And said you probably heard of him.  I'd heard of him, but I never met him.  He said-'cause I used to listen to Operation PUSH on the radio all the time when it was sponsored by Al Johnson Cadillac, Johnson Products, Grove Fence Orange Juice, he was one of the top black business people in America.  And so I came down to, somewhere on the South Side of Chicago, not too far from here, to a meeting of the Political Action Committee of Illinois, and there was Al and Bill Barry and so on and so forth.  So I met up Al and he sort of took me under his wing.  And shortly thereafter he came to San Francisco [California] and we were having dinner and we were talking about my birthday was coming up real soon.  And then I pulled up and he said, "when is your birthday?" and I says it's February 23rd.  He forced me to take out my driver's license 'cause his birthday was February 23rd.  And so out of that, among other things, we became real good friends.  He adopted me as affectionately known as Al Johnson, Jr.
Story_ID: 91158
Speaker 1: Now so in those-in the years with--okay you worked--it's actually a little over a year with Grigsby [Brandford], right, right?
Speaker 2: That I worked there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I worked there eleven years.
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh I'm sorry, right, eleven years.
Speaker 2: Eleven years.
Speaker 1: Okay, eleven years.
Speaker 2: And so we both did (unclear) with the minority firm from a technical standpoint on the street.  A lot of it came out of Chicago [Illinois].  And so basically I covered Chicago during [Mayor] Harold Washington and Gene Sawyer's [Mayor Eugene Sawyer] Administration, and so I was back here at least once a week, twice a week working on bond deals.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about you know your first deal and then subsequent deals that you got, you know, the deals with--
Speaker 2: With Harold or with the--
Speaker 1: --With Harold.
Speaker 2: --With Harold?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I think the first deal I worked on with Harold might have been-- boy what was the very first one? --I think it was the general obligation bond for some road projects.  I'm trying to think, there was a library project, but it wasn't Harold Washington Library, but it was a library project that I worked on, then there was North Loop project that I worked on the Chicago Theatre, working with Lucille Dobbins worked on that one and then we became the advisor to the airport.  So all the expansion at the airport we worked on with Franklin Raines, yeah he and I was the financial advisor and we brought a different thing to the table than he did.  I brought a little more insight on how government operated.  And so I became like the confidante to Al [Johnson] and Lucille Dobbins.
Speaker 1: And do you feel, I mean, this is a time when a lot of--there are a lot of things happening and blacks sort of are in control in many ways.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 91159
Speaker 1: And, and are you--is your effort really concentrated in Chicago [Illinois] and your partner [Calvin Grigsby] other places--what was your game plan, I guess, is what I'm asking?
Speaker 2: My game plan was I focused in--well I started most of our offices.  The game plan was, he was despite the name being Grigsby Brandford, he was like Mr. Inside, I was Mr. Outside.  And so I spent most of my time developing the offices, I developed Chicago market, Detroit [Michigan], Saint Louis [Missouri], Texas and everything in the West other than what he developed.  He developed Los Angeles [California], part of the [San Francisco] Bay Area, Miami [Florida], he really loved New York and Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and so that's how our country was split up.  I probably did two-thirds of it, but I didn't like the East Coast that much, so I didn't definitely care about going back east.
Speaker 1: You didn't like the temperament of the East Coast?
Speaker 2: Attitude of the people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Very arrogant.
Speaker 1: And now what the--I'm just saying when you sat down to sort of develop your business plan, what were you saying were the key markets that you had to get?
Speaker 2: The urban centers were the key.  And so what you could do is if you could do business in Chicago then you could take that track record anywhere, to Seattle [Washington] to Houston [Texas] to Dallas [Texas], Phoenix [Arizona], Las Vegas [Nevada] and use that to get other business with other clients.  And so that's what we did.  And that's the unfortunate thing about that book in the black, was giving way too much credit, as much as I love [Mayor] Maynard [Jackson], Atlanta [Georgia] was a very small town.  Everybody got--Maynard got his start in the business under [Mayor] Harold Washington.  He couldn't get a job in Atlanta.  He (unclear) got business at Chapman and Cutler here in Chicago.  And because of people like Al Johnson and then Gene Sawyer [Mayor Eugene Sawyer] and Harold Washington, Lucille Dobbins, all of us who got started in the business, whether it was Ron Gault [Ronald T. Gault, HM], whether it's Travers Bell, we all did deals in Chicago, because the requirement that African American had to be the lead as a majority firm and that a minority firms all had equal access to doing business in this city.  And so the credit for that really goes here.  [Mayor] Tom Bradley did a real good job, Marion Barry did a tremendous job, he was the second city, was Marion Barry in helping African Americans.  You can always go to [Washington] D.C. and get business and Philadelphia under Wilson Goode [HM], they were short-lived, and then Coleman Young.  They were the ones who were in the forefront in getting African Americans' business.  The other places were strictly considered minority firms but you had a chance to be a real participant in those cities.
Story_ID: 91160
Speaker 1: Now what--how do you think that, you know, because there have been times in our history that there have been lost opportunities.  But who were some of the leading people with that insight about having people sort of be the lead, you know, was it the, you know, sort of the policies in terms of affirmative action, I mean, you know, sort of, I want to say set aside, was that sort of motivating or were there people that had worked in places, you know, like you who had come out of the municipal--I'm just trying to understand how these policies happened?
Speaker 2: I think these policies happened because you had people in power who understood that you needed economic development in the black community to be successful and then you had people like myself, who understood the business was like and where the money was going.  And it was not just enough to be in a deal as investment banker, you had to be the lead so you can make significant amount of money to be able to help African Americans get elected.  And so we had become big time fundraisers at that point in time.  And so Travers Bell had become like the campaign financier for Tom Bell [sic, Bradley]] running for governor.  And so you had people running around the country doing those kinds of things.  And so the broader community said we got to stop this because if these guys can get these guys elected, they don't need us.  And so they passed the rule to ban contributions and fundraising for municipal investment banking firms.
Speaker 1: And what year was this passed?
Speaker 2: That was '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-three [1993]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so that began the destruction of the minority firms.
Story_ID: 91161
Speaker 1: So you, okay, now were-so you were around at the beginning of the NASP [National Association of Securities Professionals]?
Speaker 2: NASP, yes.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yes. Can you talk about how that group actually came together?
Speaker 2: I think it was the way it was set up was I was the underling, 'cause I was the youngest of the partners that were named on the street, but they were the president CEOs of each one.  So it was [Mayor] Maynard [Jackson], Travers Bell, Wardell Lazard [W R Lazard], Malcolmn Pryor, I think maybe Bernard Bill had started.  They were like the original founders of NASP.  And then you had a few people like, I think, Garland Wood, Goldman Sachs maybe, and Ron Gault [Ronald T. Gault, HM], a partner and he's managing director at 1st Boston [Corp].  These guys came together and set up NASP, the concept is the National Association of Securities Professionals.  Well for the best I can gather it was a conflict in that Travers and Calvin and Malcolmn would say hey this should be driven by the black firms, not for blacks working in major firms because we had different agendas.  And so there was always some tension between--in that body--in that organization from that perspective.
Speaker 1: And Travers Bell, can you just talk a little bit about him.  He wasn't necessarily a role model for you in many ways?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes he was.
Speaker 1: He was, okay?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Travers was real role model because we go to see a client, and on his wall, there was a person trying to get a picture of Travers in there with a picture signed by Travers.  It was like, man, how could you compete with this guy.  First black--and the interesting thing about Travers was he was just a great salesman, and that's when I gave up trying to be the technician in the business.  I figured I can do business from a technical standpoint, but Travers was an equity guy, he didn't even know what a bond was.  But he got all these guys to give him a bond deal because he had--he knew the stock exchange for 25 years and etc., etc., and I'm Travers Bell, and he knew how to entertain people, you know, and that kind of thing.  And so I learned more from how to go after business with Travers than anyone.  And actually back when we were doing business in the City of Chicago, Jane Thompson had set up a meeting to write a brief conversation before he died about merging the two firms, because he was such a great marketer that he just spent all his time doing that and not doing anything else.  And so out of that I decided that the best way to run a firm is to have an outside and an inside person and have somebody become the face of the firm that can respond to the media, go to events and represent the firm, and so I sort of took that on as the vice chair at the other firm [Grigsby Brandford].
Story_ID: 91162
Speaker 1: But why did you, your firm [Grigsby Branford] have such growth, I mean, why--this was a time when people are becoming aware and they're people that you know are investment banking, you know, been trained at the major firms, and Ariel Capital [now Ariel Investments] get started at that time, you know, I'm just saying--how were you able to come in and grab, you know, the prize and gross, so that's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: What we did was we focused in on building a firm, not just being a black firm.  And so we hired the best people we could hire and we took all the resources of the firm and plowed them back into the infrastructure, making sure the best people, the best software, the best computers, the best communication system, to try to have a real firm and so for me it was like being an athlete.  We go to the game to play the game, you're not going as a black athlete or black team, you're trying to win the game, so you got to be at a equal level and equally as prepared as these other firms.  And so we spent our effort doing that.  But some of the other firms relied upon just being black.  But if you got people like Al Johnson, people like Gene Sawyer [Mayor Eugene Sawyer] or people like Maynard [Mayor Maynard Jackson] or anyone else that's an African American mayor, he's gotta look to the whole city--he's accountable to the whole city, so he can't give you a deal if you're gonna screw it up, because it's your tax bill, it's your resident, it's your water bill, you know, it's your landing fees at the airport, so you have to actually have a quality product.  And so we said the first one that become the first quality product would get most of the lead managed deals.  And so we focused our effort on that.  And so the market was down by everybody, because no one city would give you all the deals.  Chicago [Illinois], there was no favorite firm, and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], (unclear) there was [Malcolmn] Pryor, but anybody can get a city manager deal if you were good.  And so we tried to get to that technical capability real quick.
Speaker 1: And who were most of the people you were competing with in each of the cities, were there two or three of your main ones?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was the same firms all over the nation.  We all competed for the same markets.  Everybody quickly became a national firm.
Speaker 1: And how many would you say?
Speaker 2: In the top tier?
Speaker 1: The top tier, there were--
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: --Five.
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: List them again?
Speaker 2: It was Daniels and Bell, Grigsby Branford, Pryor McClendon and Counts, M. R. Beal, W R Lazard.
Story_ID: 91163
Speaker 1: What--let me ask you, during that period, what deal were you most happy with that you did.  What would you consider your most significant deal?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [1993] L.A. Convention Center financing, that was the most significant deal because that was a deal where we worked--we worked the staff and the politics to the maximum.  We got--the first thing we got was we got the city council to adopt the resolution.  Said all things being equal we would give this deal to a California firm.  And at the same time that same motion there was this written--see I read the book "The Power Broker" and so much stuff happens through legislation that people don't really realize what they're doing until they do it.  And the second thing was whoever did the last deal can't do the next one.  And so it was Goldman Sachs and PaineWebber and ourselves competing for that deal.  So immediately we knocked Paine Webber out the box, they can't get it.  So it comes down between us and Goldman Sachs.  But Goldman Sachs has a much bigger reputation, best firm in history in Wall Street.  So we were pitted head up against these guys, and then what we did was we made a pitch to the L.A. Convention Center Board and it shows you what it means having an African American in the position, just one.  There's an eleven-member board, we gonna make our presentation and then we have a debate with Goldman Sachs, I've never done this before, the debate on the merits of why we should be hired in an open public forum between Goldman Sachs and ourselves.  I learned an awful lot just from Goldman because we had did a deal at a lower interest rate than they did--like we did a deal say like at 5.95, they did a deal at 6 percent.  Well they said it really should be a 5.90 rather than a 5.95, so they didn't perform as good as you thought they did, it seemed like they did, but they didn't.  So I learned an awful lot from that.  So it came around to a vote and there was a couple people that were voting for us and then a gentleman named Clint Rosemond, Clint grew up with Jackie Robinson, and so I was listening to this man and all of a sudden he, the most profound statement I've ever heard in this business, which was, we have a chance to be like Branch Rickey, in 1942 we--1947 he told Jackie Robinson to play baseball.  We have a chance to break through a corporate ceiling by giving this firm a $500 million dollar deal.  Once they get it, no one would ever question can a black firm do that again.  And then boom, 10-1 vote.  And then the one guy that voted against it came up to us after the presentation and said, I voted against it because the recommendation came from this little committee of three that we give it to Goldman Sachs but you guys would do a hell of a job and I believe it.  So it got caught up at the convention city board, it had to go to city council for approval.  Went to city council and we had to pull out the big guns, we had to start lobbying big time.  And so we hired like, you know, like eleven people lobbying on our behalf, Congresswoman Maxine Waters [HM], several other people that you wouldn't necessarily recognize, but we had one key person.  We got down to the end and I said who could help us get this contract.  And I said I helped this guy get into the red book to become a bond lawyer, I know he'd help us.  I picked up the phone and called Johnnie Cochran.  I met with Johnny and I said, Johnny we need your help, we almost there, brother, we need it.  I said and I'd like to pay you like $12,500.  Johnny said, give me $25,000 and I'm on board.  I said done deal.  And so we got Johnny on board and we started the lobbying, got the city council and I made a presentation, directed by this guy name Art Snyder [Arthur Snyder].  He said, Napoleon, forget all this technical stuff, just speak from the heart for two minutes about where you came from, what it was like to go (unclear) and see how you worked your way through school and so on and so forth.  So I made that presentation.  We got 11-4 vote and we got the deal over Goldman Sachs.
Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing.
Speaker 2: And I still have the tape.  And I watch it every once and a while.  And you watch it, you're still sweating like are we gonna get this deal, are we not gonna get this deal.  But that was the most incredible deal up until--up until that point and time.
Speaker 1: What size deal was it?
Speaker 2: Five hundred and three million [$503 million].  It was not the largest deal done by a minority firm.  Pryor McClendon [Counts & Co] did a deal for $649 million, but that was the most contentiously fought in an open forum by a lead minority firm and lead majority firm.
Story_ID: 90995
Speaker 1: So explain that though, you know, just explain how the municipal you know bond arena works?
Speaker 2: The way the bond arena works, issuer--City of Chicago will come to you and say we want to finance a new terminal at Midway Airport for Southwest ATA [Airlines].  And so we need to raise $800 million. And so--and then the revenue stream would be the landing fees and the concessions that people buy at the airport as security for the bonds.  And so this will take about 20 or 30 years to repay this.  So they come to us and say we want to do this bond issue and we need to find investors who are willing to invest money in these bond issues that we secure by these revenues.  And so they'll hire you, you will structure all the legal documents and the financing documents and then they'll give you a date and ascertain that they like to get the money.  A month before that you would go out and you would sell the bonds.  And you sell these bonds in like a two-hour period, $800 million.  And if you're the lead firm, you don't have to call anyone, they call you to sell these bonds, which is amazing business.  And so people call you to buy bonds and you get a fee before any of us gets paid and you get it off the top.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you know our firm was successful because you know we plow money back we invested and I'm just wondering structurally what was the, you know, because--
Speaker 2: What you have to do is you have to have the sales force to sell the bonds.  So that means you have to hire experienced people who can come over and call the Allstates and call the Franklin [Templeton] Funds and call the State Farms and (unclear) companies, and so you invest money in those kind of people to get them on board.  And you have to have a guy who can actually set the interest rate on the transaction at the same aggressive and competitive levels as Goldman Sachs or Citicorp or any of those major firms.  And so they have to have the software to do the analysis in that--see if it's the same kind of software and technology these other firms do, and so all that has to be constantly updated and kept on board.  And so that's what we mean by investing in the infrastructure.
Speaker 1: And so who were the, you think, key components--people in your, you know, in your business that really made it happen, within your organization?
Speaker 2: Our organizations?  Besides our partner Calvin Grigsby, he was critical, the traders, Sherman Swanson and a guy from Chicago [Illinois], Marty Witzhier (ph.), he's head of institutional sales, those were probably the--and then David Thompson (ph.), head of our quantitative group and then Peter Wong (ph.), head of our credit group, those are probably the six or seven key people that our infrastruc--and then Suzanne Shank, of course, she's a partner at this firm, but she was the east coast Napoleon Brandford, she covered the east coast for our firm.
Story_ID: 90996
Speaker 1: And during this time, Napoleon, you're traveling a lot and you're sort of glad-handing a lot, you know, with a lot of people and why do you think you were so successful in that way, you know, is it just you have an easy way with people you know and why were you able to beat out competition?
Speaker 2: I think the experience I had in government I can relate to people about their problems and I could see it from their perspective, I could empathize with them and I sympathize with 'em and not look down on 'em.  And so a lot of people in this business with M.B.A.s can't relate to people because they're trained for the corporate world.  But in municipal government you have people who are social workers, who are unemployed, who are teachers, who are engineers, who are everything, and see (unclear) relate to people at various different levels.  And so that was what I think was one of the reasons I had success, having had that experience, the multiple experiences in my life.
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back just before going forward to the fact that you were the youngest named partner on Wall Street and we didn't talk about that when you were at Shearson[/American Express], so can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I was at Grigsby [Brandford].
Speaker 1: Oh, Grigsby, I'm sorry, Grigsby.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I became a partner at 33.  And see Calvin was like 39 and then Travers [Bell] started his when he was 35 and Wardell [Lazard] was 36 and so I was this young kid coming in.  But again to my coming into the business was easier for me because these guys were all lawyers or salespeople or worked for pension funds, I came out--I was the only one that come out of government to do that.  And so I brought a uniqueness to the table that other people didn't.
Speaker 1: Were there other people that had come out of government that sort of you know have charted a similar path as you?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause not many people, that's what I'm saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they wanted you to come out of, you know, M.B.A. school and then work in a major firm directly as an intern and then work your way up.  And so I sort of broke the mold for that.
Speaker 1: What other sort of anecdotes during that you know 11-year-period things that were sort of near misses or you know maybe second best victory or you know what sort of lessons learned or--
Speaker 2: Each deal is different, each client is different and so there are a lot of situations.  So each deal was just--it was a challenge.  Because in my business I always had this philosophy there is no deal uncovered by investment banking.  There's a real deal--there's another banker who's on the deal as competitively and as aggressively as you are, and if it's a real big deal, it's probably seven or ten firms on the deal.  So you have to figure out an angle to get in and just depending on the circumstances of each deal.
Speaker 1: --And what about--did you ever feel that you guys were being, you know, of the minority groups pitted against each other or you know sort of crabs in the barrel?
Speaker 2: There was no crabs in the barrel, it was just grabbing it trying to get the deal.  So it's like basketball state championship tournament. Everybody's in a tournament and survival goes to the fittest.
Speaker 1: Let's track that 11-year history.  What were the major milestones, let me ask that along the way.  Like your revenues the first year, you know, what were the major milestones?
Speaker 2: I think we looked at it, not so much from revenue standpoint as progression of the size of deals we seemed to manage, that's how we looked at it.  And so I would say probably the first--or there is one other deal we did, we found unique that we were not the lead manager on, but we opened their eyes on one of our clients, actually to the whole street, there was a San Jose Convention Center.  They sent out this proposal on how to finance a $225 million convention center (unclear) only have the authorization by tax law to do a $100 million deal.  And so we sat down with the most prominent law firm in the nation, Orrick Herrington [Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe], and we came up with a structure.  Instead of issuing convention center bonds, we would issue state and local bonds and reimburse the state from revenues from the convention center authority and then tax (unclear) authority to get the deal done.  They gave the deal to Goldman Sachs maybe (unclear) recognize that we did that deal, so that sort of stood out--that's why these guys are really good.  And so that's how we knew we could beat Goldman in the convention center in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  We knew we could beat 'em, because we had beat 'em, we just didn't have the politics to get it down there and so it was sort of those kind of things.  It's a milestone, so that was a big milestone.  Then we did a deal in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that was a milestone.  We did financing of police cars when Willie Williams was the police chief.  He became police chief in L.A., but you know the average life of a police car in Philly is only 18 months, 'cause they had no--they had no (unclear) program in their fleet and so to just drive it for 18 months and throw it away, get a new one.  And so we financed that for like three years, and then some computers and (unclear) company for five.  So that was a little milestone too was to break into and bring a new concept of finance, at least purchase finance to the East Coast.  And so it was those kinds of things that were milestones that we looked at.
Story_ID: 90997
Speaker 1: And in this whole thing with municipalities, would they ask you to be creative or were there times when it was just economic change and the circumstances that made you--like the deal that you--you know the first deal that you talked about?
Speaker 2: Almost every deal is creative because they're looking, most governments, regardless of the economic times are financially strapped.  There's always need for more money for services--for human services, so if you can lower the capital, the borrowing cost, then that frees up more money.  And so it's always (unclear) to, this is pretty political but most time it's always (unclear) the best ideas.
Speaker 1: And how many--so the largest, you said the largest amount of business came out of Chicago [Illinois] for your firm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, up until Gene Sawyer [Mayor Eugene Sawyer].
Speaker 1: Oh, up until Gene Sawyer?  You mean, after Gene Sawyer?
Speaker 2: After Gene Sawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact one of the things that people don't give him credit for, we actually got more business under Gene Sawyer than we did under [Mayor] Harold [Washington], because Harold spent those first four years fighting.  By that time, he had consolidated his power.  When Gene was here, man it was unbelievable.  It'd have been a different era of this city for African Americans if they had stuck together and kept Gene Sawyer as mayor.  I mean he had totally committed to helping African Americans firms because he wasn't beholden to the majority community and so a lot of us really grew those last two years he was mayor.
Speaker 1: Now, why don't you think, you know, this is a hindsight question, but do you think you and the, you know, and the financial area could play more of a role to educate you know, 'cause the politicians do their own thing, do you think you could do more of that--have done more of that to keep things in place, 'cause things have, you know, they--well here in Chicago they've disintegrated?
Speaker 2: Our industry decided they didn't want that.  And so when they abandoned further contributions, that took you away from the contact with elected officials.  And so we were--not only were we raising money for them, we were raising capital for the city and telling them how they could do it.  And that was just the biggest threat you could ever imagine, and so they had to do something to take away that threat and they did.
Speaker 1: And at the time, you said that was 19--
Speaker 2: Ninety-Three [1993].
Speaker 1: --Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 90998
Speaker 1: Now, your, your partner [Calvin Grigsby] gets in trouble, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you--that became of what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, but by that time you're in business for--
Speaker 2: Eleven years.
Speaker 1: --Okay, '96 [1996].  Is '96 eleven years?
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985] to '96.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so can you just talk about that, because he actually ended up being acquitted?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was indicted on a bribery scheme on a bond issue for, allegedly a bond issue, for Dade County, Florida of which he was indicted and he was acquitted on all counts.
Speaker 1: So this is where you had sort of cut your teeth?
Speaker 2: In Dade County, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And how long a period of time did that between allegations and acquittal, how long did that--
Speaker 2: Take?  I think it took probably four years.
Speaker 1: That was a trying period then for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was trying, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you--are there things that you would have done differently or you just think it was sort of, you know, someone after you or--
Speaker 2: Well you know what happened was once he got indicted, he felt that there was no way to survive.  And so he encouraged us to go and find jobs at other firms.  And so I wanted to preserve, 'cause I saw Travis Bell when he died, that's when [Travers] Bell went away.  Wardell died, Wardell Lazard went away.  And so this was a death in one sense, not physical, but emotional and economic at least for a period of time.  I was trying to preserve the firm as best I could and so I took people who were not associated with that and people who I felt--that cover my territories that we would form a new firm.  That's when we formed a new firm within probably a month of his indictment.
Speaker 1: So also it was actually like three or four years later that he got acquitted and you--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Okay, operating.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He was operating in no man's land for four years dealing with the legal issues.
Story_ID: 90999
Speaker 1: Now in this whole process you're not sort of, you're not--but there are interesting changes is happening during that time, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about what's happening politically and you know, within the cities?
Speaker 2: What happened was you had the conservative government taking place throughout the nation.  It was end of the [President Ronald] Reagan era and then end of the Bush one [President George H.W. Bush], and so a lot of the cities were hiring--the African Americans--the first African American generation of mayors were being replaced by Anglo mayors all throughout the nation, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois], Seattle [Washington], other places throughout the nation.  It was happening that way.
Speaker 1: So that was happening, but there were still those requirements in place, but those didn't matter?
Speaker 2: No, there were no requirements because you also had an affirmative action effort taking place.  California had two propositions, Prop 209 which banned minority contracting and then also you had Prop 187 which was anti-immigration.  So there was this fervor of anti-minority spreading from west to east.  And so there was initiatives all throughout the country combining that with no political contributions to elected officials and combining that with the turning out of office African American mayors and elected officials, you had sort of like a perfect storm for economic crisis for the securities industry for African Americans.
Speaker 1: And so the companies that sort of succumbed during that period were whom?
Speaker 2: All of them.
Speaker 1: All of them, all of them?
Speaker 2: Virtually except M. R. Beal.
Speaker 1: So as of today it's M. R. Beal, yourself?
Speaker 2: And then the other ones are--Grisby & Associates is around but it's (unclear) for themself.   There's no Dun (ph.) and [W R] Lazard there's no Daniels & Bell, Pryor McClendon [Counts & Co.] has been swallowed up by a smaller firm called Apex, but there no more--none of the powerhouses anymore or anything like that.
Story_ID: 91000
Speaker 1: Now what has contributed to your success, once again, and you know, is this an industry that you still love?
Speaker 2: I love what I do because I've always wanted to leave a legacy and corporate finance never intrigued me that much because it's all about dollars and cents and then all the treasurers and the CFOs are predominantly Anglo-Saxon Protestant, graduate Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Stanford [University, Stanford, California], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], Texas, so all the same.  In public finance, you get a chance to affect people's lives on a day-to-day basis and you can see it, you can see a building going up, you can see a housing project going up.  You get a chance to interact with people of all different economic status and so that's why I love public finance.  I dabble a little bit in corporate finance but, and we do corporate finance, but I don't do it personally.
Story_ID: 91001
Speaker 1: And where do you see the growth areas now, sort of looking forward, and do you see any--are the trends still the same or starting a Republican government--
Speaker 2: Well first of all, as [Dick] Montalbano told me a long time ago, there's advice right there, off all the things he said was, I said that's political, he said political is not bad now, it's just political, once you understand it, and so some of my best clients happened to be Republicans.  My best year I've ever done in this new firm under Siebert Brandford Shank is a Republican treasurer of Ohio.  And to (unclear) answer your question first, is there's tremendous need for infrastructure, the infrastructure of the country is falling apart.  Every system needs a new water--waste water treatment system since the growth area.  With the airline industry even current as it is, you got to continue to replace the runways and upgrade the terminals.  The roads and brake systems, if you're driving across this country are terrible.  You need more mass transit to cut down on congestion and so it's a--and you need more housing because more people--housing is just a game you need to rebuild it.  And so it's just a tremendous growth area is this part of finance in terms of volume of business is great as it's ever been.  Back in the '80s [1980s], it was $100 million and then '90s [1990s] maybe $200 million, this year, it's already $350 and may be over $400 million by the end of the year, so it's a tremendous growth area.  But in terms of--and this is very interesting in being in this business, is that Republicans have constituents and Republicans in the different centers, not presidential, but at the local level or state level, they have to deal with their community and they represent all kinds of people.  And so they want to be able to show they can support the African American community, but they not gonna support Section 8 Housing or welfare, but they'll support an investment banking firm, then get a bond deal.  So we're the benefit of some of these so-called conservative trends, especially with (unclear) government, we have to borrow now, before you could pay as you go and use cash out of your coffers to do that.  And so my biggest transaction--my most (unclear) concern as an investment banker was a $471 million State of Ohio transaction.  This transaction was given to me at 80 million, unsolicited proposal, no RFP process.  We got into it--this is March of 2001, the rates started improving, deal size grows, grows to $200 million, and then it grows to like $290 million.  Well the day before the pricing on a set of gold bonds, the market really rallies, the deal goes to $471 million, the state treasurer asked me one simple question--the deputy state treasurer, one simple question, can you handle this deal this size, I said yes, he said, done.  And we sold the bonds and so the second largest deal in the history of Ohio.  And his name is Joe Deters and it's amazing office.  He was a former Hamilton County prosecutor, his whole staff are white males and all (unclear) prosecutors.  You would never think that kind of makeup would give a deal to an African American (unclear) firm.  And so politics are very interesting, makes some strange bedfellows.
Speaker 1: But what was the political part of that, that they had to--you know on the--you said it was unsolicited?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how was it unsolicited and you got, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, we submitted an idea on a refunding opportunity.  And so we said these are some bonds you have currently outstanding, you can refund them and you can save x millions of dollars.
Story_ID: 91002
Speaker 1: And do you do--so that's what I'm trying to understand. The way that business has sort of changed because what you described at the beginning were-sort of these halcyon days of blacks getting in as mayors and everyone--there's an excitement in the air and people are getting involved in the business and deals are being cut and that went.  But at the same time people like yourself who survived, you're doing business, still doing it, probably under the radar screen of a lot of situations, but what is the nature, what you know, what of these types of deals, you know, that would allow an all-white office to--
Speaker 2: Well, what I think what it is, is that people don't, because of the history, knowing that African Americans can do business, it has become more color-blind, it's become more regionalized or a specific focus, do you have the qualifications in this particular area.  And so my advisory board which was led by Al Johnson, R. Greenfield and state treasurer at the time, Ken Blackwell, said, as a small firm you need to do what other little small firms have done, you specialize in certain areas.  So we decided two areas we're going to choose to be experts in, water and sewer, and transportation.  And so in the first quarter of 2003, we were the number one firm on Wall Street in water and sewer, and now we're currently number five.  And we broke into the top twenty for the first time, (unclear) broke up to the top twenty in 2001, and we've been in the top 20 ever since.  And so we have elevated our firm up into the second tier firms.  We're after Goldman Sachs, the top five firms is the first tier and then 15 to 25--five to 25 is the second tier.  So we're in the second tier firms.  And so they like firms of a smaller size because you get that personal attention.  We're really small, maybe 40 people, but the four people working in your deal will have 20 years' experience a piece.  You have Goldman Sachs, the lead partner has 20 years, but the other kids have three years, five years, they don't know as much as the people that they're working for.  So firms like firms with expertise and so that's what we bring, we're just not--we're more like a boutique--a national boutique, we're not trying to be all things to all people.  So that's how we sort of built the firm.  And so there other small firms doing that now, a couple Hispanic firms are really growing.
Speaker 1: And you had--you looked at that in terms of like you said the infrastructure that needed to be focused on?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there's education, but education--
Speaker 2: Education is another big one.  I mean we've done--we did $1.5 billion for Detroit Public Schools in the last four years as lead manager.  And it's been a couple of things my partner has done.  And so we just got hired at Englewood School District, we doing the different Chicago Public Schools, we do virtually all public schools throughout the nation.  Schools are a very interesting entity in that the funding from schools comes from property taxes and so people don't like to vote for property tax increases to pay for public schools when they're sending their kids to private schools.  And so schools are a very complicated scenario and so--but in order to do school finance you have to have vote of the people to raise their taxes specifically to do that.
Story_ID: 91003
Speaker 1: And with--what do you want to see your firm do, you know, going forward.  What is your plan now from this point on?
Speaker 2: Well, the partners said, we decided that, my first goal was achieved.  We wanted to create the only minority women-owned firm that could effectively compete with the major Wall Street firms, so we've done that.  Our next goal is probably to be at the upper tier of the second tier.  We don't want to try to get to the first tier because it would take--we would lose our identity, we'd have to sell part of our firm and lose the minority woman ownership interest in, so we think it's very important to maintain this as an institution going forward.  So my goal is to try to have a African American firm become like Goldman Sachs that will survive a century, not just a lifetime of the partners and so that's the challenge that we face.
Speaker 1: And what infrastructure are you putting in place for that to happen?
Speaker 2: We're trying to hire some young people that could come along and we can mentor who can carry the torch.  That's one of the things that the other firms were so reliant upon only the senior manager, I mean the senior partners.  At least in our firm there's a ten-year-gap between me and Suzanne Shank and so, she's forty, I'm fifty-one.  And so when I decide to slow down, she'll be able to carry on 'cause we got some younger people we're bringing along.
Speaker 1: But you've still got a lot of life left in you?
Speaker 2: Got an awful lot of life, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And now are you still traveling as much as you were?
Speaker 2: No, I cut down the travel.  I've flown over four and half million miles on business, which is staggering, but I managed to do it and maintain my home life because I never traveled on the weekends except once a year--twice a year, Final Four (unclear) NCAA Board and then the Congressional Black Caucus and I'm home three nights a week.  I may go to New York Monday and come back Tuesday, go to Houston on Thursday, come back Friday, and so it's very important to do that.  But now, I've gotten these regional offices up, I got some very good people in place, so I'm focusing most on my efforts now in the west.  So if I could stay in one time zone, you know, a time zone a hour before like Denver west or to Alaska.  We just opened up Anchorage, Alaska office.  And so we still continuing to expand, but I'm focusing my efforts on the west and my partners are handling more of the east and we got some new people handling Texas and Florida, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And how many people working for you?
Speaker 2: Forty people.
Speaker 1: And that size, you find that a nice, comfortable size.  It sounds like, I mean, the way the deals are done, you don't need to have huge amounts of people?
Speaker 2: Well, see with technology, with computers and cellphones and email, you don't need as many people as you used to.  Used to be real labor-intensive, and the way the process is set up now, most issuers have proposals and they usually the same, they qualify you in the pool and then you have to figure out how to get selected out of the pool.  So it's based on your focus as a firm.  So we focus in on these particular areas and so it's--we don't chase everything, we don't chase a lot housing stuff and things like that.
Story_ID: 91004
Speaker 1: I want to ask just some, you know, questions, sort of contextual questions or you know, philosophical questions.  In terms of the industry, you know like this--the investment banking industry is divided into how many parts, is it public and private?
Speaker 2: It's public, corporate, commodities and real estate.
Speaker 1: And in those--between those different areas, the opportunities for minorities, where have they been the strongest?
Speaker 2: In the public finance area.
Speaker 1: And do you think that will change or is changing?
Speaker 2: It will not change because the only place that's required have social responsibility is in the public.  And corporations are willing to let minority firms do transactions or participate in 'em but not to the extent that you can build a firm to be in the top tier by doing that.
Speaker 1: And if you are--for young people coming out, what would you say, you know, their background should be and would you advise anyone to go in the same, you know, the same path as you?
Speaker 2: Well I would advise people to do what they want to do.  I think if you have an interest working in the public sector and you want to make that a profession, this is a great profession.  But I would never want a kid to limit its dreams of what he wanted to be.  If he wanted to corporate finance, he may be able to start a corporate finance firm that he can compete, or if he wanted to get into real estate or their managing of money or all that, I think the opportunities are unlimited.  The United States is much different than anywhere else in the world.  In France, you can't quit an investment banking firm.  They're only like--constitution--no more than ten are allowed or something like that.  And so you can never be an investment banker or have your own firm.  Where in the United States you can do that.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it's such a wonderful industry?
Speaker 2: Travel.  You make more money than athletes make for a longer period of time, and then you get that same competitive environment.  You think people fight at the Super Bowl, you let them fight for a billion dollar deal, you know, it's the same kind of no-holds barred competition.  And so it's a great lifestyle and also too, you can make the kind of money you want to make without being a celebrity, which means you can still enjoy yourself.  One of my good friends is Avery Brooks, we go through the Final Four and he can't walk 10 feet and somebody wants to get his autograph, he can't enjoy himself.  It's a terrible life to live, I would never want to be a celebrity.
Speaker 1: And--the NASP [National Association of Securities Professionals]. What is the status of it now and what do you consider its legacy? It's still--
Speaker 2: NASC is still the professional organization for the securities industries for African American.  And because there's been a lack of minority firms on the investment banking side, they have shifted its focus to a certain extent, to the firms that manage money like Air Capital and Smith Graham and Paradigm [Asset Management] and people like that.  And so they have a much bigger say-so because that is a world growth industry in terms of the management of pension funds as the population gets older, the baby boomers get older, the pension funds will continue to grow and they need all the help they can to maximize returns because social security is gonna be miniscule by the time my generation gets to be that age.
Speaker 1: So if you were--would you advise someone, a young person that enter into that area, you know if they were starting out now?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I think it would be a great business to get into.
Story_ID: 91005
Speaker 1: I want to just ask you because you know you grew up and you say, you know, you have a strong interest in history and you know you have written your book, I want to ask you what motivated you to write your book?
Speaker 2: What motivated to write my book, first of all its called "Hoosiers, Too[: The Road Warriors]" and the book was--what motivated me was in 1995 we got inducted into the Hall of Fame and went down to Indianapolis [Indiana] and they spent maybe two minutes talking about the team.  They didn't mention the starter's team at all because he's no longer living.  And so we were basically dissed, using the young people's vernacular, by the Indiana High School Athletic Association.  And so I said that was not what happened with this team and so in order to memorialize anything, you need to put it in print like the last generations--last centuries.  And so I decided I was going to make everyone aware of this great team, circumstances of how this team got to where it was, the obstacles that they faced and that one of our greatest basketball players of all time is virtually unknown outside basketball enthusiasts of our generation.  And so that's why I wrote the book.
Story_ID: 91006
Speaker 1: And, you know, speaking of sports, there's still, you know, well how would you describe, instead of my commentary, you know, the progression of African Americans in sports and you know and the role and sort of ownership or non-role and ownership of teams?
Speaker 2: Being involved in the NCAA I got a chance to see sports up close and personal.  And athletes have to recognize that if they're gonna ever become owners of teams, they're gonna need to pull their resources together.  Their intent is not to let minorities into the ownership of clubs.  It's the last of the old boy networks.  It used to be Wall Street, those barriers have been broken down.  And if Michael Jordan can't own a team, it's going to be very difficult for any other African American to own a team unless you do like Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and I don't think he got a good deal for what he did and I'm not sure that's gonna be--it's not the optimum situation you want to go into, you got a failed city [Charlotte, North Carolina] that wouldn't support a franchise in the deep south.  All the things that are set up for him to fail are in place.  It will take a miracle for him to be a success, not so much that he's not a good businessman, but the circumstances surrounding the league, they're less kids coming out of college today, they're way too many teams and so to find a superstar that can make your team competitive is going to be very, very difficult.  The Cleveland Cavaliers are very excited about LeBron James.  But LeBron James could be years before he can get that championship.  Look at Michael Jordan here in Chicago [Illinois].  He got Scottie Pippin and some other folk, it took him seven years, and so you got to have the endurance to get past that.  And so I think we need to look at how athletics are being viewed by our kids and I think what would help these kids out a lot, and a lot of folks even who want to become owners, is to read this great book that just came out.  It's called "They Cleared The Lane" by Ron Thomas.  It's the history of African Americans in the NBA.  It is such eye-vealing--an eye-opening book about segregation in the North.  It's a lot different than Jackie Robinson.  Jackie Robinson was the only, or the first, and maybe the only one of the original black baseball players that had a college education.  All the college basketball players had to have a college education.  And so you see that from their perspective what it was like to grow up in a society, and these kids growing up today, they wouldn't be doing half the things that they're doing and they would make a real effort to get an education.
Speaker 1: And so that's the education you think that really needs to be done.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The other thing of its', you know, sort of telling about your half is that you are in control of what you do and a lot--this is what is the issue is African Americans have not been able to relegate income--
Speaker 2: Control.
Speaker 1: --Even though they've been the main revenue generators--
Speaker 2: Right, entertainers.
Speaker 1: --Right, entertainers that's right.
Speaker 2: Always entertainers.  They like for us to entertain, but they don't like for you to own.  And that's one of the difficulties of these kids coming out of school without an education.  You need a foundation to prepare yourself to own.  And what they're doing is they're making all this money and turning it over to an agent.  And the agent is doing with that money what he wants to do with it.  And so all it takes is one slip-up and you can lose all your endorsements through injury or through an incident or anything.  And so you have to have something as the old people always told you, you have to--the one thing, they can't take from you is your education.  And so I encourage all kids to get their education, even if you got to go back and get it, but just don't think you can make it in life without an education.  I don't know where that concept came from.  Because in my generation it was not whether you going to go to school, it's where you gonna go to school.  And today people are even questioning am I going to go to college, and how can you possibly make it in this world without an education.
Story_ID: 91007
Speaker 1: Now, your view--do you have any other thoughts about black--well let me ask you how you got involved with the NCAA, I mean how that came about?
Speaker 2: One of my best friends is Dan Boggan, he's the chief operating officer at the NCAA.  He said Napoleon, we need people in here who can help raise money and then also who can give a different perspective than somebody who doesn't own their own company and so that's how I got involved.  And so there are four or five African Americans on that board, Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] of American Express, Calvin Hill who played for the [Dallas] Cowboys, he's got his own business--successful in his own right and Mr. Brown from North Carolina, he's a--and Bob Holland, and so we give a different perspective and we tend to have more credibility because we've been successful in our own right.
Speaker 1: Now with--you've really, well for a while had been in this sort of elite group of African Americans, you mentioned you know Ken Chenault who's head of American Express, Bob Brown who has his own investment banking firm, and Holland too, so what is--where do you see the interesting sort of--what is the next stage for African Americans?  What do you see, you talked a little bit about you know color-blind, you know, be the best, yet you know a lot of times people are now getting to that point and you know corporate America and then they get the company when it's like in horrible shape and--
Speaker 2: Totally.  My philosophy of life is--of business, the more I am dependent upon somebody else for my economic survival, the more at risk I am.  I know what I can do and what I can make and so if I'm working for myself, I feeling very comfortable.  (unclear) working for these major corporations that you have a real problem.  And so I would encourage these guys and ladies to be looking at how to start their own firm, their own corporation in these corporations, not just continue making dollars for the shareholders.  You can still do good work and set yourself up to expand your own economic opportunities.  I guarantee you if Ken had a chance to do with American Express what he wanted to do with it, it would be a much bigger and much better company, but he's limited because they think he's African American so how could he possibly know something that we don't know.
Story_ID: 91008
Speaker 1: Now with--when you look at the African American community now and you know you were part of sit-ins in the early '70s [1970s], I guess, you know, '60s [1960s], '70s, and you know we've sort of transitioned and integrated sort of--or we've integrated, I shouldn't say sort of, but what hopes and concerns do you have for the African American community going forward?
Speaker 2: My concern is a lack of understanding one's history and without vision people perish.  And our people do not have a sense of what it was like to grow up, and without their history understanding how we got to where we are, you're doomed to make the same mistakes of the past and so we need to have our people more in tuned with history.  I don't understand why we don't have black history in schools, or why it's not being taught.  To understand your self-worth and all the great things that African Americans have done, that's why this project is so important, because we have done so many things and we've been held back by so many people, there's so much talent that went before me, there's more talent in myself that never got the opportunity and people need to recognize that and try to help the next generation by supporting various types of programs for kids.  It's all based on the kids and these kids need to have a better perspective other than video games and cable TV and rap and all that.
Story_ID: 91009
Speaker 1: And when you think about yourself, the little boy who grew up you know on that block in Indiana sort of surrounded by family, but a family that may not have had a vision past the, you know, the steel mills there, how did you do it?
Speaker 2: Let's see it's interesting.  I don't, I don't, I don't--
Speaker 1: And yet you're grounded.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You didn't cut it off.
Speaker 2: --I didn't cut it off.  That's a difficult question.  Well faith is first of all, is very important.  You can't do it without faith and being grounded in the word, so you have to have that, from my perspective.  I don't know if I've done that much.  People always say, you done this, you done that.  My response is I'm just a guy from a small town in Indiana doing the best he can with what he got, not too smart and not too sophisticated, that's my story, I'm sticking to it.
Speaker 1: But for a young person coming?  No, I'm just saying, for a young person coming behind because remember what you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah well I think it is--
Speaker 1: I liked the subject, I did well.
Speaker 2: --Yeah, well I think you should have seen this book called the "Men of Courage" I've gone through and looked at all those quotes on these 34 men who've come from poverty and have become successful.  My quote, I still it's the best, which is "you can't let anybody deter you from your dream" and you have to make everything a mission.  A mission is different than anything else.  Mission means you will do whatever it takes to get to your goal, well not whatever it takes, whatever is appropriate to get to your goal.  And so that drive, when you're going up the hill and the people are throwing land mines, they're shooting rockets at you, you just learn to duck and dodge, but you keep your eye on the prize and you don't give up under any circumstances.  And so that's something that was--I'm still trying to figure out where I got that from, but I've always had that.  And so I always encourage kids to whatever it is you want to do then you should go for it with all the gusto you got.  But as a matter of fact, part of it did come from [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s philosophy of you know be the best of whatever it is, he said, if your lot in life is to be a shoe salesman--a guy who's shining shoes, well shine shoes like Michelangelo painted pictures or like Handel composed music.  And so whatever it is you do, do it to your absolute best and then you'll be considered a success.  And he said that people should recognize that a Ford should not be trying to be a Cadillac.  Some people in life are destined to be Fords in life, some people are designed to be Cadillacs.  Well a Ford can park in a space that a Cadillac can't get into, at least in the old days.  And so it's those kinds of things I think if kids would really get back into history and study Dr. King and what he believed other than "I have a dream" speech, they would offer an awful lot from all of our ancestors.  I mean it's a awful lot, I mean one of the greatest books I ever read was Judge [A.] Leon Higginbotham [Jr.] who should have been a supreme court justice, one of the most brilliant men of all time.  In his book he breaks down racism in America by the law.  It's written for non-lawyers, and when you read that you understand where we are.  And so I think if people read those kinds of things and take that into consideration with their desires of their own heart, I think there's no limit to what you can achieve.  But you have to have that basic grounding and rooting and family and word and history to be a success.
Story_ID: 91010
Speaker 1: And what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: As a person who gave his all to make his world and the world he lived in a better place.
Story_ID: 91011
Speaker 1: And your mother [Cora Brandford], who's still alive--
Speaker 2: --Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: What does she say about her son's success?
Speaker 2: I think she's amazed 'cause she say, you see all this right here, I got it from you.  Because I was--I always had this energy and she didn't know what I was gonna do with it 'cause I had a lot of pent-up anger against the Anglo community because I felt I had been held back for a variety of reasons.  And she was always concerned I was gonna do something.  In fact she wouldn't--she tried to get me to not even look at "Roots" she thought I would do something crazy.  But I always knew how to channel my energy into positive response.
Speaker 1: And your children, right?
Speaker 2: I don't have any children.
Speaker 1: You don't have any children, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: And is there anything else that I may have missed?
Speaker 2: I have two favorite sayings, the first one was about my grandfather [Eli Harris] and then my other one which is really a philosophy on life and circumstances and things that happen was the last line of "Ain't Misbehavin'" that was written by Fats Waller.  As they pulled him off the stage, he pulls down his glasses and he looks back and says, "one never knows, do one?."
Speaker 1: Great.  Okay, that's true.  Your grandfather's with you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: He's been with you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: He might be the missing piece of the puzzle?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah, he was quite a man.  They moved there in 1922.
Story_ID: 91012
Speaker 1: Alright, Napoleon Brandford, III, that was graduation picture, June, 1970.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER: Just a second. Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was taken when I was about six years old in front of our home in East Chicago, Indiana, Calumet section of East Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, now you have to state, you know, from left to right?
Speaker 1: Oh, from left to right is me, Napoleon Brandford, and to the right is my younger next brother, second oldest brother--oldest brother Darryl Brandford.
Speaker 2: Darryl, D-A-R-R-Y-L.
Speaker 1: R-Y-L, right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: That picture is taken in May of 1952 of myself, three months old.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, just a second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Please?
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 2002 at the Congressional Black Caucus, that's Ambassador Sidney Williams to the left and in the center is his wife, Congress Woman Maxine Waters and then me on the right, Napoleon Brandford.
Speaker 2: Did they show you what we do with these, we make them part of the archives?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, they didn't.  Great.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, just a second.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken probably when I was 14 years old and to my immediate, to the left is Emery Brandford, my youngest brother then Napoleon Brandford then my mother, Cora Leigh (ph.) Brandford and then to the right Darryl Brandford, my second oldest.  This was taken I think 1988 in New York at the Rockefeller Center, to the left is Mayor Gene Sawyer [Eugene Sawyer], in the middle is my wife Sharon Brandford and to the right is myself.
Speaker 2: You know he's very sick.  We did get his interview though.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, just a second. Okay.  This picture was taken in 1993, it's a picture of me on the left and then my wife Sharon on the right.
Speaker 2: So how long have you been married?
Speaker 1: Twenty-seven years.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Just a second.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Please?
Speaker 1: Okay this picture was taken the summer of '76 [1976].  I'm to the left, to the right is my wife.  This was taken in Los Angeles [California].  We just got married.
Speaker 2: You had just got married, okay.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Just a second.  Please?
Speaker 2: This picture was taken when I was fourteen years old at Mr. Emmett Watkins' (ph.) home.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken graduation, December '74 [1974] from Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Go ahead please?
Speaker 1: This picture was taken, I think it's my eighth grade picture at East Chicago Roosevelt [High School] which would have been 1966.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.  Just a second.  Please?
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was taken in 1983 in Modesto, California, at the Redline Motel to the left is Richard Patterson, Vice-Mayor of Modesto, in the center is Henry Cisneros and to the right is myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what was the occasion?
Speaker 1: League of Cities Trade Mission and Henry was mayor of San Antonio [Texas].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in May of '76 [1976] at the Rose Garden at University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  In the front is my wife Sharon and I'm sitting behind her.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken July of 2001 at the Westin Hotel at Indianapolis, Indiana.  The occasion is the Citizen for Sports Alliance banquet award.  To the left is myself, to the right is Avery Brooks, the actor.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Just a second.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 2: This picture in September, 2002 at the Congressional Black Caucus at the Council of Negro Women's headquarters office to the left is myself, to the right is Dorothy Height [HM].
Speaker 1: You know she just came out with her book.
Speaker 2: Did she?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's written a book.  She's on all kinds of tours now.
Speaker 2: Oh, good.
Speaker 1: I just was at a book signing for her the other day.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's quite incredible.
Speaker 1: She's highly incredible.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: This picture was taken when I was about six years old.  I am in the center to the left is my cousin, Karen Harris first, next to her is my brother Emery, next to him is William Sturdevant, above him with the mouth open is Willie Sanders, Jr., to the left of me is Sylvia Durr, I'm in the middle with the bow tie, to the right is Angela Durr, to the right of her is my brother Darryl, directly in front of Darryl is Carl Parker and right in front of Carl is Sharon Manly.
Speaker 2: It was taken of me when I was approximately three years old on the couch at my home.
Story_ID: 91013
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was taken--this is a class picture in 1966 at East Chicago Roosevelt [High School, East Chicago, Indiana] and on the back to my grandmother saying that I am the star of the family.
Speaker 2: See, it was that guy.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, report cards, everything.
Speaker 2: Oh, see.
Speaker 1: Now this picture was taken January of '78 [1978], graduation from University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California], School of Park Administration, master's degree.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: This is our wedding day, May 21, 1996.  I'm to the left and to the right is my wife Sharon [Brandford], and we got married at halftime with the [Philadelphia] 76ers-Phoenix Suns game.
Speaker 2: You didn't, no.
Speaker 1: Not at the actual game, but we went out and got married.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: That was September, 1976, a picture of me taken at Lake Tahoe during our honeymoon.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: Graduation picture '78 [1978], University of Southern California, January.  To my left is my wife Sharon, I'm in the middle, to the right is my mother Cora [Brandford].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken, I think, in the Bahamas in 1976.
Speaker 2: On vacation.
Speaker 1: Vacation.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a book "Hoosiers, Too: The Road Warriors" written about the 1969-70 [1970] State Championship team, East Chicago Roosevelt Rough Riders, which I was a starting forward on.  The purpose of the book is to present to the State of Indiana an urban version of the movie "Hoosiers" to let people know that people from northwest Lake County and people of color were also part of Indiana history basketball.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of my eighth grade high school basketball team.  And the top left is Coach [Kenneth] Hinebaugh.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name?
Speaker 1: H-I-N-E-B-A-U-G-H.  Forty is number Jim Kroll, 44 is Napoleon Brandford, 20 is Jim Bradley [James Bradley], 34 is Pete Rancifer [Woodrow Rancifer].
Speaker 2: How do you spell Rancifer.
Speaker 1: R-A-N-C-I-F-E-R, Rancifer, then Jim Rossi [James Rossi] is number 30.
Speaker 2: R-O-S-S-I?
Speaker 1: Yes.  At the bottom left, Bob Modrowski, I don't know how to spell that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then you have Mack Washington is next, next to him is Bob Warner (ph.), on the other side of the trophy going to the right is Tony Avington and the other two, I don't remember their names.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Which one are you, 44?
Speaker 2: Forty-four.
Speaker 1: Go in on it.
Speaker 2: Starting on the left is myself, leaning over, Napoleon Brandford, 25 is Jim Bradley, 31 is Darryl Brandford, 24 is John Davis, 20 is Michael Artis, 23 is Frank Sucheki.
Speaker 1: You know how to spell Sucheki?  I wouldn't ask you the hard ones.
Speaker 2: S-U-C-H-E-K-I, something like that.  To his right is Chris Kouros, that's a great name, K-U-A-R-A-S [sic, K-O-U-R-O-S], then Bill Hosback (ph.) is the last one to remain standing, then on the bottom left is Jim Rossi, to his immediate right is Holland Fluellen, to his immediate right is Leonard Marks, and the last one there is Cavanaugh Gary.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, please?
Speaker 2: To the immediate left is myself looking over the shoulder of Pete Rancifer, holding the newspaper is Cavanaugh Gary, to his immediate right is Leonard Marks and the tallest guy on the page is Mike Artis.
Speaker 1: And what was the occasion?
Speaker 2: The Sunday morning after the State Championship victory.
Speaker 1: Okay and this is 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine, seventy [1969-1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy, but this is like March 22, 1970 and that's the headlines, "Rough Riders Russell Shepherds Flock" which shows us winning the State Championship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Shooting the basketball number 25 is Jim Bradley and the other gentleman in the dark uniform blocking out the guy is Napoleon Brandford.  And this is a game against Morton High School.  The other guys I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was taken in 1990 in Los Angeles and this is a photo in "Men of Courage" book, "Men of Courage" was 34 young men that was chosen by Nestle's who started from humble beginnings to make something of themselves.
Speaker 2: And I'm reading here the Wall Street Journal.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Wall Street Journal.
Speaker 1: You with the Wall Street Journal.
Speaker 2: A picture of me with the Wall Street Journal commenting about what I thought it was to be a success.
