Story_ID: 371847
Speaker 1: Good afternoon Dr. Branche [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Good afternoon, Shawn.
Speaker 1: I am Shawn Wilson for The HistoryMakers.  I will do the interview today and perhaps the second session if we are not finished today.  This is the videographer, Neculai Burghelea.
Speaker 2: Neculai.
Speaker 1: And if you have any, we are here to make you comfortable and to get your story.  So, oh, and also we'll pause every half hour to change the tapes, so that will be a good time to stand, stretch your legs.  I'm gonna start with five basic questions, but before that I'm going to ask you today's date.  What's is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 6th, 2006.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: In my home at 15 Bank Street, Apartment 106H, in White Plains, New York.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, twenty-two, twenty-five [March 22, 1925].
Speaker 1: So it's March 22nd.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-five [1925].
Speaker 1: And your birthplace?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Tuskegee.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired physician.  My specialty, internal medicine.
Story_ID: 371848
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna start with these very basic pop culture questions.  Easy answers.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say brown.  I have more brown clothes than anything else, as you can see.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: In terms of, I like all vegetables, particularly asparagus, string beans, of course, sweet potatoes, and I also, as far as protein, I enjoy fish primarily, and, of course, chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The spring.  The spring.  Things like, it's not too hot, and it's a time when it seems like the earth is taking on a new thing so to speak.  Fall and winter I don't care that much for.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would say away from the states, I would say the Caribbean, several islands I've gone to for a week with family, I've enjoyed them.  I also go, have gone over fifty years, every--almost, for a week or two, to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], where my son and daughter [Leota Susan Branche] now each have a home there.  So Martha's Vineyard is a place where I have many friends, particularly Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts] where they have their home.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase.  My attitude is that we were put on earth to make things easier for others, and that those coming after us should have a better time than I had, if possible.  I believe in the Golden Rule.  My daughter when she was younger, when she was trying to learn the Golden Rule, said, "Do it to others before they do it to you."  But I don't really go along with that.
Story_ID: 371849
Speaker 1: So we will start by talking about your family history.  You have a rich family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So we will start by talking about your mother's [Lillian Davidson Branche] side first and then we will work our way backwards with your mother's family.  So we will start with your mother's name, your mother's date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's date of birth was December the 22nd, 1900, and she was born in a little town in Statesville, North Carolina, in North Carolina.  I knew her grandmother, who was a very elderly lady sitting in a rocking chair.  As I recall she may have even had a pipe.  I knew my grandmother, my mother's mother, whose name was Davidson [Victoria Davidson], family name was Davidson, and I don't know whether this has any relationship to Davidson College [Davidson, North Carolina] or not in North Carolina, Davidson.  I know that my mother did not know her father, who was Caucasian, but I knew my grandma Victoria, and they were extremely poor.  When we would go up to North Carolina, we'd go every summer when we were children, from Tuskegee [Alabama] to North Carolina.  That was going north, and we would, most of the time, my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] would get in this old Hudson and pile the family in, we would stop in Statesville to see friends and see grandma there.  Years later, when we were little, my mother built a home for her mother Victoria.  My mother had three siblings, Aunt Bessie [Bessie Davidson], who would be about my complexion, and Uncle Joel [Joel Davidson (ph.)] and Uncle Justin [Justin Davidson], who were like my mother, very, very fair.  My mother would never talk very much about that, and later on, apparently it was a pretty large family, but I never got to know many of them, but apparently, one of the relatives in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] brought my mother into their home to sort of take care of her.  She was a very beautiful woman, as you will see in some of the pictures, and when it came time for her to go to school, Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina] was going.  Mary Potter had been founded twelve years previous, no, had been founded twelve years prior to her birth, and so she went to Mary Potter and did very well and was very well liked by Dr. Shaw [George Clayton Shaw] and his, Dr. Shaw's wife, Mary Elizabeth [Mary Elizabeth Lewis Shaw].  And she met my father, who was five years older, he was born, well he was born in 1896, four years older.  I guess he met her when he was a sharp young college student from Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  He had gone to Mary Potter too.  And so after he finished his training, they were married.  In the meantime, my mother studied at Cheyney Teachers [Cheyney Training School for Teachers; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  That's an old school.  It's now Cheyney University, I believe.  I know she took courses there and I know she was a teacher.  She was teaching, and they were married.  My father then married in 1923, after he had received the appointment to the big veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus] in Tuskegee, Alabama, they married, and moved to Tuskegee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your mother and her siblings all have the same father?
Speaker 2: We're not sure.
Speaker 1: You're not sure.
Story_ID: 371850
Speaker 1: Did she [Branche's mother, Lillian Davidson Branche] ever talk about stories growing up in Statesville [North Carolina]?  What was, it was a very small town you said.
Speaker 2: Well actually, there's a little town adjacent to Statesville called Troutman [North Carolina], Troutman, and that's where we visited my great-grandmother when we would go there.  She died a few years later.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know that--
Speaker 1: But that was Victoria's mother?
Speaker 2: That was Victoria's mother, yes, and no knowledge whatsoever.
Speaker 1: What did Victoria [Branche's maternal grandmother, Victoria Davidson] do for a living?  She worked as a domestic in someone's house?
Speaker 2: Something like that.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Were they on a farm in Statesville?
Speaker 2: No.  No, they were not.  There was Statesville, and it was a little town and she lived adjacent to the town out in the country and we knew, I don't know how, we knew a couple of the professional people at Statesville.  There was a doctor there.  I forget his name.
Speaker 1: Was he black?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a very close friend of my mother's, and we would always call with him when we would visit, but I knew very little about Statesville.  Most of our time when we went to North Carolina was in Oxford [North Carolina] with my father's [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] side of the family.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's last name?
Speaker 2: Davidson.
Speaker 1: Davidson.  And that was Victoria's last name as well.  Did Victoria ever marry?
Speaker 2: I'm not aware of it.
Speaker 1: You don't know.
Speaker 2: And, my mother's name, as I said, is Lillian Davidson.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that your mother related to you about her time growing up in Statesville that you can remember?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She rarely talked about it?
Speaker 2: Rarely talked about it.
Speaker 1: These must have been very hard times for them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Statesville.
Speaker 2: Very hard.  She never would describe how and when or why, I would know why because probably there were very poor and these loving relatives who were quite better off, in fact, I know the grandchild of one of those relatives, whose husband, who's a former professor at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], they lived in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and they made sure that my mother got an education.
Speaker 1: Now where did your mother go to school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, after Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina] she went to Cheyney Teachers [Cheyney Training School for Teachers; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Cheyney Teachers.
Speaker 2: I don't know how long she stayed there, but I know she was a teacher.
Speaker 1: And she became a teacher at--did she teach at Mary Potter?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know where she taught.  But after she, actually, she was twenty-three when she was, when she married my father.  My father was twenty-seven, twenty-eight.  But I don't know very much about it.  Her siblings moved north to Englewood, New Jersey, her two brothers [Joel Davidson (ph.) and Justin Davidson].  They were each married.  One of the brothers has a daughter whom I'm in touch with every holiday, who lives down in Georgia, Patricia [ph.], and the brothers were all Davidson, Martreaux [ph.] and Justin.  And Bessie [Bessie Davidson] was her sister who moved up to Washington.  She was married, had no children.
Story_ID: 371851
Speaker 1: So when your mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] met and married your father, then they moved north?
Speaker 2: No, they moved to Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where my father had the--
Speaker 1: --further south then.
Speaker 2: Further south, further south.  He had, apparently there were offers to, they needed young doctors there [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Apparently, they were anxious to get young, I guess, black doctors 'cause it was a black institution.  And when my father finished Boston University medical school [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], by the way, there were twenty-three people in his class, and three were black.  My father was one of them, and the other, one of the others I think went to Tuskegee and joined the medical service with my father.  Now when my father finished Boston University, he took an internship of four months, now these internships they're trying--he took an internship for four months in psychiatry, and he became very much involved with the field and worked hard and studied after he got to Tuskegee and soon became chief of the neuropsychiatric service.
Speaker 1: Well, let's just back up a little before we talk about his professional life.  Let's talk about his childhood.  Your father's date of birth, his full name and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father's full name was George Clayton Branche [George Clayton Branche, Sr.].  He was born January 10th, 1896.  When he was three years old, he was adopted by his uncle, Reverend George Clayton Shaw.  Dr. and Mrs. Shaw [Mary Elizabeth Lewis Shaw] had no children, and when they would visit their family in Louisburg, where my father was born, Louisburg, North Carolina, they asked if they could adopt this little fellow, and they adopted him and his younger sister [Iola Branche].  I think she was no more than two.  Since they adopted him, they said, we might as well take this young girl too, and they moved into the house and they were raised by Aunt Libby, Aunt Libby, Uncle George Shaw's wife raised them as their own children.  They lived in the home there and they went to Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina], graduated from Mary Potter, both went off to college.
Story_ID: 371852
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your father's biological father?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's biological father is named, as I said, there were twelve of the children, my father's mother's name was Hannah, Hannah Shaw [Hannah Shaw Branche].  She was the sister of George Clayton Shaw, and I know they were farmers and often they was a bit of, many of them were preachers.  Did a little preaching, country preachers, but mostly farming.  And I know that they were a mixture so to speak, of Indian, so-called Native American, or Indian, Caucasian and African American.  Let's see, I think I have pictures, there's one up, is a picture up there, I'll get later on and show you, which is my great uncle who lived, moved to New York from North Carolina, Ferdinand [ph.].  You can see very strong Indian features.
Speaker 1: So Hannah was George's sister, which is why he adopted her two children?
Speaker 2: Hannah was George's sister.  Hannah Shaw, who married Joel Branche, and Joel Branche, I think was the oldest of my father's brothers, and they kept in touch, but I didn't see that much of them.  Periodically when we would go to North Carolina, they would take me by, out in the country and see uncle so and so, and as a youngster I was totally confused as to who, how they were, it's only been in the past few years that I've been able to try to collect some information about the family.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you know about George Shaw, the Shaw that adopted your father?
Speaker 2: Well, he was really the one who I might consider the patriarch of our particular group.  As I said he was born during slavery in 1863, and, as I said, I guess he was fortunate that his parents were, would you say house slaves so to speak.  They were not relegated to the field and what have you, and so they enjoyed certain privileges and learned much more, much more about, I guess, the culture of mistress and master.  Apparently they were, I gather treated very well because Uncle George, my father's uncle, he was able, after the war [Civil War] ended, to go on to school in that area.  The school that he founded, however, Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina], they had no schools for African American kids.  That was in Granville County [North Carolina].  That was one of the reasons that Oxford [North Carolina], he had chosen Oxford as a place, to start his school.
Speaker 1: So, Shaw, the family's patriarch, was in school, but this school, talk to me about his schooling, his education.
Speaker 2: We know that he, I have some information that I want to share with you, booklets about the whole history of his education and so forth, and I think you'll be able to find out.  I know that he did go to a school and I know that the school was big enough for him to qualify for admission to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] where my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] went, and several of my father's brothers went to Lincoln University, Joel, Matthew [Matthew Branche], after whom my brother was named, and I believe one other.  So they were able, and most of them became ministers and educators and teachers.  I know one Uncle Tallmadge [ph.] practiced, he was the principal of a high school and was a minister in Fayetteville, North Carolina, and Uncle Joel, I kept in touch with his family, moved to Cleveland [Ohio] where he was in construction.  He had several children whom I knew quite well.  Uncle Matthew was a minister and a teacher in Warsaw, North Carolina, and I'm not familiar with where the others went.
Story_ID: 371853
Speaker 1: So Shaw [George Clayton Shaw], the patriarch of the family?
Speaker 2: I consider, I call him that.
Speaker 1: Now, I may refer to him as that, because it's easy to remember it that way.  He himself was a minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They called him Dr. Shaw.
Speaker 1: Dr. Shaw.
Speaker 2: Now he went at least three years after leaving Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] to Auburn [Auburn Theological Seminary, New York, New York].  Incidentally, I think Auburn closed down a few years later.  They called him Dr. Shaw, he was the leader or the principal, whatever you want to call someone.  When they first started the school, they had no building and they had two students who lived in the house.  The house burned down, I think.  In 1930 they built a new home, and I have pictures of Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina].  They had a new building which dealt with the trades. They had a dormitory, Pittsburgh Hall, next to the main house, which was for boys.  I gather somebody from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], somebody must have made some funds available, and Wells Hall, and a little gymnasium, a tiny gymnasium which is named after Mrs. Shaw, Mary Elizabeth Shaw Gymnasium [Mary E. Shaw Gymnasium].  They still have little affairs there, social affairs, although the school officially closed down in 1970.  They have an elementary school on the grounds but a new school that was built there.
Speaker 1: So he became a theologian from Auburn here in New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, I thought it was in Schenectady [New York], it was in New York State.
Speaker 1: New York State, yes.
Speaker 2: New York State, but I have that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then the church, he opened the Presbyterian church.
Speaker 2: In Oxford, North Carolina, just three blocks away, up the street, near the little town itself, and that was named Timothy Darling Presbyterian Church [Oxford, North Carolina].  It's still active even though we've lost quite a few churches in the Presbyterian--
Speaker 1: What was the size of his congregation, do you know?
Speaker 2: The church would hold, probably, I'm taking a guess, seventy-five or a hundred.  It's a nice little church, I have pictures of that and, as I said, when we went up to North Carolina to visit, we always went there to the church and I was baptized there.  And I'm told I was baptized with water, a bottle of water Uncle George brought back from, when he was in Jerusalem he brought a little bottle back from the River Jordan.  That's what I'm told now.
Speaker 1: So you were baptized in the River Jordan.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So the church itself still stands?
Speaker 2: Still stands, and it's active.  And I receive information periodically, I'm in touch with a lot of things going on at Mary Potter.  We try to keep it going, primarily the house which has become a museum.  It's become a museum, and the church is just a few blocks up the street.
Speaker 1: Now do you know how he, how your, Mr., Dr. Shaw formulated or founded Mary Potter school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He went to that area, and as I'm told that he would walk as many as 12 or 14 or 20 miles each day between Henderson, North Carolina, which is a much bigger city.  That's where Henderson Institute [Henderson, North Carolina] was.  I don't know exactly when that was founded.  But he would walk there all the way into the area of Oxford.  Back and forth, walked, there were no, he didn't even have a mule or certainly no car.  And he chose Oxford as his site and began to investigate about land availability and the people up at Auburn, the ones who really supported him financially gave him funds with the understanding that there would be a church involved with this school.  And he started out, with as I said, just a couple of students and there were different ages and he graduated evolved into what really was Mary Potter Academy which was a high school basically.
Speaker 1: And it was private at the time?
Speaker 2: It was a private school, but I'm told at one point in the early years that the students had to pay something like twenty-five cents a month to go there, and quite a few interesting people have gone there.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people who have gone?
Speaker 2: I don't remember all of their names, I really don't.  I met many of them, some have gone on off to various professions and you may recall that there later on there was Palmer Institute [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] founded by Charlotte Hawkins Brown, and many of my contemporaries went to Palmer Institute, and many of them, not so many of them went to Mary Potter, but my friends knew youngsters at Mary Potter and said, why, how did they go to Mary Potter instead of Palmer.  So, of course, each of the institutions closed down.
Story_ID: 371854
Speaker 1: So let's talk some about your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] then.  We talked about your father's, his father who was actually his uncle, his adopted father we were talking about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, yeah.  Uncle George [George Clayton Shaw] really was his father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his father, I mean your father, then was born, your father's date of birth is?
Speaker 2: That was January 10th, 1896.  And I mentioned, he had gone to Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina] and then to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  Now his college was interrupted in his junior year by World War I [WWI].
Speaker 1: Because of the war.  But before you get to his college, do you have any stories about his childhood?
Speaker 2: The only thing he used talk a great deal about were athletics.  He loved tennis.  Uncle George had a clay tennis court in the turn of the century on that little campus next to one of the buildings, a clay tennis court, and I know that the house sat back, as you will see in the pictures, and on the lawn they played croquet.  You know, I learned to play croquet.  And then baseball was something my father, as a youngster and I'm sure that they had teams where they participated.  I don't know how much the curriculum offered.  I know that Latin was something they were taught, and other languages, but they had a little trades building across the street from the house, which is now our museum.  And a Mr. Hicks [Thomas Hicks], who had one child, ran that, and they trained many of the youngsters in a variety of trades.
Speaker 1: What trades were popular at the time for African Americans to then get jobs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not, I don't know.  I'm that they had to be, I would hear them hammering and so forth, maybe, I'm sure mechanics, I don't think that farming would be involved there, but Mr. Hicks ran it for many years before he passed.
Speaker 1: So your father went to Mary Potter for school. After Mary Potter, where did, was Mary Potter then a high school?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: Because later on it became an elementary or young--
Speaker 2: Years later when integration occurred and so forth.  Then the grounds were used for, to make a--to build an elementary school [Mary Potter Middle School, Oxford, North Carolina], which is integrated but primarily black.
Speaker 1: So at the time your father went there for high school.  Where did he go before he went to Mary Potter?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Mary Potter, Mary Potter initially was more than just a high school, as I said.  They had some students who were just learning elementary school work.  Here again, I'm not sure because he was only three when he was taken from Louisburg [North Carolina] to Oxford [North Carolina].  So I don't know, except all I've heard is going to Mary Potter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then after there he went to Lincoln?
Speaker 2: He went to Lincoln and, as I said, at Lincoln he was an outstanding athlete, primarily in basketball, baseball and tennis, and a good student, and he was known as boy wonder.
Story_ID: 372243
Speaker 1: We're going to continue with, your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] was called boy wonder.
Speaker 2: Boy wonder, at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and outstanding in baseball and basketball.  He was 5'10" and he was a giant, and I have, my son has pictures of him as a center for the basket- Lincoln University's basketball team.  But after two or three years he was drafted into the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: World War I [WWII]?
Speaker 2: World War I, where he stayed about six months.  He was a master sergeant according to one of the records, and went back to Lincoln where he graduated.  And when he graduated from Lincoln, he--
Speaker 1: I have that he graduated from Lincoln in 1919, do you know if that's correct?
Speaker 2: That would, that is exactly right because he went to Boston University School of Medicine [Boston, Massachusetts] and graduated in 1923, exactly twenty-five years before I graduated from there.  And after he graduated from Boston University, he took an internship in psychiatry at the Boston Psychopathic Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] or something, I'm told.
Speaker 1: Was that unusual at the time for an African American to move toward psychiatry?
Speaker 2: I'm not aware that it was at all.  I do know one thing, that the person who influenced him more than anybody else, and you may have this in your records, was a Dr. Solomon Fuller [Solomon Carter Fuller], who was from Liberia.  He went to a little college [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina] down in North Carolina and later gravitated up into the Boston [Massachusetts] area where he became a member of the faculty of Boston University in psychiatry.  While he, this was long before my father, and I know this, that he studied under Dr. Alzheimer [Aloysius Alzheimer], the Austrian doctor who described the pathological changes in the brain, little plaques that caused Alzheimer's.  So Dr. Fuller was an outstanding man and my father just gravitated towards him and worshipped him and believed everything he said.  And Dr. Fuller, Boston University was late in paying tribute to him, very late.  I don't know that he ever got a full professorship or what have you.  Some years ago, one of the buildings at Boston University was named after him, but not many people know about him at all.  He later, when he was in his late eighties and nineties, became blind, and in his private practice still practiced psychiatry, and when I took my residency after leaving Boston City [Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], it was in Framingham [Massachusetts], at the Cushing Veterans Hospital [Cushing General Hospital] that's where Dr. Fuller had moved, and I went by on several occasions and sat and talked to him.  He was totally blind and he passed a few years later.  But at any rate, I know that my father was one of the early black psychiatrists.  In those days they also had what they call, still now, neuropsychiatry, and my father was involved in neurology and psychiatry and he became chief of the neuropsychiatric service at the VA hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus] in Tuskegee [Alabama].  I don't know whether my father was the first black physician to get his boards of certification, I don't know, I'm not going to say that, but I know it was very early, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was very early, so it was probably, definitely one of the first.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 372244
Speaker 1: Now did your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] do any research at all?
Speaker 2: A lot of research.
Speaker 1: Did he write any papers about--
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, I have some of them here.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things he was researching and writing about?
Speaker 2: Most of them, he wrote some things in lay articles.  I don't have any of those.  I remember as a youngster, my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] would show me one of them where he, the article described everybody as a little crazy.  And he would point out funny little anecdotes there.  Some of his research was done on treatment of neurosyphilis.  In fact, a couple of articles.  He was one of the first to use quartan malaria therapy in an attempt to combat tertiary syphilis.  They didn't have very many types of treatment.  I have one article here in which a drug called, I'll get that article for you, in which he wrote a paper and was presented I think in Chicago [Illinois] and he attended quite a few meetings I know in New York and gave papers relating primarily to the treatment of advanced syphilitic disease.  He also was--there were no psychiatrists in the county, Tuskegee [Alabama] was in Macon County [Alabama], and he would, I remember as a small child when he would come home, take off his uniform, put on civvies and go over to his, he had a little one-room at the John Andrew Memorial Hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama] where I was born, and he would see patients with severe depressions, and I know that he worked very hard and when coming home from duty from the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], which was a walking, you walk up to the main buildings, come back and change his clothes and then drive to Andrew Memorial.  He was one of the, he was an outstanding Omega man, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], one of the early, early Omegas, and then he was one of the first members of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] in Alabama, and was very, very active in that.  And he continued visiting his schools, particularly Lincoln.  And I remember going up with him when he had been out quite a few years, meeting Langston Hughes, who finished just a few years after him, and some of the people there.  So I have a lot of fond memories of those, but he worked very hard.  He continued playing tennis and fortunately we had tennis courts in our back yard at the VA hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], had six beautiful red clay courts, which were taken care of by the patients as a form of physical and occupational therapy because we had a huge number of patients who had severe psychiatric disorders.  We talk about the youngsters from Vietnam and this present conflict [Iraq War], the horrible things that it's doing, to the trauma and post-traumatic stress.  They had a huge number of people with mental disorders.  So, as I said, he was very busy.  He unfortunately developed high blood pressure, and had a stroke and then later on died.  He was just turning sixty.
Speaker 1: Of an aneurysm?
Speaker 2: He had an aneurysm of one of the branches of his aorta, the iliac, but he had, we had, this was, at the time he died in 1956, he had had a stroke but was alert and talking and then had a sudden demise.  But we had no treatment.  I think we were beginning to use Serpasil or something, but there was no effective treatment.
Story_ID: 372245
Speaker 1: Was your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] politically active and socially active in the community?
Speaker 2: Socially active, as I said, with, they had little clubs, my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche], you know, they would have a women's club of Tuskegee [Alabama] or this or that.
Speaker 1: What kinds of clubs were your father involved with?
Speaker 2: Primarily the fraternity, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  In those days, you would have one Boule chapter in the entire state, so he would go to Huntsville [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama], Montgomery [Alabama], or the group might meet in Tuskegee.  The same thing many years later when I became a member of the Boule in 1961.  In Richmond [Virginia], we had only one Boule. We would go to Roanoke [Virginia], to Hampton [Virginia].  When I went into the Boule in Hampton, Brud Holland [Jerome H. Holland], Jerome Holland was president, and Brud and I went in together.  But then now you've got chapters in Roanoke, Richmond, Newport News [Virginia], all over, so it's spread out.  Actually, yeah, okay, that's the way.  So they were, he was socially active and outgoing.
Speaker 1: Was he involved with any civil rights of the era, of the time?
Speaker 2: No, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was still active down there, and it's amazing that we were fortunate living in, I would, would you call it an oasis, you know, we were.  Not that we had a lot of money, no, no.  There was no money and salaries, but he struggled hard, and I don't think he made any money in his private practice at all.  But the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] allowed him to see people because of the paucity of psychiatrists in the area.
Story_ID: 372246
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Tuskegee [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I, as a little boy, I was very fortunate.  We lived on what was called the circle.  The circle consisted of a number of little houses and large apartment building which housed primarily physicians and their families and people who worked some in business, some in laboratory sciences who lived there, and was in walking distance from there.  I would say no more than a quarter of a mile, and there was a little library at the VA hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], which was very well run, and I recall growing up like the other little boys.  We played ball out in the yard.  We played tennis very early and so became pretty adept, and I can say that we have five generations of tennis players.  Because of Uncle George [George Clayton Shaw], we had that tennis court in Oxford [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: In the backyard.
Speaker 2: Well, on the campus [of Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina], the little campus.  As I said the pictures will make you understand clearly what went on.  And then I had, we had tennis.  We were very fortunate, and they would sometimes have little tennis tournaments there between, most of the tennis players, of course, came from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but they would play other, other schools.  And Tuskegee at that time was quite a proponent for tennis.  You don't remember, you're too, you weren't even born when McDaniel [Jimmie McDaniel] and Cohen [Richard Cohen] and all these outstanding men were players, but we, they could not compete in the main tennis world, the white world.  Arthur Ashe was a, well Arthur Ashe wasn't the first.  Althea Gibson was the first, and we used to go to the little tennis tournaments sponsored by the ATA, the American Tennis Association, and Althea and my brother [Matthew Branche] were the same age, and Althea's best practice came from playing against the boys, because there were no women, and Althea played and won one of the, and you have I'm sure, the records on Althea.  She just passed a few years ago.  Very said, she was an excellent golfer, excellent tennis player.  But then later on Arthur came.  And Arthur lived two blocks from me in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And then they thought to put the statue on the main boulevard.
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?  And you couldn't play tennis there, in courts in Richmond.  And I forget the doctor [Robert Walter Johnson], the doctor's name who took him up to St. Louis [Missouri], and that's where he blossomed.  But he was a fine young man.  We called him Little Ashe.
Speaker 1: Little Ashe.  So your days in Tuskegee were playing tennis and--
Speaker 2: Playing tennis and whatever little boys do, and then I went to the Chambliss Children's House [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama] for my elementary school, I remember that.
Speaker 1: What was it called again?
Speaker 2: Chambliss, C-H-A-M-B-L-I-S-S.  He was a former student of Tuskegee who did quite well, must have given some funds to them and we all, I and my close friends--
Story_ID: 372247
Speaker 1: We had to take a bus from the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama].  The bus would come around every morning and take us to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and deposit us at the Chambliss Children's House [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama], where we would all, these were grades kindergarten, I went to kindergarten there, through I think the seventh grade, elementary school.
Speaker 2: Well when your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] was working at Tuskegee, what was your mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] doing?  Was she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a housemaker.  She had a lot to do to take care of us.
Speaker 2: Well it was only the three of you, right?
Speaker 1: Homemaker.  It was just the three of us.  My brother [Matthew Branche] was two and a half years younger.  He and I were always in school generally together.  He was in elementary school the same time.  My sister [Martie Branche Baudult] was seven years younger than I, was starting the Chambliss School when I had left to go to Boston [Massachusetts].  But we, as children, you know, we played with Booker T. Washington's grandchildren by his son Dave [Ernest Davidson Washington].  We played together.  Edith Washington [Edith Washington Johnson] just died well before, a couple years ago.  Gloria Washington [Gloria Jackson Baskin], I think, was my brother's contemporary.  And their mother [Olivia Davidson Washington] taught either the third or fourth grade at Chambliss Children's House.  So it was, we got a pretty good education, and then after you left the Chambliss Children's House, I think they had a little intermediate school, then you went to the high school.  Now I will say that the majority of our very close friends, left Tuskegee [Alabama] when they were about to enter high school, and went to various, some went to Palmer [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina], some went all the way up to Northfield [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts], all the way up to Massachusetts, but most of them went to high school away from Tuskegee.  They were, they felt very strongly about, the parents, about education, and that's why my father sent me to Boston [Massachusetts] with the understanding that I would go to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], and I didn't know anything about Boston Latin, but that's what happened.
Speaker 2: So before you went off to Boston Latin, what were summers like, you said the summers you traveled back, or you traveled north to Shaw [George Clayton Shaw].
Speaker 1: We would often, almost every summer we would get in this old Hudson and drive up to North Carolina.  We went north in the summer, and, but we only spent a week or two there in North Carolina, and we would come in, we engaged later on when we came a little older, we would go to tournaments, but sometimes my father would drive us up, to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] on a couple of occasions, to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], where the ATA [American Tennis Association] had its tournaments, but I never did very well in tennis with the ATA.  I did better in Boston where the kids didn't know anything about tennis.  Even white kids (laughter).  So we did well, all of my siblings, my brother and I.
Speaker 2: Who were your inspirations?  Who were your influences at that smaller school, Chambliss?
Speaker 1: My teachers in elementary school, who were very excellent teachers, Mrs. Flake [ph.], Mrs. Washington, Booker T. Washington's daughter-in-law, who impressed upon us the need to study.  They were a little more strict in those days.  They wouldn't spank us but they would scold us in terms of education, they--athletically, in athletics, my dad was always an inspiration for everything.  For his, I unfortunately did not develop his soft manner and low key nature.  He was a very kind, I used to see him come home, sometimes late at night I would wake up when he'd come in from Tuskegee Institute from seeing patients, and said, "Dad, why do you practice, why do you do this, why do you work so hard?"  And I never will forget, never, he said, "Because of the joy I get when I see the patient and the patient says, 'Thank you doctor.'"  He says, "You don't know what a thrill I get." So my father has always, and the sad thing is I didn't have that much time with him because, as you will see in our records, when my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] moved north with my siblings, my father was left alone.  Now, that tells the story of what we did later on.  We went south during the summer when it was hot, hot, hot, and then came back in September, came back north in the fall and winter.
Story_ID: 372248
Speaker 1: Whose idea was it for you to go to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I'd never heard Latin when I was sent, I know that I was going to be sent to Boston.  A very close friend [John Garrett, Jr.] of mine who lived next door at the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], his father was, I forget exactly what Mr. Garrett did, John Garrett [John Garrett, Sr.].  Well John and I were the same age, and when he was ten, his parents sent him to live with Mr. Garrett's relatives, and so after he spent a year there, my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] asked Mr. Garrett if they could send me up there.  Now this was living in a small apartment in Roxbury, Massachusetts [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], where there were already two boys who were a couple of years older than us, and one went to Boston Latin, one went to Boston English [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts], and John and I went to an intermediate school, James P. Timilty Intermediate School [James P. Timilty Middle School, Boston, Massachusetts] or something in Roxbury, right near where we lived.  And then our grades were good enough for us to go to Boston Latin.  And that's where we went on to high school.
Speaker 1: While you were, before you moved north, had you been, had you felt any discrimination in the South as a child?
Speaker 2: As I say, not where we lived in Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: It was an oasis you said.
Speaker 2: But we saw, when we would travel, we would stop, later on when I was a little older, we would stop in Atlanta [Georgia], and we'd be on a train and you'd see the signs saying, two water fountains, white and colored.  You'd see restrooms, white and colored.  In Atlanta and all throughout, even my friends who lived in the Carolinas, you would drive in your car all the way up and buy your, fill up your tank and you couldn't use the restroom at a gas station, and you'd have to do what you could. And this went on for many, many years.  Now that's the, now, when we would get in our car and dress nicely and we were go into Montgomery [Alabama] to the department stores to buy clothes, they knew who we were, "Those are those people, they," well I don't know what they thought, but they let us try on the shoes, well you couldn't try on shoes if you went into some of these stores.  And Tuskegee itself had a little business area and we, they had to give us service because they depended on us.  Once you get out of that area, and when I talked to my colleagues from other areas, that was very blatant, so we were, and our family tended to hide us from that, we'll say, as did the other parents.  So Tuskegee was an unusual place, just I'm sure like within the area where you lived, there were probably certain little pockets of areas where you did not, you didn't feel it as badly and, of course, as I said, we had, I'm sure our school [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama], our school was better than the white elementary schools.  And certainly we had more than the white counterparts.
Speaker 1: I see you have a lot of photographs of different portraits, family portraits (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are all my children.
Speaker 1: Was it an annual thing that when you were growing up that you went to a photographer to, for the family portrait?
Speaker 2: Well, I became interested in photography when I was in Korea.  Cameras are very cheap.  You could buy a Canon, you know, for this or that, or get a Nikon, and we didn't know what we were doing, and the sad thing about it is everything was 35 millimeter, so I have thousands in one of my cabinets, thousands of pictures, not only taken in Korea, but after I came back, then I got a new Canon and whenever we would travel to the Caribbean or we'd, a couple of times in southern Europe, or Far East when I went with my family, I've always took pictures, but everything 35 millimeter.  Then I decided that my family, my family gave me the digital and I didn't know how to use it.  And so I buy the throwaway Kodak, twenty-seven films and all those pictures you see there, were taken with a throwaway Kodak.
Story_ID: 372249
Speaker 1: So do you remember preparing to leave Tuskegee [Alabama] to go to Boston [Massachusetts]?  Was that traumatic because you were leaving home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you know what I had done a year before then.  I didn't know anything about going away to camp, and when I was eleven, less than eleven, my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] sent me to a camp in Pennsylvania called Camp Emlen in a little town [Norwood, Pennsylvania] out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me?  Camp--
Speaker 2: E-M-L-E-N.  I'll tell you how you can find out all about it.  It was run by the Wissahickon Boys Club in Philadelphia.  And do you know who was in charge of that and the camp?  It was a Mr. Coleman [William T. Coleman, Sr.], and you know who Mr. Coleman was?  The father of William Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.], secretary of transportation.  We became, we were friends, became friends.  He was short and I forget why we called, we called him Bumps, so the next time you see him or call him, say, "Bumps, how you doing?  I saw old George Branche."  So Bumps was sixteen, I was eleven.  Bumps was fifteen.  He was a junior counselor, and Bumps was my, one of my counsels at Camp Emlen.  We had a little tennis court, we had a swimming pool, and it was a camp where we, where I learned to be away from home for a whole month.  And then the following year, the following summer I believe that's the way it went.  I went on up to Boston.
Speaker 1: Did Mr. Coleman have a daughter, Lizzie Coleman [ph.]?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  But I ran into Bill on several occasions over the years when he was also very active in the Legal Defense and Educational Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].  I believe he's there.  And I'd see him at those meetings.  We would go and chat.
Speaker 1: So at that camp, it was a camp for all black kids?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And the following year, I guess it was the following year, my brother [Matthew Branche] came.  It must have been a couple of years, but my younger brother came.  He was younger than I, quite a bit younger.  He was one of the younger kids.  They had kids as young as ten years or nine years old and my brother was, of course, very active in doing his thing all the way, and I have a letter from my father, I have the letter here, saying, make sure you look after and take care of your brother.  Which nobody could do.  But, at any rate, so I was sent away, and on a couple occasions later on when I was fourteen, fifteen and went to the tournaments, I would go with friends sometimes, not with my father, cause he couldn't, didn't have that much time.
Story_ID: 372250
Speaker 1: So when you arrived in Boston [Massachusetts], you were--
Speaker 2: I lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in an apartment with--
Speaker 1: With what, what was the family's name that you lived with?
Speaker 2: Garrett.  Oh, Mrs. Garrett, I'm sorry, let me go back.  The family was Ridgley.  Mr. Ridgley [sic.] was married to Mr. Garrett down in Tuskegee [Alabama], my father's [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] closest--an excellent, he won the veterans' tennis tournament in the ATA [American Tennis Association] many years, even when he was in his sixties and seventies, John B., you should look that up.  John B. Garrett [John Garrett, Sr.], he was the early VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], veterans' tennis player in the ATA, Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  He'd get out there and beat all the veterans.  And his son [John Garrett, Jr.] and I were close friends.  His son is a dentist, retired in Boston now.  But his son and I fit in very well because his son was my childhood buddy. We were born only six weeks apart as I said.  And his two older cousins [Aldas Ridgley and Garrett Ridgley], who lived there, sort of brought us along and told us what to do and what was good and what was right and what was wrong, and the mother [Mayme Ridgley] and father [Aldas Ridgley] of the Ridgley boys were very kind.  And an aunt lived there too.  She never married.  Aunt Anna [Anna Garrett], and she was really the one who sort of looked after us.  So that's why I lived on Island Street in Roxbury, Massachusetts, which is adjacent to Boston.
Speaker 1: Now in Roxbury were you one of just a handful of black families in Roxbury?
Speaker 2: At that time, very few.  And then it opened up and it became quite a few.  There was one section of Roxbury up where I could walk, in walking distance a mile away, where there were a fair number of middle class families, but not very many.  Boston has changed tremendously in so many ways.
Story_ID: 372251
Speaker 1: The education you are receiving in Boston [Massachusetts] versus the one you had received in Tuskegee [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, no, because as I said, these were excellent teachers, caring, small class size.  I have a picture of a classroom at the Chambliss Children's House [Chambliss Children's House School, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I'll let you, 1934, I'll let you see how our classes were, very tiny classes.  The teachers were socially active with my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] and father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.].  They were, I might see them out in some social affair, and, not that we got spanked by them, but if we did, we'd get another spanking when we got home.  That you don't do, you just don't misbehave.  Now that's where we were very fortunate.  Now if you ask somebody else who'd grown up in different parts of the South, there might be a difference.
Speaker 1: Did you know George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Let me say this.  Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] died about seven or eight years before I was born, but I have pictures of Dr. George Washington Carver.  He would walk by the Chambliss Children's House when we out for recess.  We were out playing ball, little kids, and we'd see this man walking by.  We knew him, and we would say, "Hello Dr. Carver," and he would say, "Hello children, hello."  And he would have some plants in his arms and then Booker--you know he was born in slavery in Missouri, and then went to Iowa and then Booker T. got him to come to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] under rather adverse circumstances.  There wasn't anything, no money for him to work with and he did so much with the peanut and the sweet potato.  And when you said did I know him, I knew who he was.  He, when he would see all the children out in the yard playing, he knew who we were and we always admired him.
Speaker 1: And he never made much money off any of his, he didn't patent any of the things he did with the peanuts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm sure he didn't.  I'm sure he didn't.  But he was just a very dedicated and devoted man.
Speaker 1: So when you moved to Boston--
Speaker 2: I stayed there for a couple years with the Garretts.  They were very kind, treated me like a member of the family, child.
Speaker 1: And then you came home in the summers?
Speaker 2: And during the summer I would go back and depending on whether or not we played in the tennis tournament or something, I would go to various places or, most of the time was spent in Tuskegee all summer.  So I was in Tuskegee, which was, at least we had some time with my father from most of June, July and August, and then we would come back, then I would come back north.
Speaker 1: How did you get, sorry go ahead.
Speaker 2: Two years later my mother, and you saw the article--
Speaker 1: Moved.
Speaker 2: --moved with my brother [Matthew Branche] and sister [Martie Branche Baudult].  And we lived in a little tiny apartment on the third floor, only two rooms, two bedrooms, on Morley Street, just two blocks from where we lived on Highland Street.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna get to that, but I wanna go back before I get to your mom moving up.  Do you remember the trip up to Boston by yourself?  Did they put you on a bus or did they drive you?
Speaker 2: When I first went, I think they took me the first time, and, of course, I was only up there for two years before they arrived, but so usually going up together.  I don't definitely, I know they didn't send me on a bus or a train by myself, and when I was, when I went to Camp Emlen [Norwood, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania, I know my father drove me there.
Speaker 1: What was our understanding as to why you were going off to Boston to go to school?
Speaker 2: I really didn't have a full understanding, but it had something to do with getting a better education, but there was never a great deal of time spent describing why I went.  As I said, I was twelve, eleven or twelve, and I really didn't have a full appreciation, but I was very fortunate in being able to stay with this family because they were like family.
Speaker 1: Because they knew your father.
Speaker 2: Very close to my father and mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very close to your father--Then did you spend holidays with them, or did you come home for holidays?
Speaker 2: No, I spent holidays.  I couldn't go all the way back to Alabama from Boston.
Story_ID: 372252
Speaker 1: What were holidays like for you then with the Garretts (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fun.  We had the Thanksgiving dinners, we had, now I had, we were very active in the church, this family I stayed with.  We went to a church in Boston [Massachusetts], and every Sunday, we went to church and Sunday School, and then later when my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] came, we went to a small Unitarian church which was only two blocks down the, from our house, and we were very active in that little church.
Speaker 1: Now was it a Presbyterian church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that was in--
Speaker 1: --because Shaw [George Clayton Shaw] had you--
Speaker 2: Initially with the other family, it was Baptist.  And then we sort of got away from the Presbyterian church and then the Uni- this was a Unitarian church and we were very active there.  And then later on I became involved with the Presbyterian church again, which was the one that my grand uncle was involved with.
Speaker 1: So a lot of your time growing up, your social activities involved church, involved things that were happening around the church activities?
Speaker 2: In the community there were little groups of kids who lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  We would have little parties, when we got a little older, fifteen, sixteen, and we might meet at one's house like all kids did, play soft music, dance and meet a couple of nice pretty little girls, you know, you would always like to smile at, and I guess it was normal childhood development.  I would have to walk 'cause where I lived in the section of Roxbury on Highland Street, had, didn't have many, what you'd say, colored families around in that area, so you would have to walk up to another section of Roxbury where the Roxbury Memorial High School [Boston, Massachusetts] was.  A lot of them had went to Roxbury Memorial, and then there were, my friends, both boy and girl friends, lived in that area of Roxbury.  Clifton Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] later moved.  Clifton moved right next door to me on 71 Highland.  I think he was 69 Highland, but I know after a couple of years, he moved up to a different section of Roxbury.
Speaker 1: Now was this--
Speaker 2: And I met his--his father [Clifton R. Wharton, Sr.] and my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] knew each other.  His father, as you saw in the new stamp, went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] after going to Boston English [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  And in those days, apparently you could get a law degree without going basically to college.  And so I knew--and Cliff's father was a few years younger than my dad, but they knew each other, years later, when my dad was in his medical school years [at Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So during the time you knew Cliff, during the time you knew Cliff, was that before your mom moved up?  Did he live next door to the Garretts?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I was moved--living with the Garretts for approximately two years and I think that was, now I was a year older than Cliff.  I went to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] in 1938 and finished in '42 [1942].  Clifton went in '39 [1939], so that was before my mother moved up, but we stayed in touch, socializing and everything.  Cliff had three siblings, younger, and his mother [Harriet Banks Wharton] was a very kind, nurturing woman who kept after those kids too, but we were, Clifton, as I said, was just a couple of years ahead of my brother [Matthew Branche] at Latin, but they competed against each other and for Boston Latin.  And my brother being not only a more of a sprinter, high jumper, broad jumper, Clifton ran more of the 220 [220-yard dash], 440s [440-yard dash], and did quite well.
Story_ID: 372253
Speaker 1: Do you know what made your mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] decide to bring the other children to Boston [Massachusetts] in '44 [1944] as well?
Speaker 2: Well, they, she and dad [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] decided that they wanted all three youngsters to have the same opportunity and the only way to do it.  There was, they didn't have any money and the salary that you get from working for the VA, Veterans Administration hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], they had to make a decision, and so that's what they decided, that they would just, she would just bring them on up there.  I don't know that there was any other reason except that they wanted each of the kids to have the same chance the older boy had.  They went on to Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] and my sister [Martie Branche Baudult] went to Girls' Latin [Girls Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So when the article was published in the 1940s, "Negro Family Comes to Boston Attracted by Schooling," what prompted them to write that article?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I don't, I recall the article shows my father in uniform.  That meant that it had to be 1944.  I think that article was written a few years later.  I don't know, we were, somebody, I guess, thought this was a rather interesting family.  Why would they leave a situation where they were pretty well off financially and socially and move to Boston.  And that, well, one of the things that I am sure you're aware of is that education has always been, and this has been true with your family, the number one, almost the number one priority for youngsters, and you see this going back to Dr. Shaw [George Clayton Shaw].  I mean how more could you thirst and want for better education, and so it was, that it was felt we could get the best education in that area.  We knew about it, I'm sure there were many other areas, but then they had to think about the cost, and believe you me, my mother, an outstanding woman, how she made do with feeding three growing kids with very, very little income.  I remember her walking with great big huge shopping bags way down from where we lived down to Washington Street and walking back.  I mean the sacrifices that they made were just overwhelming, and I'm sure a great number of people wouldn't do that.  I still to this day sort of feel guilty, but that's what they really wanted to do.
Story_ID: 372254
Speaker 1: So when you think about the days, those early days of your childhood, what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Tuskegee [Alabama], and then in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds, well, where I grew up on the circle, we called it the circle, I had other friends, and our tennis courts, and then you could walk to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  It was only, you just walk less than half a mile, and seeing the campus and seeing my friends, and then we had quite a pretty good football team, and we would like to go, and we'd look forward to when we would Alabama A&M [The State Agricultural and Mechanical Institute for Negroes; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], the one in Montgomery [sic.], they were our--and then Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I recall, and then we didn't have many sounds.  There were no trains running by.  There was a train station called Chehaw [Chehaw Train Station], which was several miles from where we lived.
Speaker 1: Chehaw was the station where they dropped all the soldiers off, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And Chehaw was where you got the train to go to various places.  I think we went to Atlanta [Georgia] from Chehaw, and so we didn't hear the engines and the sounds from the train there.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear anything from the flight school?  The sound--
Speaker 2: Years later.
Speaker 1: Years later.
Speaker 2: In fact, a number of my friends encouraged me to get involved with the flight school and many of very dear friends now, my close friends, Lee Archer, "Buddy" Archer, Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown] and a lot of others.  Percy Sutton, I don't know as well as I know Roscoe.  But many of these guys were training there.  And you remember, you may remember one of the young guys who was going to be washed out so to speak, committed suicide on one of the planes, but when I would go back to Tuskegee, Tuskegee, just right there, no more than a couple of miles away and that's where their training took place.
Speaker 1: What did it smell like?
Speaker 2: I don't recall smelling anything.
Speaker 1: It was an agricultural school though.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, that's right.  That's why Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver] came to Tuskegee from Iowa [Iowa Agricultural College and Model Farm; Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa] after he had finished his training, gotten his master's [degree].  I don't remember any particular odors.
Speaker 1: Was your mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] a good cook?
Speaker 2: Oh, excellent.  I was getting ready to say the one odor that I am thoroughly familiar with, was some of those good greens and potatoes that my mother was cooking.  Those are the most enjoyable odors, but yeah, that was quite an occasion with the Tuskegee Airmen.  I remember some of my contemporaries dropping out of their early years in college to go to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 372255
Speaker 1: I'll ask you now, but we'll keep going in chronological order.  Well, why was that not an option for you?  Why did you not see that as a path for you to take?
Speaker 2: I wasn't interested. I was afraid to fly.  I was afraid to ride a horse.  I was afraid to ride, I fell off a pony at camp and never rode a horse, and I had no interest in it, and I was active, and I wanted to go to medical school, and I was fortunate, they needed doctors.
Speaker 1: Had you always been interested in medicine?
Speaker 2: I never thought of anything else.
Speaker 1: For how long?  How far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as I can remember.  That's the only think I knew. I lived in a community of doctors, my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] was a doctor, his close friends were physicians.  I didn't know what kind I would be, but I never thought, as I said, and I'll get to the, once I got into Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], I had spent almost two years there, 1944, I had finished my, I finished Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] in '42 [1942].  I spent two years at Bowdoin and was told that unless I got into medical school that I would be subject to the draft.  I only, didn't have enough, yeah, I only had two years, but I took a summer and at that time all, many of my classmates were in the same situation I was.  We were only nineteen and twenty and so the colleges, Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], Bowdoin, many of us, my friend Garrett [John Garrett, Jr.] at Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], we were allowed to go to medical school and we, and then we accelerated very rapidly, but then in 1945, the war [World War II, WWII] sort of ended and we decelerated so we spent a couple, one six-month period without going to school, and we had to write a little thesis and do something else, and then went on back and finished.  And, but the reason, as I said, I was always interested in medicine.  And at Boston University [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], it was a very tiny school.  When my father went there, there were only twenty-three students at the medical school.  And three of 'em was black, including my father.  And when I went to BU medical school, it was still small.  There were only fifty-nine and now there're over 160 in each class.
Speaker 1: How many blacks were there when you were there of the fifty-nine?
Speaker 2: Very, I was the only one in my class, just like I was the only one at Bowdoin, except for a young fellow who was there for a year and left to go in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Where did you live when you went out to Bowdoin?
Speaker 2: When I went back, when I came back from Bowdoin?  My mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] had moved to 71 Highland Street.  A family moved out and she moved in the same building, apartment, little apartment in Boston [Massachusetts], and I used to ride a bicycle from my apartment to the medical school.  I'd get on my, had my books on the back and I'd get on my little bike and kids would say look, there's a man on a bike.  So I rode that and they would let me hook it up inside the building and then I would bicycle back up to, it was a couple, maybe mile and a half, two miles.
Story_ID: 372256
Speaker 1: Was it difficult at the time for black students to get internships?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very difficult in certain places.
Speaker 1: How did you go about getting your internship?
Speaker 2: Now I was not the first.  A very dear friend of mine, and you should have some records of him, George Lythcott, George Ignatius Lythcott [George I. Lythcott, Jr.] from Tulsa, Oklahoma.  His father [George I. Lythcott, Sr.] finished Boston University [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] seven years before my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] finished Boston, and George finished seven years, and George was an outstanding resident, one of the first in pediatrics at the Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts].  He was outstanding, and then he went on to do fantastic, I'm not, we don't have time to go into that, but fantastic things.  He died about eight to ten years ago.  He spent time in Africa helping to eliminate measles, and just a whole great deal of work that he had done, and then he was on the faculty more or less at Columbia medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], and George was responsible for really turning things around and getting more black kids into the medical school at Columbia.  Columbia had a policy of admitting one black student a year.  And I know many of those guys, each one.  One was a brother, the Yergan boys, Max Yergan [Max Yergan, Jr.] and his brother.  Max finished one year, a couple of years later his brother Charles [Charles Yergan], who was my contemporary, and so there're quotas, and so if you talk about affirmative action, you might say well let's catch up from what we did.  Now it was more difficult.  Boston University picked up, my brother [Matthew Branche] had two, at least two or three black students in his class.  They did a little better in terms of what many of the schools, but, of course, with the need for diversity for the grants given by the government and this and that, they have done a better job in terms of admissions.  The problem is we have a paucity of students who are eligible for applying.
Speaker 1: So in 1948 you're accepted as an intern?
Speaker 2: At the Boston City Hospital.  I had pretty good records and I, I did a lot of my training right across the street in Boston [Massachusetts].  The guy I liked the best, a Dr. Katz [ph.], internal medicine then, he, I'm sure, vouched for me, and I was at, and Boston University, Tufts medical school [Medical School of Tufts College; Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], the three medical schools, each had a division at the Boston City Hospital, so I applied to the BU division.  I really didn't apply to any other hospitals, I felt pretty sure that I could get that.  Now Boston University has the entire city hospital.  Tufts is no longer involved, nor is Harvard.  And my brother went on to Boston City for several years for his training in surgery.
Speaker 1: So were you, you were the only black intern then because you had been the only black student (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my service from the medical, I don't recall any others.  There may have been others.
Speaker 1: Did you every think about that?  How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: I realized that this was not right.  How were we going to make enough doctors and are how people gonna be treated who are sick, and it was not fair.  Now my contemporaries, and a number of my friends, many of them would do their internship in St. Louis [Missouri], Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri], some places in, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  My close friend in surgery when I was in Richmond, Virginia, practicing, virtually the same age as I, finished at Howard.  He did his internship at Homer Phillips and in places in the metropolitan areas, but there weren't many applicants anyhow.  My brother went to Boston City and stayed all of his, but he had to rotate.  He rotated to another hospital outside of Boston for his, some of his training, came back to Boston and he was chief resident in surgery.
Story_ID: 372257
Speaker 1: Outside of your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.], did you have any mentors during this time when you were at Boston University [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], and then you went to Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] and then your internship?
Speaker 2: Not at Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], I really didn't.  That was quite an experience.  They were very strict and I don't know what I was supposed to be learning there.  You had to take four years of Latin, which I didn't understand, and then you had to take at least three years of French, and you had to take at least three years of German or Greek, German or Greek.  And I chose German because I was interested in medicine and a lot of publications in Germany was one of the outstanding countries.  A lot of things were going on in medicine, research, but of course with the war [World War II, WWII], that sort of went away.  And I went on to Bowdoin and took a couple of years of scientific German, thinking that this is, but then the other courses, usual courses, I struggled through, and I got out of the Latin School, but I don't know that I had, the tennis coach, a young man named Aaron Gordon, he was the history teacher.  He wasn't my teacher but he would, they would take any teacher.  He could be history, what have you, and he was my, sort of, I was in touch with him a lot because I was active on the tennis team.  I didn't care for the coach, nor did my brother [Matthew Branche] at Boston Latin.  He was not a nice--we didn't care for him.  But I did for Aaron Gordon, very nice man.  At Bowdoin, there was a outstanding professor, Professor Helmreich [Ernst C. Helmreich] and I didn't take any of his courses, but he was--I babysat for him and family at Bowdoin.  And, I didn't have the older students--when I arrived there were four black students on campus, and by my first year, they were all gone into the [U.S.] Army, and my classmate from Washington, D.C., went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], Ashton Robinson, he was my roommate and my classmate.  He had to leave after a year.  It was an interesting experience, he was from a fine family in Washington and wanted to get in the Navy AS- remember they had the ASTP [Army Specialized Training Program], you don't remember, the ASTP and the Navy V-12 [V-12 Navy College Training Program] programs were for college students.  They were in a hurry to make, get young officers and to train them in certain specialties, and so you could, you could go into the ASTP, Army Student Training Program [sic.], meteorology, what have you, you could go in that and train for pre-med.  You could go in the Navy V-12 program and be and get your training for medicine after spending a couple of years.  So when I went to Boston University [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] I was one of only a half dozen, I would say ten, we didn't have, we have ASTP or V-12.  All my classmates walked around in uniform.  My roommate, Ashton Robinson, applied for the Navy V-12 program, and although he looked as if he might be Caucasian, they investigated and found out that he wasn't, and denied him.  He was an excellent student and he ended up going to the maritime something or other, Ashton Robinson.  So, a lot of this was the time when you couldn't get the best deal.  My father, incidentally, after serving in World War I [WWI], you saw the picture, was a lieutenant colonel in World War II.  They put everybody in the service, and so he was like, light colonel at the VA hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Story_ID: 372258
Speaker 1: Talking about 1948, you are doing your internship at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now was the hospital, did the hospital have two different wings at that time?
Speaker 2: At Boston City, it had sections, surgical and medicine.  For Boston University [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] and for Tufts [Medical School of Tufts College; Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], Harvard, of course, is involved at the Peter Bent Brigham, the Brigham and Women's Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts], Tufts had the New England Center Hospital [Tufts New England Center Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] and so they moved out into, back to those facilities.  And after I finished, now in those days, you weren't paid.  It was a privilege for you to be accepted to this place, this hospital.  It was a privilege so you were not given a salary, and after a few months, we went on a job action and demanded a salary, and we were paid, finally they gave in and paid us twenty-five dollars a month.  Now there was quite a bit of difference, of course, in the cost of tuition.  When I went to Boston University, the tuition for medical school was four hundred dollars and the first year I got a hundred dollar scholarship.  A young friend of mine, Joe Niemann [ph.], later went into psychiatry.  He and I were responsible for cleaning up the table in the autopsy unit.  We had to clean up the tables and wash everything down for the next day, and we got a scholarship, and then the next year my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] had to foot the bill, and when I finished med school and was in my internship, my father was able to help me by, he bought a car for me so I was able to move around a little better.  That was when I was getting ready to go into my residency.  I left Boston City and went to the Cushing Veterans Hospital [Cushing General Hospital] in Framingham [Massachusetts].  That's where I met, where I used to go and visit Dr. Solomon Fuller [Solomon Carter Fuller], who was my father's mentor and advisor.
Speaker 1: And that, what year was that you were--?
Speaker 2: That was in, from 1949 to 1951, I spent two years as a resident in internal medicine.  It was at that time that I thought seriously of psychiatry, and a number of my friends and associates said, "Why don't you try it?"  I don't know if you know a Dr. Charles Pinderhughes, who was an outstanding psychiatrist in Boston [Massachusetts] who finished, went to Dartmouth, went to Dartmouth Med [Dartmouth Medical School; Geisel School of Medicine, Hanover, New Hampshire], Dartmouth only had a two-year medical school at one time, so he had to transfer to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] to finish his medicine.  Then he went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and worked with my father in psychiatry, then went to Cushing Veterans, his wife just called me a few days ago asking about me and so forth, and my family, and so he was there, an outstanding psychiatrist, and later practiced in the Boston area.  But I didn't quite understand psychiatry, and I stayed in internal medicine, and after I finished my two years residency, then I took a fellowship in malignant diseases, cancer fellowship, National Cancer Institute.  And I took that at Tufts medical school at a chronic disease hospital in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 372259
Speaker 1: And I was there for about fifteen months when the [U.S.] Army said that I had--the Korean War had started and they said, "Now, we got you," and so I had my choice, being drafted or going in as a medical officer, and so I was sent to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas, to the Medical Field Service [Medical Field Service School].  It's on the wall when he gave me my certificate after eight weeks, nine weeks there.  And so, that was quite an experience.  They would teach us how we should respond under fighting conditions, not that we had any thought of that, but I have some pictures, funny pictures showing me with a grenade launcher and with shotguns, and they would have us crawl on the ground and fire supposedly live bullets.  I don't think they would fire live bullets, and you were supposed to crawl on the ground until you reached a certain point.  We would all lie down.  They said all right, advance.  They should have given us examples of how you were supposed to crawl, and I was so scared and I laid there, and after about five minutes, most of the guys finished, you know, it was about, it seemed like fifty yards, but I'm sure it was no more than forty.  And he said, okay, and then the guy said something like, "All you chickens get up and walk on in."  And I got up and walked on in and I got up from where I started.  But, and then so many things, they took us out at night, got us lost and all these things that are supposed to help you in times of conflict.  And so after we finished that and a few courses on this, and you go over, then they told us where we would go.  You'd write down your preference.
Speaker 2: What were your preferences?
Speaker 1: Europe, see Europe.  Naturally, you know I wasn't gonna get that.  So my assignment was Korea.  I asked for Europe and got Korea.  And many of my friends went to Europe.  Some of the guys went to Korea, and we, what we did, we sailed from, no, they were in a hurry to get us over there, not in a hurry to get us back.  We flew to Hawaii, from Hawaii our next flight was Wake Island.  These were DC, oh, DC-6s [Douglas DC-6], propeller driven.  And then the next was Japan.  And then we went from Japan by boat to Incheon, Korea [Incheon, South Korea], and then by jeep or whatever you, to the places where we were assigned.
Speaker 2: The Army had been desegregated by this time.
Speaker 1: This is one reason I didn't mind going in.  Some of my friends were involved with that.  Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] was running things then, and a lot of pressure was put on him.  Why should troops do this and that while segregated, and so I, that's one reason I didn't mind too much going into the Army, although that didn't change so many other things, as you know.  This was 1952, and Harry Truman desegregated, so to speak, to some extent.
Speaker 2: What was desegregated about it?
Speaker 1: Well, you weren't supposed to have two separate armies, black and white.  That's what went on and throughout World War (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you were a first lieutenant, medical officer.
Speaker 1: Medical officer, and I was assigned to evacuate, when I went down to Fort Sam Houston, I was trained with, all my best buddies were white guys--
Story_ID: 372260
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you allowed to go in any of the officers' clubs?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, oh yes, oh yes.  And when we got to Korea, my assignments, the first one was up in, way up north, a boat, above the thirty.  You remember the 38th parallel, you were too young, but the 38th parallel was the dividing line, but we were actually a little above the 38th parallel, and I was, after I was given a little indoctrination, I was placed in the jeep.  The driver, I think there were two drivers, two enlisted men. I was sitting in the back seat with my duffel bag and we headed north from, I think from Seoul [South Korea].  I'm not sure.  But I remember seeing a sign that said 38th parallel, and they kept going.  I said, "We just passed the 38th parallel."  He said, "Yeah, yeah we did."  And so I went, I was assigned to the, a big, what are these things that shoot off, not infantry. I have it all written down there, but they'd fire off these great big artillery things.  That was it, artillery battalion, to fulfill an artillery battalion.  And you lived in tents and then I was there for, I didn't see many patients.  There were no hostilities going right at that time.  There was no push from the north, so I was relatively happy, and after several weeks, the officer whom I was to replace had been there over a year, and he could stay a couple, few more months, he would be allowed go home or to rotate out of a career, and he asked me if I would, he was to be assigned to a lower, to an evacuation hospital where there were more patients and more things to do.  And he asked if I would take his place, and would I be willing to take his place and go south to the evacuation hospital, and I embraced him.  I was a coward, and so I got in one of these little field artillery, what are they called, observation flights, where they fly to look over what's going on with the enemy, and this is the only thing, way that I could get down to Jeonju, Korea [Jeonju, South Korea].  So I was put in the back seat of a little plane and flown to Jeonju.  I have pictures that I took from my position there in the air.  And I stayed in Jeonju and worked there.  And incidentally, that's where I met many of my friends, several black medical officers.  Two of them are still alive, they're right here in White Plains [New York], Oscar Graves, Herbert Cave [Herbert G. Cave] was an anesthesiologist, Bob Morton [Robert Morton], a fellow from Oklahoma. We were all integrated into this unit, and several of the, and later on after six months I got promoted to captain, became a captain and stayed there, and it was later after ten months, transferred near Seoul to Yeongam-eup [South Korea], to another evacuation hospital for several months.
Speaker 1: So that was quite different from the experience your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] had had in World War I [WWI], cause he was legally segregated, they came back after the war and still had to fight for their rights here.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay, it was taken for granted (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was taken for granted.  We know it would happen.  That's, you know, the Tuskegee Airmen.
Story_ID: 372261
Speaker 1: That's how it came about, because there was so many demands and so the only thing they could, this happened in so many ways, well, we don't have time to discuss it, but there's so many (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go ahead, we have time.
Speaker 1: So many instances where in order to avoid integration, the South did many things I didn't realize.  My brother [Matthew Branche] got half of his tuition paid to Boston University medical school [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] because he couldn't go to medical schools in Alabama.  I didn't know about that.  There were all sorts of tricks that you'd have.  North Carolina Central College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], when black kids wanted to go to law school, they would rather start up a law school with two students and a faculty, I knew some of the faculty members, and the first class I think had two students.  They would rather do things like that.  And so this is what came with the Tuskegee Airmen.  Rather than to let them fly in an integrated way, they developed an entirely different setup.  And they were not allowed in many of the other branches of service, many of the other branches.  The Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] were very late, and you get different attitudes about the Marines.
Speaker 2: You spoke about the gentleman, they discovered he was black and then they didn't accept him.
Speaker 1: Ashton Robinson from Washington [D.C.], went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  That was a Navy V-12 program [V-12 Navy College Training Program] which allowed youngsters to continue into college and go--now, once you finish those, you would have, well, there weren't any black fellows in there so I guess you went on into the [U.S.] Navy or it might, or to medical school or anywhere you could go.  But it was a way they had of preventing a form of integrated services.
Speaker 2: Well how did they know he was black?  You have to fill out a form (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They went in to find his records.  Oh, they could find out all this stuff.  This is the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], you know how well they function, so they found out that he was a colored boy from Washington who went to Dunbar High School, and said, "No, no, you can't get into the Navy V-12 program."  Excellent student, outstanding young man, outstanding family.  And when I came back from Korea in 1954, there was still blatant segregation in restaurants and all of that.
Speaker 2: Because you were in Texas, they sent you down to Fort Sam Houston [San Antonio, Texas].
Speaker 1: But that was after, I went there after Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] said there will be integration in the armed services, is when I got in the [U.S.] Army, that's why I didn't feel too bitter, too angry, but then I found out that there were a lot of things that still occurred when you got back here.  One instance that would amuse you was that I was assigned for two months when I got back to Fort Lee [Virginia], Fort Knox [Kentucky] was having a problem with some infections, polio or something, and they needed medical officers where there was a surplus to come out and work with them, so I got in my little car and drove from Fort Lee, Virginia, to Fort Knox in Louisville, Kentucky, and when I got there, before I got there, I was in my uniform, I could not get a room in a motel driving out, so I had to sleep in my car.  When I got to Fort Knox, everything was perfect on the officers' unit, had a white roommate and we were good buddies, good buddies, and they had a tennis team.  So naturally I played the tennis team.  I was one of the leading tennis players on the tennis team, and the tennis team played other groups in the city that played one of the public parks in Louisville, or you'd play here, and so several of the guys and I got together and we drove over to this park where we were playing some group, tennis group.  And an elderly white man came up, said, "You can't play here."  And so, see but I was off base, I was in Louisville, Kentucky, which was blatantly segregated.  And so I felt discouraged, and I just, I didn't, I was upset and shaken.  I didn't know what to do, I just sort of went over to this little bench there and sat there, and do you know my tennis mates played, went ahead and played.  Now many years before then in Boston [Massachusetts], so many of the outstanding schools, but students, white students, would never do something like that.  So this made you a little angry, and but at any rate, I went on back to Fort Lee and finished my time and that's when they found out I had this peculiar abnormality.  But I was blessed in that I was able to carry on and play tennis up until ten years ago.
Story_ID: 372262
Speaker 1: And also it was, you know, when you were coming back, Brown v. Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], the decision had come down to desegregate the schools.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].  And also things were changing in terms of restaurants and so forth.
Speaker 1: And being able to stay in hotels when you were on the road?
Speaker 2: Some, some.  Now when I came, when I decided to practice in Richmond, Virginia, in 1954 and '55 [1955], and Richmond, of course, was still highly segregated.  There were no black medical students at the Medical College of Virginia [Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia], not University of Virginia, which is in Charlottesville [Virginia].  And we had a very tiny black medical group.  I would say no more than twenty, twenty-five doctors, and I had planned to practice with my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] in Durham [North Carolina], he was going to move from the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], and he became ill and wasn't able to do it.  And I decided to practice in Richmond, and while I was there, there were a number of activities that you could engage in, and one was that the major department stores, like Thalhimers [Richmond, Virginia], and Miller Rhoads [Miller and Rhoads, Richmond, Virginia], all the big, on the main boulevards there in Richmond were not allowing blacks to eat at counters, not allowing people to work there, and I remember we had a little group in Richmond, a little supervised group, I don't even know if we had a name, and you walked with a placard up in front of the store and I remember walking.  I was the only doctor.  Now most of the doctors were from Richmond and were, and had not been north.  They were all guys who'd gone to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], but most of them, I guess were set in their ways, and you wouldn't find another one out there.  I carried this placard at every, and I would get my assignment the next day.  "Are you gonna, Dr. Branche [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.], are you gonna participate?"  I said, "I'll be out there."  I'd walk up and down and sometimes the school buses with the white students would stop, "Two, four, six, eight, we don't want to integrate."  I didn't give them the sign or anything, but I was crazy, and I, that's when I, as I said, I couldn't get the job, any type of job working at the Medical College of Virginia, even though I offered to work free, and that was where they had a segregated hospital.  They had the St. Philip Hospital [Richmond, Virginia] for black people.  And we had a little tiny hospital over in one section near Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] where I worked on the staff.  And then later on a hospital after the integrations began, hospitals, the Richmond Memorial [Richmond Memorial Hospital, Richmond, Virginia] opened and that's where my second child was born.
Speaker 1: Now the first child was born?
Speaker 2: At Richmond Community Hospital [Richmond, Virginia].  That's a twenty bed, not twenty beds, two-story little building near where we lived, and it was, my former wife [June Granger Branche] delivered, was delivered there.  That's George [George Clayton Branche III], the one who's the surgeon in McLean, Virginia.  And then my daughter [Leota Susan Branche] was born a year and a half later, just within that year, we had privileges at a new hospital, Richmond Memorial Hospital.
Speaker 1: Just to go back a little and speak about your father, wasn't your father involved in a lot of the research with syphilis?  Or was that you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was my father.
Speaker 1: Your father.
Speaker 2: He was not involved with the so-called Tuskegee study [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male], which is an infamous study where there was sort of--my father was interested in treating far advanced neurosyphilis.  I'll show you before you go, an old beat up pamphlet where he used the new, he was using drugs for trying to halt the progression, and then, of course, penicillin came, and then everything stopped.  Not that penicillin did that much with far advanced tertiary.  You have primary, secondary, tertiary sorts of syphilis.  But his research was done using drugs primarily because he was a neurologist.  That was his interest and that aspect of syphilis.  Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was in Macon County [Alabama], and I'm sure that that had to do with that.  The lady who called me the other night, other day, Mrs. Pinderhughes, was the wife of Charles Pinderhughes who trained with my father.  She has been asked many times whether or not he had been involved, and she knew nothing, nor had her husband, and that was never, and I never heard my father mention to anybody any trials.
Story_ID: 372263
Speaker 1: So why did you decide to move to Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, because I had lived there for a few months.
Speaker 1: When did you live there?
Speaker 2: I was at Fort Lee [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Fort Lee is in Richmond, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And after, after I left Fort Lee, I had to have some place to live so I moved to Richmond.  Had a little apartment in Richmond.
Speaker 1: City life.
Speaker 2: And got to know people.  Some of the guys I liked very much, and they said, "Why don't you practice here?"  And the thing sort of fell through with my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.], who wanted, who always wanted to come north, North Carolina, where his roots were, and Durham [North Carolina], with all of its activities was a nice place, and here was his son who was by that time, I'd gotten my boards in internal, my boards said internal medicine enrichment, but I had been practicing there, and I married for a year and then decided to stay there, and then I became discouraged, as you will see from the many articles, I was discouraged.  I was worried about the school system, although the little school, elementary school that my son [George Clayton Branche III] first went to, was near Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and it was a pretty good little school but it was not what we wanted, and then I was active with the Presbyterian church, and with some social organizations.
Speaker 1: Which ones?
Speaker 2: With Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], but not long enough.  I didn't, I was not a good member.
Speaker 1: Did you find Richmond to feel like the South, like a segregated place?
Speaker 2: I felt that I was still in the South to a great extent, and when I would go over, I had several interviews with the dean of the medical school, and he would look over my credentials, these are good, these are good, and I said, "Well, I'd like to join the staff."  That had always been my interest to become involved with academics as well as clinical practice, always.  And I offered time.  He said, "Oh yeah, you got great credentials," but he never, never was I given a position.
Story_ID: 372264
Speaker 1: Now seven years had passed, and my wife [June Granger Branche] and I agreed that it was time to move, and I had contacts in New York.  In fact, one of the fellows who was in my tent in Korea, Bob Morton [Robert Morton], an outstanding surgeon, just passed a few months, years ago and a couple of friends here, said, "Why don't you come on up to New York," and then I found out that sure enough, my brother [Matthew Branche] was practicing in New York.  His father-in-law had a practice in Harlem [New York, New York], and I felt it might be good for the two of us to practice together and we looked over the situation, and then Dr. Maynard, Dr. Aubre Maynard [Aubre de Lambert Maynard], who was chief of surgery at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], was anxious to, always looking for young people who had boards, by then I was board certified, internal medicine, and Bob Morton and a lot of the guys who worked in Harlem recommended me.  And Dr. Maynard gave me a job working in the emergency room for a couple of years, for a year, and then Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] was about to become involved.  All the big medical schools in New York had to take over some type of responsibility for helping or working with the municipal hospitals.  And so Columbia sort of became involved with Harlem, and if you spent so much time, certain amount of time, particularly teaching, then you would gain an academic appointment at Columbia, and so Columbia was fair in that regard.  And I worked there, and then I worked most of that as an attending physician teaching, teaching medical, we have sophomore medical students come to Harlem, and we had junior medical students, and then a number of our interns and residents who trained at Columbia, came to Harlem for their internships and residency, and I worked up at Columbia in the admissions program for several years and I worked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you feel you were effective in bringing on, bring aboard more black students?
Speaker 1: Into the medical school?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Yes.  But the one who was really the most effective person, was George Lythcott [George I. Lythcott, Jr.], who did this ten years prior to me.  He was the one who was the outstanding pediatrician, went to Africa, just outstanding, and he was an associate dean.  He was appointed associate dean or something, whatever the term, at Columbia, and that was involved with minority students, and at one point, George had, Columbia had about 140 medical students, and as I told you before, there was one black student per year during a period of time, and when George was there, it went up.  I don't know the exact figure, but at least ten in some classes.  When he left, it sort of went down again, and then we did a little bit better.  I was on the admissions committee for maybe three years, and during that time, several, six or seven or eight, we were able to get back.  I know, I'm sure it's, I don't know exactly what it is now, but that was one of the things that I enjoyed doing.
Speaker 2: So doing your seven years in Richmond [Virginia] building your private practice--
Speaker 1: A nice private practice in the, I would take my patients to the Richmond Memorial Hospital [Richmond, Virginia], but I never got to the medical, the hospital downtown at the Medical College of Virginia [Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia].  I never got on the faculty there.  And so that was one other reason that I left.
Story_ID: 372265
Speaker 1: Continuing.  We were talking about the years you were in Richmond [Virginia] and the challenges in building a practice at Richmond (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How I started the practice.  Okay.  Once I left Fort Lee [Virginia], there was a job offer I had.  It was called a civilian contract physician or something like that, where you could do work in the clinics, outpatient clinics at Fort Lee for soldiers' families.  These were women and their children, the wives and their children, and all I had to do was drive from Richmond to Fort Lee where I saw these people.  I don't recall exactly how much time I had to put in, but it gave me a salary.  It gave me a start.  And then by that time, then I started my practice.  I didn't have many patients initially, but knowing all of the guys there, they would refer, and then we had a little medical society, local, and we got the, then we had little meetings periodically.
Speaker 1: Who formed the medical society?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  Before I got there, a very small, we could not get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Consisting of how many doctors?
Speaker 2: In ours there were about fifteen to eighteen local folks.  The, we could not get into the local state medical society.
Speaker 1: The AMA [American Medical Association]?
Speaker 2: No, the AMA.  We couldn't get into AMA because to get into the AMA you had to be a member of the local medical society which would be, which was affiliated with them, but because we couldn't get into the local, we couldn't get into the AMA.
Speaker 1: And you couldn't get into the local simply because you were black?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Um-hm.  And then as you may recall, and you may have seen, when I got up to New York [New York], I had to join the local medical society to get into the AMA, and then it was declared wrong or unconstitutional for an individual to have to belong to a state medical society to get into the AMA.  So you could get into the AMA without that, so I got angry and just dropped membership in the AMA and joined other medical groups I remember, other internal medical groups, American College of Physicians and the state medical center, all of those I belonged to.
Speaker 1: Before you got disgusted with the, or fed up with Richmond and decided to move further north, what social changes were you fighting to make within Richmond, Virginia?  Were you working there to make the changes that you would later work to make in Harlem in New York?
Speaker 2: When you say social changes, we had a cluster of friends from Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  I knew Dr. Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor], president of Virginia, very good close friend, a wonderful person.  Many of the teachers and professors, and when I got my practice, some of the people there were patients of mine.  I had a pretty good reputation.
Story_ID: 372266
Speaker 1: We were just saying in Richmond [Virginia] the doors were closed too tight for you to do anything academically (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I couldn't do it.  And with the primary, going into the children.  No, see I was concerned about educating these two little children [George Clayton Branche III and Leota Susan Branche] I had.  That was, what did my family do for me?  Moving up like that was a small price to pay.  We made no sacrifices then, in fact, we were all better off, and I had the idea of moving on up into the area and I talked to my brother [Matthew Branche] who lived in New Rochelle [New York], and my wife [June Granger Branche] and I rented a garden apartment there while I was working at, I got this job at Harlem [New York, New York], then my brother and I opened up an office in a professional building in Mount Vernon, New York, and we did quite well there.  In other words, I had both, a full time practice in southern Westchester [Westchester County, New York] in Mount Vernon, where I saw patients primarily from Mount Vernon, Bronx [New York], New Rochelle, southern Westchester, and then I would spend the rest of my time down, primarily at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] where I was sort of half time involved with patient care, and with teaching, and with working primarily in the hypertension clinic.
Speaker 1: How did you do that work particularly because of your father's [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] death or you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I was just sort of, I didn't go in, I didn't continue in the field of oncology, I was sort of depressed about that, and decided that it would be easier.  I heard there was a large population of patients with hypertension as you well know.  We had a huge clinic, and then I started becoming involved with some of the national groups, and some of the pharmaceutical houses had me go off and give little talks.  I guess I've been to about thirty states, but I think I was honest and I was the first black, and at the first meeting of the Joint National Committee for the Evaluation and Treatment of Hypertension [sic. Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure], meets every two years.  We would meet in various cities, and that was, I have the information somewhere hidden around here, but that was quite an experience. I worked with about ten other people who were involved with hypertension and its management.  People who were involved primarily in academia and who were research-oriented.  I wasn't that, didn't do that much, just involved in a couple of papers and a few lay publications and talks to various groups.  But I was very fortunate being able to have a practice, and I was very fortunate being able to become involved with, well that was a practice too in Harlem Hospital, and I spent some time at, I worked at the Vanderbilt Clinic [New York, New York], which was an outpatient clinic, for a couple of years, but then I could not, I didn't have the time to continue, and then as I mentioned to you, I spent a couple of years involved with admissions to the medical school.  And I was granted privileges at the Harkness Pavilion [New York, New York], which as you know preceded the Milstein Pavilion [Milstein Hospital Building, New York, New York], and I was able to admit my patients there.  I admitted a few patients.  They had to be pretty well off.  And so I still had privileges.  In 1992 I was having a few problems medically and so I left Harlem and Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].  I was there thirty years, from '62 [1962] to '92 [1992], and I continued practicing for another four years in a small private practice with my brother.  And then I had a mild heart attack and had to undergo bypass surgery, and by that time I was having more and more of a medical problem, pulmonary, and I had to give up medicine.
Story_ID: 372267
Speaker 1: And so the last few years I have not done very much except I do, I'm still involved with a number of social organizations, and they always ask me what kind of programs I'm involved in and I'm very proud to say I'm involved in the foundation of the Westchester Club [Westchester Clubmen Foundation], which is an organization that was founded a couple of years before I came up here.  It's an organization that deals with Upward Bound things for students.  We have a Higher Aims program for young boys in elementary school, maybe fourteen or fifteen.  They're ages twelve, ten, who, usually a little at risk, if you know what I mean, and we're very proud that we have tutoring for them, and some of the members are able to spend more time teaching chess and mentoring and that program has been going on many years.  But initially it started out simply as a program to grant a scholarship to an understanding college student.  I was a mentor of one of the students [Victoria Holloway Barbosa], who's an outstanding dermatologist in Chicago [Illinois] now.  Then we began to realize that you got to start earlier, that you don't start in high school, it's too late.  And so we started in, with this program in youngsters who were twelve and thirteen.  We're very proud.  We get together with them and that has progressed and so we've tended to follow them on through, and now we started doing this program in White Plains [New York] and now we've moved to New Rochelle [New York], and we are following the students in White Plains High School [White Plains, New York] to find out how they're doing, and so it has been a good program.  Another program that I've been involved with I'm happy to say, I became involved with the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.].  I was one of the founders back in, was it 1943?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-three [sic.] it was?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I was asked to, my brother [Matthew Branche] and a few friends and a group of guys were talking about this organization called The 100 Men, The 100 Men.  I said, "That's interesting."  And they were interesting guys, some of whom we knew.
Speaker 2: David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was one.
Speaker 1: Dave, Dave was there, and Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown] was there.  I don't know that Roscoe came and, in fact, Roscoe was one of our presidents.  And then we decided, there were things to be tackled, problems in our community, and could we help out in terms of being advocates for this and that right and so forth, and we really started out a little fuzzy, hazy-eyed about what we were all about.  And then after about a year or so, we decided to change the name to The 100 Black Men, and some of the members objected to that, but at any rate, we are very proud that now we have 104 chapters and many of them in certain other communities have really been outstanding.  And we've improved a great deal as time has gone.  We have some outstanding young leaders now, and we have an Eagle Academy [Eagle Academy for Young Men] here in the Bronx [New York] which we hope to really get going, and we're having a Founder's Day exercise next week, and I'm being honored along with Lee Archer and Roscoe Brown and Cyril Tyson [Cyril D. Tyson], and Bob Mangum [Robert Mangum], who was one of the starters, and Bruce Llewellyn [J. Bruce Llewellyn], Bruce, I hope they'll be there.  And so we're gonna have a lot of fun next week.  We usually meet at the Adam Clayton Powell Building [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building, New York, New York] there on 125th Street.
Story_ID: 372268
Speaker 1: And then the other organization that I am proud of is the Youth Shelter Program of Westchester [Youth Shelter Program of Westchester, Inc., Mount Vernon, New York], which is a program set to take young men sixteen to twenty-one who've gotten into trouble with the law, often drugs.  Not a felony although they claim that there are those whose crimes have sort of been, could be listed under that.  The idea is to keep them out of jail and have them live in a shelter.  And so we have about twelve to fourteen young men.  The program has been going on for many years, over thirty, and a few years ago, we have another little house adjacent to our building and we call it the Pink House.  It's painted pink and we had several young women.  We couldn't handle it.  We couldn't handle it.  The problems that we encountered were more than we could handle, and so we concentrated back with the young men.  Not that we might not get back to becoming involved with young women, but we're proud.  I'm happy to see the way they act.  We're going to have a little Christmas party on the 18th at the YMCA.  They're taught skills, computer skills.  We have good rapport with some of the judges who look for these kids.  We have to go and have our counselors interview the kids, and most of them, as I told you outside, I would say that some of our studies show that less than 30 percent of those who leave our program after a year are back in jail, and compare that to the jail thing is where it's over 70 percent.  So we're proud with that group and some, one young man went into the branch of the service.  A number have gotten their GEDs [General Educational Development] and they act.  If you walk in there and sat with them, they act better than your average kid from the well-to-do schools in the best communities who don't act nearly as nice as these youngsters.  That's what they're taught.  And then I had belonged to some other groups at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  We had, I think I may have mentioned, while there we had to fight for certain privileges for our workers.  That was the Black Caucus of Harlem Health Workers.  And we did a few (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year was that born?
Speaker 1: That was back when I, in the early years when I was at Harlem in the, go back in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Well, we gonna go back.
Speaker 1: You know this what this relates, this relates also, this relates, I think this was also, this was our group, that raised sand when City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] had developed the six-year medical program, and Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Brown U [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], all of them have that where you spend six years to get your hot college, and when we looked at the initial class, I think there was only one black student, and there were, I think the class had, I have the figures, the class had maybe fourteen to twenty, I don't know how many.  But they had primarily Caucasian, they had few, maybe a couple, not many, Hispanic youngsters and one black.  And we raised sand, and I know that we achieved something in terms of getting the next year or getting an increase up to five or six.  That was one thing that we did.  Now I must confess, I have not been involved with that for many years, but I do have some statistics on that.  And that was something, it was very important for us to work with.  But most of the medical schools have been pretty good jobs in New York in taking black students, but the situation is we have a paucity of black males.  The young women have done fantastic, the black women, but we still don't have enough students to apply and most of the schools really, I think, sincerely, want to have more disparity and we need more.  The same with black colleges [HBCUs] and many other places, and institutions of higher learning.
Story_ID: 372269
Speaker 1: Actually, I want to pick it back up in your early days in Harlem [New York, New York] in the '70s [1970s].  What was happening in Harlem itself and some of the changes you were involved in making within the hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Well I wasn't involved, I just taught there.  I enjoyed it.  They were very nice to me.  And I learned so much.  I had some good contacts.  [HistoryMaker] Dr. Harold Freeman. Dr. Freeman was a very dear close friend of mine.  He was chief of surgery during, after Dr. Maynard [Aubre de Lambert Maynard] and some of the others.  And Harold was responsible for many of the accomplishments that my son [George Clayton Branche III] has made.  He gave my son a position there.
Speaker 1: And we didn't talk about your meeting your wife [June Granger Branche] and getting married.  Those are all things we need to--
Speaker 2: We'll have to talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I met my wife through a mutual friend up in Boston [Massachusetts] and we married.  She was an outstanding, she was with, she went to Tobe-Coburn [Wood Tobe-Coburn School, New York, New York] and was an associate, she was an editor at Vogue, fashion editor at Vogue.  And she was an attractive lady from New Jersey.  Her father [Lloyd Granger] was an outstanding dentist. She's related to the Grangers.  Lester Granger.  And we married.  Then when I was at Richmond [Virginia], she decided to give up her position in New York [New York] and Vogue and come with me and raise a family, and we did--made out pretty well socially.  We were active in many, many, many, many, many, many groups, the couples' club and this club, and that club.
Story_ID: 372270
Speaker 1: Today is December 12th, the year 2006.  So we, I know where we left off with you moving to New York [New York] to start the work in Harlem [New York, New York], but since we've had an opportunity to have a gap, you said you'd gone back and researched some family stuff that you want to catch me up on.  One of the things that I want to talk about is your father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.], but uncle, or grandfather, but grand, great uncle [George Clayton Shaw].
Speaker 2: Great uncle.
Speaker 1: Great uncle.
Speaker 2: The one who adopted my dad when he was three years old from down in a little town, Louisburg [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Now he wrote a book about another family member who was a slave who taught--
Speaker 2: Now he wasn't a family member.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: In fact he came years before Uncle George.  John Chavis, I believe, was born in 1700 and something and spent time, I think he came from the West Indies.  They don't know exactly how he ended up in North Carolina, but he went to Oxford [North Carolina], he went to Princeton [College of New Jersey; Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].  You know, Princeton didn't take college students.  Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson], said, "There will never be a Negro coming to this school, to Princeton."  And my Uncle George went to Princeton after finishing Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and because of the bias he left and went to Auburn [Auburn Theological Seminary, New York, New York].  Now, this gentlemen, John Chavis, was at Oxford when he was only a little fellow, fourteen or fifteen, as you'll see in the book.  I read several pages I was so intrigued, but I never would have read it had you not started all of this investigation.  But he was something else.  He taught Latin, Greek, all of these things and he taught them to very well-to-do white families.  This is back in the 18th century.  Now it is claimed, and you will see pictures in that book, there was a lady who was in her eighties who claimed that her great-grandmother or something was a relative of John Chavis'.  Her name is Chavis, and she lived in Oxford, North Carolina where Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy] was established.  And all of that is in that little text, so basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who wrote the book on John Chavis?
Speaker 2: My great uncle, Uncle George wrote the book ['John Chavis: 1763-1838, a Remarkable Negro who Conducted a School in North Carolina for White Boys and Girls,' George Clayton Shaw] on John Chavis and he got a great deal of, oh, he did so much research on that.  He went to all sorts of places, to University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], many places, to give him information and it is a fascinating story, fascinating to hear about this man, little black fellow who dined literally with the very high class white folks and taught their children for years.  And then you see, and there are many statements made by my uncle and many quotations which are similar to what Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said, judge people not by the color of their skin, but, you know, by their character, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Some of those things were in the book, those statements?
Speaker 2: Not the statements, no, no, that was many years, no, certain statements that are made about what John Chavis did, which is, he's just such a remarkable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I understand now, matches the things King were saying--
Speaker 2: A lot of things that he would say about judging people by, you know, their character, what they do, and of course, these were highly religious people by the way.  A lot of the help came from the Presbyterian ministry and many of the little schools that were opened up, Mary Potter was opened because of funds that my Uncle George got from the Presbyterian.  As I told you, he had to build a church [Timothy Darling Presbyterian Church, Oxford, North Carolina] before he opened the school, and the church is still standing.  It looks very nice.
Story_ID: 372271
Speaker 1: Now you told me also that you had an opportunity to read a little more about Mary Potter school [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina], and is there anything you want to share with me about what you've read that will fill in some of--
Speaker 2: You're welcome to read that little text, as long as you say you'll give it back.  It's the only copy I have.  I learned how it developed.  Initially, when it started, they only had a couple of students, and I'm told the students lived in the little house that Uncle George [George Clayton Shaw] and Aunt Libby [Mary Elizabeth Lewis Shaw] had built.  They had a tough time getting started, by the way.  When they got, when he got to Oxford [North Carolina], he was looking for an area where there was no high school for black kids.  Henderson [North Carolina] had something and the other communities did have little elementary schools and high schools, but there was nothing and it was, he was advised really, to look for an area where there was no high school, and that's when he chose Oxford.  But then he had a little home, got a little, got, bought a little piece of, little old house and was gonna use that as the school and get started as a church, and something went wrong.  It was destroyed by some bad people I gather, and he got help again from the Presbyterian, and was able, and he went to a white Presbyterian minister at Oxford, and the was one member, one black member of that church, and they advised him.  He got some money to buy some land and on that he started building the church.  He built his home.  His home burned down in 1929, '21 [1921], and so a new home, the one that you have pictures of, that I remember very well as a youngster, going there from Alabama when we'd go north to visit with our family.  And what he did, getting started as a minister, there were seven to eight thousand black folks living in Oxford, and there were more than there were whites.  But, of course, the businesses and so forth and most of the property lines were owned by whites.  But Henderson, North Carolina, which I'm sure you're heard of, which is only twelve miles away, he was able to start a little church in Henderson, and he walked every Sunday, after conducting his services in Oxford at our little Timothy Darling [Timothy Darling Presbyterian Church, Oxford, North Carolina], he walked twelve miles to Henderson, gave the sermons and the services there and walked back.  No cars, no mules, nothing.  So he was in good physical shape.  But, at any rate, he finally got going and gradually built and the first class, they began to get several students.  They had, I recall reading, one, the youngest was five years old and the oldest was forty-five years old.
Story_ID: 372272
Speaker 1: So initially, it was sort of come all.
Speaker 2: Come one, come all.
Speaker 1: Come one, come all, and as it later developed into a nice academy.  They had football and baseball.  I can remember my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] talking about playing baseball when he went there.  And he gradually increased to the point where they had as many, I don't know certainly--there are pictures of the classes and showing in some, and up until 1933, because you see this was written as a thesis by a Mrs. Davis [Owena Hunter Davis], whose husband [Herman S. Davis] succeeded Dr. Shaw [George Clayton Shaw] as principal.  My Uncle George died in the early 1930s, and she wrote her thesis with help from her husband and from the Presbyterians and from all over, tremendous amount of research that she did, and so we have pictures of classes up through the mid-'30s [1930s], and some of the classes was large as seventy or eighty and it, the graduates went on to college and to medical school and to law school and to the ministry, a great deal of them.  And then about, it continued until the early '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s] when integration was sort of the thing to do in Oxford [North Carolina], so they had their own high school.  Now the grounds where the campus for Mary Potter [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina] was, are now used for an elementary, new elementary school which is called, I think it may even be called Mary Potter Elementary School [sic. Mary Potter Middle School, Oxford, North Carolina], which is a small integrated elementary school, and of course, all of the kids go to the high school in Oxford.  So that was about it.  My Uncle George, when you say, well how did he, when he would go back and forth from North Carolina up to Schenectady [New York] and so forth, and he, and as I said, he went to college in Chester, Pennsylvania, where Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] is.  And in Pennsylvania, he met this lovely lady, Mary Elizabeth Lewis [Mary Elizabeth Lewis Shaw].  Her family came from, they were freedmen, and had property in Pennsylvania, quite well-to-do.  Her maiden name was Lewis, Mary Elizabeth Lewis, and my Uncle George married her and took her back to Oxford.  She was the teacher.  She was a trained, trained in education and taught school in New Jersey, I believe.  So he not only got a wife, but he got a tremendous teacher.  And Libby was a great teacher, I remember her.  And she taught for over thirty odd years, and whenever you see the faculty, they had little notes in that book telling you faculty, and you'll see G.C. Shaw, M.E. Shaw, every year.  And in that listing, I saw my mother's [Lillian Davidson Branche] name as one of the, as one of the teachers.  My mother taught for a year or two there and then married, then she married my father.  Then they moved to Tuskegee, Alabama.
Story_ID: 372273
Speaker 1: Before we get to back to where we were with you moving to Harlem [New York, New York], you spoke about some, when we were just talking about some of the things you'd done in Korea that you hadn't mentioned when we were, when we'd spoken and, you know, one of the things you talked about, the camp and you know there were very few, you know, people that you treated that were not Koreans.  You met--
Speaker 2: What I was saying that when I first went to Korea, I was assigned to a field artillery battalion, a little above the 38th parallel.  I told you the joke about my being frightened and riding in this open jeep, and I mentioned to you that you spend some--I was an internist.  Why would I be going into an area where people would be injured?  And I said to the, some of the people when I got to the hospital there, I said well I'm an--they said, "So is the man you're replacing, an internist."  And as I said, he was the one who was anxious to rotate back to the states.  And he was due to rotate south into the 11th Evacuation Hospital [Korea].  That's where you see all the tents and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's tents in pictures that--
Speaker 2: And there's several African American doctors whom have been close friends. That's where I met them, in a tent in Korea.  Several have died, a couple are still alive.
Speaker 1: Who's still alive?
Speaker 2: There is a Dr. Oscar Graves, who was living, he wasn't living, didn't live in our tent, but he lived in the little town with another group.  I forget the name of it.  One who just passed within the past year was a Dr. Robert Morton, Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  I'll mention him later on 'cause he helped me get the position.  We met in Korea.  We became friends when I got back.  And then there was a Dr. Herbert Cave [Herbert G. Cave] who was chief of anesthesiology at Harlem Hospital for years.  He died unfortunately about ten or fifteen years ago.  And then there were several other doctors, one from Oklahoma, one who, Joel Smith, Dr. Joel Smith, who was an outstanding otolaryngologist at Howard [Howard University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], I don't know that Joel is alive or not, but I met these fellows in the 11th Evac Hospital.
Story_ID: 372274
Speaker 1: But I only spent a, no more than four or five weeks, and then I was allowed, I traded places with this fellow, as I told you I don't like flying, but I was willing to get into a little tiny two-seater with my duffel bag and fly south.  And while I was there I was--you had to have a dispensary.  You had to have a dispensary for soldiers when they had various problems, whether they're STS [significant threshold shift], sexually transmitted disorders, or various other things, or whether the common cold or whether they were this or that.  They would come to the dispensary.  Now--
Speaker 2: A dispensary is a pharmacy basically.
Speaker 1: The dispensary is a little tent where I had, had a little desk and things, and I had pills and so forth to treat--injections for certain disorders.  But I saw very few sick people in this little--now there weren't, there wasn't a great deal of fighting going on.  You remember there were little lulls in fighting.  Now we're talking now, we're talking, I got to this hospital and about February of 1993 [sic. 1953], and there were no major battles or anything going on.  Occasionally there was a push so to speak when the Chinese became involved and there were skirmishes and so they came, they did bring in, as I said, this was Evacuation Hospital [11th Evacuation Hospital, Korea].  They would bring troops down from the lines and so there were times when there were troops who had to have emergency surgical procedures which is what some of my friends were involved with.  But I couldn't help out because I knew nothing about surgical tech.  In fact, they would ask all of the officers, medical officers, to come and give a hand, and I recall, I never will forget it, when I got in the operating room, and my friend Wharton [ph.] would be operating, really working hard, and I would try to, he said, "Gee you're all thumbs," he said, "please leave."  And I was, I had to leave.  But anyhow, as things passed on, what happened was I allowed the Korean civilians to come into the clinic, those who had medical problems that I could handle, and so each morning you would see a line up outside, see it was a gate, not a gate, but a guard would be there opening, letting them into our little ground, camp, whatever you want to call them, you'd find maybe fifteen, twenty or so lined up coming in, and so it was okay.  In fact, the U.S., my superiors said, sure, you can see as many as you, so they would line up and take their time and I would see them for various forms of anemia, a lot of parasitic diseases and minor problems that I could handle and they were grateful, and I enjoyed it, because otherwise I wouldn't have been practicing any medicine.
Speaker 2: You wouldn't have had anything to do.
Speaker 1: Very little.
Speaker 2: Very little.
Speaker 1: And so anyhow, I was there for about ten, let's see, from oh about eight to ten months and then I was transferred to the area near Seoul [South Korea], to the 121st Evacuation Hospital.  That was in the town across from the Han River from Yeongam-eup [South Korea], I got promoted to captaincy, I was captain, and did primarily--much bigger facility and we, the general medical, we had medical wards and treated more medical problems, I left there.  The war ended as you will recall only a few months after I got to Korea actually.  And I left Korea in 1954, and came to, back to the states.
Story_ID: 372275
Speaker 1: When you left Richmond [Virginia], because you spent a number of years building a practice in Richmond, and decided to move north to New York [New York], what were the main reasons for wanting to leave Richmond to move north (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, let me just say why I started my practice in Richmond.  My roots are primarily North Carolina.  It was my father's [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] intention, who was at the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama].  As I told you he was an army officer.  He became an officer in World War II [WWII] he was a light colonel and then he, but he unfortunately, developed a number of medical problems and he had the desire to go back into practice, neuropsychiatry, in Durham [North Carolina].  We had friends there and we knew Dr. Shepard [James E. Shepard] who was the president of North Carolina, it was called, North Carolina Central, North Carolina College for Negroes [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], not North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina], which is, of course, a white school.  And I thought that would be a wonderful thing, I could practice, we could go into practice together.  And unfortunately things didn't work out too well, he became more sick, more ill.  Well, while I was, when I was sent from Korea, I was assigned to Fort Lee, Virginia.  Used to be Camp Lee, huge, Fort Lee, if you know anything about army camps.  And so I lived there at Fort Lee and practice general medicine among the troops.  We had dispensaries where you'd see troops who had things.  We had, it was pretty well equipped, and after I was there a short time, it was in the summer of '54 [1954], that I was told that I had to go on TDY [temporary duty assignment] to Fort Knox, Kentucky because they were having an outbreak, I think, of polio.  And that was when I had a little car back then and I drove from Fort Lee, Virginia, to Fort Knox, Kentucky, in Louisville, Kentucky.  And I was, I worked there for at least two and a half months, my assignment, and then was sent back to Fort Lee.  Now you might say, well how did you get, I think you asked me, "How did you get a practice coming out of the [U.S.] Army?"  Well I may have explained to you they needed doctors, even civilian doctors who had been in the Army, government contract physicians, so I had a job where I would drive from Richmond to Petersburg [Virginia], which is only twenty miles.  Virginia State College [Virginia State University] is in Petersburg.  Fort Lee is just a hand's throw, arm's throw length away, and so that's where I would go each day and I would see military wives and children.  I didn't wear any uniform, I was a civilian then.  And I would go in the morning and would go to my clinic and see patients with various problems then drive back to Richmond.  While I was in Richmond, I managed, I had met friends there, and got a little place to live, a little apartment in one part of Richmond, and then I decided that maybe well, they didn't have, there was no one there highly specialized in certain things. Met a group of fine doctors.  Must have been about, I think I told you, about twenty, twenty-five--
Speaker 1: Twenty-five black doctors.
Speaker 2: --and nice people, and so I decided--right by Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], so I decided, "Well, I'm gonna practice here," and by the time I left, was able to leave Camp Lee, I had a practice going, enough to really make a living, and then in '55 [1955], I married my former wife, June Granger [June Granger Branche], and we were able to get a nice little apartment, two blocks from where Arthur Ashe used to live.  And then we had two children [George Clayton Branche III and Leota Susan Branche] over the course of the next few years.
Story_ID: 372276
Speaker 1: Was Mr. Ashe [Arthur Ashe] in Richmond [Virginia] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Arthur was a little fellow playing, he would call him Little Ashe because he was so small, an excellent player, and he would, he would play in some of the little tournaments.  Such talent, but he could not get any help and could not play on the courts there in Richmond [Virginia], and so a gentleman [Robert Walter Johnson] in St. Louis [Missouri], (unclear) as you get older, you get mixed up, I forget his name, it's on the tip of my tongue, took him north, and that's where he got his fantastic training, and you knew the story from there, but what happened was in Richmond I was a little upset because there was no, by the way, Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] was 1954.  This was getting into '55 [1955] and '56 [1956] and there was no real integration of the schools.  They had a nice little elementary school near where we lived.  We had a nice home near a park and I was making a pretty good living, and my son [George Clayton Branche III] went to the Norrell School [Albert V. Norrell Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia], a fine elementary school, and he did very well.  And we became a little discouraged, a number of things would occur that would make me a little upset.  Very shortly after I was starting my practice in Richmond, there was still segregation policies in the department stores.  You may have, you're too young to realize it, and you don't even know the names.  Thalhimers [Richmond, Virginia], and Miller and Rhoads [Richmond, Virginia], these outstanding, just like Nordstrom and Neiman Marcus and so, there was a group of active young folks there who believed in picketing, and they would go down each afternoon with a little picket and walk up and down, you know, saying so and so and so.  And I've always felt that I should be a part of anything like that, and so I would go every afternoon and I would, and I told you about the kids, the white kids on the school bus and the bus would pause, they would say, "Two, four, six, eight, we don't want to integrate."
Speaker 1: Were you--
Speaker 2: I wasn't afraid or anything, but the professionals who lived there all their lives, weren't out there.  Some of the youngsters and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now was your practice in Richmond--
Speaker 2: Right in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: --predominately black?
Speaker 2: I would say, almost 100 percent.
Speaker 1: Almost 100 percent black patients.
Speaker 2: And I went into a nice little professional building, there were four of us, and the young man working down the hall, worked right up the hall from me was young Ferguson Reid [William Ferguson Reid].  He was a lady's son, excellent well-trained surgeon, excellent surgeon, who went to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and did his post-graduate at Homer G. Phillips Hospital in St. Louis which was, you know, in those days, there were very few places that you could get training.  I was fortunate, I told you I trained in the North, but we were good buddies, we had social events.  There were very nice parties, and I joined the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] in Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] with Dr. Jerome Holland [Jerome H. Holland], "Brud" Holland, the same, he was--
Speaker 1: What year did you join the Boule?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], I believe, when Dr. Holland was president of Hampton Institute, and we became close friends and continued the friendship for many years later. He was ambassador to Sweden during the time when it was rough to be an American ambassador, but he withstood that and continued to do fine work.
Story_ID: 372277
Speaker 1: So anyhow, I decided that I wasn't happy with the schools, I was worried about the schools, you know, as I said, this has always been a problem, not a problem, but it was an attribute from Uncle George [George Clayton Shaw], education is the thing, the most important thing.  And I decided that I was not gonna, if my family sent me from Alabama to Boston [Massachusetts], why was I gonna stay in Richmond [Virginia], and so we decided that we would think about moving north.  This is why I contacted some of my friends.  Believe it or not, Robert Morton, Dr. Morton, outstanding surgeon and he said well come on up here.  We'll, he knew Dr. Maynard [Aubre de Lambert Maynard], the chief of surgery at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] and another instance he told me what I could do, and then he told me that at this time, this is in '62 [1962], Columbia University [New York, New York] was involved with having to join with a municipal hospital.  Many of the medical schools had to do that.  NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital Center; NYC Health + Hospitals/Bellevue, New York, New York], Columbia and Harlem.  Harlem had put up a brand new building, and it's a great big, if you've ever been, seen the Harlem Hospital, it's great big tall, twenty-yard structure, which is blue, and the guy said, there's a good reason for it being blue because those are the Columbia colors, so when I, there was a chance of working at Harlem, not only teaching, but getting an affiliation with Columbia faculty.  There were other duties where you have to, you worked in clinics and did those things.
Speaker 2: Because in Richmond, you had been denied access to the hospital.
Speaker 1: To the hospital.  That was one of the, I guess if I had gotten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You couldn't get a teaching position.
Speaker 1: I couldn't get any position.
Speaker 2: Any position.
Speaker 1: And I had gotten my boards, my specialty boards in Richmond by the way.  But I was willing to work in St. Philip Hospital [Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 2: For nothing.
Speaker 1: For nothing, which is a colored hospital, and I met with the, one of the important people at Richmond was named Branch, Dr. Branch, without the E, and they just were hog tied.  As I told you, you couldn't join the AMA [American Medical Association], which you might have had some benefit from, because we couldn't join the local, we had a little local colored medical society.  So what happened, it was that and a few other things, and I just said, "I have these opportunities, and I think I'm going to try the North."
Story_ID: 372278
Speaker 1: So continuing, you were about to tell us about your--
Speaker 2: Moving.
Speaker 1: --moving into Harlem [New York, New York].  I know one of the first things you did was join the AMA [American Medical Association].
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: What I, first of all we were told that, we were told that, I think you join the state medical society, see, and then you could belong to the AMA.  Now that was what, in Richmond, Virginia, you could not join the AMA because you must belong to the state medical society.  The state denied admission to black students, black physicians, therefore, we couldn't join the AMA.  Then later on when I came north, I naturally joined the state and then joined the AMA, and then there were several cases.  I don't know the exact details, but it was ruled improper, or unconstitutional, for that demand to be made that you couldn't join the AMA without having to join the state.  And I saw nothing the AMA offered.  I belonged to other medical societies and so I discontinued my involvement with that.
Speaker 1: What year did you move to Harlem?
Speaker 2: In 1962.  I decided I was gonna come up to New York and look around, you know, spend a few weeks with some of my friends and find out what was available, look for a place to live.  And so, we, I came on up, that would be in May or June of fifty--I'm sorry, '62 [1962], 1962.  Excuse me.  And I met my friends and they, I met the chief of, I got a job on the emergency room [at Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], working, seeing patients with medical treatment needs, triage and so forth, and I found out that I could, later on after a number of months, a year or so, I found out I could get a job working on the wards, the big wards, as an attending physician.  And then later working in the clinics, for which I was paid, I was paid by the City of New York [New York], and then I was given an academic title after a while as an instructor in medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons [New York, New York], and over the years I gradually moved on up, and when I left I was an associate clinical professor at the College of Physicians and Surgeons.  And I worked fully half time, a little more than half time, which gave me some benefits from Columbia University.
Story_ID: 372279
Speaker 1: During that time, I was looking for practice, start a practice, and I had a younger brother [Matthew Branche] who lived up in New Rochelle [New York], but was working with his father-in-law, who was a physician in New York, and we said, "Let's see if we can't get a place to practice in southern Westchester [Westchester County, New York]."  I'm not a big city boy and I was going to Harlem [New York, New York] almost every day, so that's what we did.  We opened a practice in the professional building in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 2: Your younger brother was a surgeon?
Speaker 1: Surgeon.  He was three years behind me.  He, we had like, let's see, circumstances.  I may have told you when I came north, my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] later brought him and my sister [Martie Branche Baudult] north.  I told you I went to the Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], he went to Boston Latin.  I went to Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], he went to Bowdoin College.  I went to Boston University School of Medicine [Boston, Massachusetts], he went to Boston University.  I went to the Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], he went to the Boston City Hospital.  I went to Korea, he went to Korea.
Speaker 2: So he was trailing you all the way.
Speaker 1: But entirely different personality, entirely, so.
Speaker 2: One thing I want to ask before we, I mean, that you reminded me of, is, and we'll come back to you and your brother in Westchester, but back in Richmond, Virginia, when you had the practice, what were you seeing?  What were you treating mainly among--
Speaker 1: I was an internist, not a surgeon.
Speaker 2: You were an internist throughout.  But the patients you were seeing, you were mainly seeing, because later on in Harlem you saw a lot of hypertension, what were you seeing a lot of in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was seeing high blood pressure, but we didn't have that many things to treat it well with.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I saw the diabetes, I saw infectious diseases, you know, bad sore throat, and this and that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so just general.
Speaker 1: General medical care.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was not, even though I had taken a brief fellowship in cancer at Tufts medical school [Medical School of Tufts College; Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], I had not gone further into that, and there was nothing that I felt I could contribute, so if I saw patient with some type of malignancy, I would refer them to an appropriate specialist.  If I saw somebody, in other words, I was a general internist.  Some people with internal medicine go further into kidney disease. Some go into cardiologist, some become nephrologists, hematologists, oncologists, so I was a general intern.  I became interested and started seeing many more people with high blood pressure once I was at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] and then after a number of years, I ran a large hypertension, high blood pressure clinic.  And then went on, went to meetings primarily related to hypertension, and I think I may have mentioned to you that we had developed some years ago, this joint national committee [Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure] to which I was assigned the first year.  It was quite an honor.  I was the first African American physician to be assigned to that.  That was the first year it was up, it was formed, and every two years it was, they would get together again to decide what is now the best treatment, what is going to be, what is the best treatment in 1998 would be entirely different from what we had in 1900.  And so that was one of the things that I did.  But at any rate--
Speaker 2: You and your brother start the practice.
Speaker 1: My brother and I started our practice, and he moved from this little in Harlem with is father-in-law.  We moved to Mount Vernon to a professional building, Stevens Medical Arts Building [Mount Vernon, New York].  It's still very active, in Mount Vernon.  And we shared the office, shared the same receptionist, and our office hours changed.  And I referred, this is good for him because I must confess, all general surgery I sent to him, and any little medical problems, I would see, and he also became active at Harlem on the surgical service.  Harold Freeman [HistoryMaker Dr. Harold Freeman] was his chief for one period of time.  Now he didn't spend as much time.  He spent more time in private practice, but he had commitments and duties at Harlem Hospital--
Story_ID: 372280
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Dr. Branche [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.], when you were in Harlem [New York, New York], were you also active within the Harlem community outside of the hospital?
Speaker 2: There were certain things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the things?
Speaker 2: --that I was active.  Number one, during one period of time, I think I may have mentioned to you, we had a little organization formed by young professionals and people at the Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. I forget the exact name, but one had to do with getting some clear understanding about a program that City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] had for pre-medical students where they would take so many students and put them through a six-year program.  That is to say, you get a young person going to college, City College, who is interested in medicine, and you do the whole thing in six years.  This is not unusual.  The school [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] that I went to has a six-year program where you go for six years, not four college, four medicine.  Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], same thing.  We found out that lo and behold, there was only one black student in this program.  There were others, Latinos, white, and we did get some satisfaction in terms of having the number increased.  That was one, one thing that I worked with, but then there were other, other things--
Story_ID: 372281
Speaker 1: I joined 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.].  That was forty-three years ago I believe.  And a group of us got together and some of us you know, and we decided that there needed to be, it was initially The 100 Men, 100 Men.  My brother George, I'm trying, a group of us, Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], and we thought that there were problems or affairs that should be addressed in the Harlem [New York, New York] community relating to a variety of things.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the things you felt needed to be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it had to do with hiring policies of the city.  It had to do with education.  We've, we, the initial years, we sort of fumbled.  I, it was a group of guys getting there, what are we gonna do?  Most of them in pretty good shape as it was, you know, why worry about anybody else?  Then we changed the name a year or two later, we changed the name to The 100 Black Men.
Speaker 2: Did that change the nature of the organization?
Speaker 1: A teeny weenie bit.  I didn't see some of the members come back.  But, no, if anything, over the year.  And then gradually we began to become more involved in activities, particularly black history.  We made ourselves known and then we would have, we started working out of the, some of the schools, giving a little talks, giving some of the kids that I, here were black professionals who would--but as I said, only in, and some of the, each guy did a good job during his time.  Bruce Llewellyn [J. Bruce Llewellyn] came along after Bob Mangum [Robert Mangum].  Then we had Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown], Tuskegee Airman.  I saw Roscoe the other night, and then some of the younger, more active, more energetic young guys began to do other things.  We would take part when there were certain types of activities.  We had our representation when they had their certain important marches in Harlem, we'd be there.  But the most important thing, the most important thing, is just a few years ago we developed Eagle Academy [Eagle Academy for Young Men] in the Bronx [New York], which is something you should, if you don't know about it, you should learn about it.  This is really the 100 Black Men enterprise.  And it is fantastic what we're doing.  And we have an outstanding young man who is the principal of that.  Now there are other things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But talk to me about the Eagle Academy.
Speaker 1: Eagle Academy is the equivalent to a high school, private, run by the 100 Black Men and certain types of benefits I'm sure we can get from the city in certain things.  Speakers bureau.  The younger more active men really do a much better job than I'm able to do now, in terms of mentors for a lot of the kids.  Now we also, I will say this, we're very fort- most of our meetings are held at Adam Clayton Powell Building [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building] down in Harlem.  You know where that is.  That's where we're having our celebration the day after tomorrow.  And we've had, we've had everybody there.  Just last week, we had Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], you know, the former mayor of--
Speaker 2: New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: --New Orleans, who's now head of the Urban League [National Urban League].  Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] has come over and we talked about, you get another, just an entire different idea about him and his thoughts, when you're like that close up.  We had the young Deputy Mayor Walcott [Dennis Walcott], who was at our meeting the other night, him and his wife [Denise St. Hill Walcott].  And when, and they also, they have all sorts of little bulletins that show you what type of job, this is a sad thing, that there are so many jobs available which we know about and they list, "Do you know anyone who has attributes in this or that?"  And so they do make available, and there is, I'm sure, as I've said, as I've gotten older, I'm I guess one of the oldest there, I haven't had the time or the energy, but if I did, I'm sure I would do more with mentoring, and I'd be able to make referrals to some of these agencies where you can recommend young people.  But sometimes it's easy to, as I said, it's doing so much better as time has grown, it is a much more--and we have each year, we meet with another group every day, and I'd have to look this up, has to do with Better Business Bureau, something or other, a huge group.  We meet with them for a little gala celebration at one of the big hotels, and we have met with all of the outstanding people in city government, police, et cetera, et cetera.  So, that's what I, I've stayed active with that within the city.  There are other organizations that I stay active with, as old as I am.
Story_ID: 372282
Speaker 1: When you were in Harlem [New York, New York], were you working at the Harkness facility [Harkness Pavilion, New York, New York] at the same time you were working--
Speaker 2: When I was at Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], because of the time I had put in, as I said I used to teach.  I taught sophomore and junior medical students their introduction to medicine.  That was the early, I did that for quite a few years.  And then later on I became chief, let's see head of the, the course was called, Introduction to the Patient, and we had about forty students at Harlem from Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].  Presbyterian [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] had forty or fifty.  St. Luke's Roosevelt [Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York].  Each big major facility affiliated with Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] had this course, it lasted several weeks, and you would take maybe four to six patients, four to six students to the bedside and you would teach them how to do the history, how to take a history.  The most important thing, a lot of this has been forgotten, but at any rate, they would take a patient, that lasted, and so after a few years I became the--in charge of that program so that I had several instructors that I would go and they would see.
Speaker 1: Report back to you?
Speaker 2: Report back to me.  That was a lot of fun, and then we had junior medical students.  That was a different thing with fewer students, and a few of them would come and I worked with them over a period of years.  Now later on what I did, I became a little more involved up at the medical school.  One of the things I was asked to do was work in the clinic.  I don't know if you know this, every big hospital has a clinic.  Harlem has these clinics.  I worked in the clinic, years in hypertension clinic.  But Vanderbilt Clinic [New York, New York] at Columbia was like a big clinic, and I worked in the Vanderbilt Clinic, and that you do, you don't, you're not paid for that.  And after a few years, it was a little tough and I had to leave, let that go.  Then I did other things.  I did work in the admissions, with the admissions group that admitted students to Columbia.  Columbia has not had, nor have any of the med schools, done a good job admitting black kids.  Columbia has been doing, in recent years, primarily because a friend of mine, George Lythcott [George I. Lythcott, Jr.], who was there quite a few years before I.  Then we had a few others who worked very hard, Dr. Kenneth Forde, Dr. Gene Smith [ph.], who just died a few weeks ago, outstanding hematologist.  And so after I worked, I think, three years on the admissions, helping to get a few more minority kids in, and then I was granted admission privileges to the Harkness Pavilion, and as I said, that's a little expensive.  I had a few patients there, and I laugh and say by the time the patients paid the hospital, they couldn't pay me, but that wasn't really true.  It's just a matter, you just do so much and you get tired and so.
Story_ID: 372283
Speaker 1: And then you were also active in the Scarsdale [New York] community.
Speaker 2: In the Scarsdale community we had some problems, had some problems.
Speaker 1: You, how many black families were in Scarsdale when you were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know when, since I talked to you last, I sat down to talk to my daughter [Leota Susan Branche], who lives in Scarsdale.  Now this is gonna interest you.  When we first moved, we lived in New Rochelle [New York] for three years.  I came up here and spent a couple of weeks looking around, finding out what I wanted to do, and I was afraid New York City [New York, New York] was too big for me to look for an apartment and my brother [Matthew Branche] lived in New Rochelle, and I was able to find a few garden apartments and so forth.  Most of them, not integrated.  I guess it's all right to tell you that my wife is very fair and so I must also tell you that on occasion, we have sometimes used the color of the skin for certain things.  So anyhow, I left June [June Granger Branche] and the kids and came on down and then I went down and got them a couple weeks later, and we drove on up to--back up, and there was this beautiful area of garden apartments, just opened, on the Sound [Long Island Sound], Pelham Road, if you know anything about Davenport Neck [New Rochelle, New York] and Pelham Road, that area, well one opened up just a few blocks from a nice little school, and so, my wife and my two kids, we drove up, and my two kids and I got out of the car and went to a little delicatessen, and my wife pointed out this particular place and so she drove on down and walked on in and, "Oh, how are you Mrs. So and So," said, "let us show you what we have available."  She said, "Now where's your husband?"  She said, "Oh, he's busy with some patients," and so we went ahead, and next we moved on in.  Of course, the guy who owned it, not the, what do you call it, the superintendent or something, was amazed, but there was nothing he could do, and most of the people around there turned out to be our very best friends.  Until now, some of them.  And so it just showed you how, what can happen.  So we got settled, and after the kids went to the little elementary school two blocks away, nice job, never will forget it, Jefferson Elementary School [New Rochelle, New York], and you don't know very much about Pelham [New York] and New Rochelle do you?  Anyhow, there's a great big shopping area there and with Home Depots and all these, like we lived right towards the water.  That was beautiful, go on picnics there.  After three years we decided we would move.  And because we had friends who lived in Scarsdale, and they vouched for the school, we said we would try, and we moved.  We didn't have too much difficulty.  In fact, here again, to be certain that we wouldn't have any difficulty, I think I sent my wife in as a forerunner.  So we moved into a nice section in Greenacres [Scarsdale, New York], and at that time there weren't more than twelve or fourteen black families in Scarsdale.  A couple of my dear friends had lived there.  That was one, another reason, Dr. Marcus Moore, the dentist who--he helped train the young woman [HistoryMaker Dr. Carol Morales] who's the wife of Riggs [HistoryMaker Dr. Enrique A. Riggs], and he and his wife got us in, and a couple of other families.  But that was just about it.  Now, to make a long story short, not very many black families came.  Maybe another ten or twelve while we were there.
Speaker 1: Did you become active in the community in Scarsdale?
Speaker 2: Quite active.  My wife even more in terms of PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  I mean that's one thing that I give her credit for, she was on top of everything with the kids and the Parent Teachers.  She even taught a couple of courses in the adult--she still does, even at her age, she still teaches certain forms of needlework, and I attended this adult school as a student and I joined one of the local county tennis clubs and things like that.  The kids did very well, and after we'd been there, my third child [Scott Branche] was born.  I have a third child, came ten years after, after my daughter.  The children were very active in the various activities that go on there, and we were generally happy.
Story_ID: 372284
Speaker 1: We had an organization because of the paucity of black families in Scarsdale [New York].  There were still groups that did not want black folks there.  There were still groups.  I don't know why.  Scarsdale's not that much of a place.  It's not the best school in the area.  Other schools that are just as good, ranked high.  We had an organization that was formed called SOSA, Scarsdale Open Society Association, to encourage the, let's see, not admission, encouraging black families to come to Scarsdale.  These were very fine people.  I never will forget the names.  A couple have passed on, and these, they, we would have little meetings periodically, and on one occasion we had a meeting in one, Scarsdale is divided into five school districts.  Edgewood [Scarsdale, New York] which is right adjacent to Eastchester [New York], then Heathcote [Scarsdale, New York] where the high school is, and then Fox Meadow [Scarsdale, New York], which is, I guess, the higher up, that's where my daughter lives, Greenacres [Scarsdale, New York] and Quaker Ridge [Scarsdale, New York], Quaker is the latest addition.  I will say that Edgewood is not, would be the less likely area to favor bringing in black families, and I think, okay, I will just say that we had a meeting on one occasion.  I never will forget, where we invited people from various areas, and we would try to encourage diversity, but I never will forget this guy got up and said, "I'm not, why should I work for something like--?"  He was obviously on the lower economic scale, not too bright, and he really got up and made some noise about not being in favor of this.  And we weren't too surprised.  And, but that didn't stop my work and I think that it was readily, admissions or getting property in Scarsdale was okay, it was pretty good.  Needless, what has happened is we haven't had that number, much of an increase, and I called my daughter after (unclear).  I said, "Susan [Leota Susan Branche], tell me exactly, has there been any great change since you went?"  When she went to Scarsdale High School [Scarsdale, New York], she was, she, I think was the only colored kid in her class.  No there was one other, Greg Broderick, Dr. Broderick's son.  Two or three in her graduating class.  When my son finished, he was president of the class, captain of the tennis team, captain of the basketball team, and I don't think there was, maybe, another colored kid there.  And then we'd hear about classes subsequently.  Graves' [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] younger son was in my youngest child's class, Scott [Scott Branche].  His older boys had done very well, one had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and but there were never a huge number finishing the high school.  And said I said to my daughter, my daughter belongs to a number of organizations for young women, make sure their kids socialize and go here or there.  You've heard of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  Well she belongs to Jack and Jill with my two little, and she says, she can't, nobody lives in Scarsdale except her.  And so where does she go to Jack and Jill meetings, New Rochelle [New York], other places, the city [New York, New York].  And I said, "Well, all these people, these young people, I know them."  Some of them are in my Westchester Clubmen.  These guys are far better off than I am financially, young executives.  And Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], you know Ken Chenault?  Ken finished Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] thirty years after I did.  Where does Ken live?  Right in New Rochelle, two blocks from a young cardiologist whom I trained.  I said, "Why do they live there?  Why not?"  He said, "Why should they live in Scarsdale?"  And she began to explain all that.  She's a psychologist.  She said how inconvenient it is for her when there's a Jack and Jill meeting, she's got to go way the hell here and there, whereas the folks who live there literally walk down the street.
Speaker 2: What did she say about the psychology of Scarsdale, the psychological minds of the people that are there as far as inviting, being open to having more black families?
Speaker 1: There's no problem with black families moving in.  Archie Bankston [Archie M. Bankston, Jr.].  You know Archie Bankston, huh, with Con Ed [Consolidated Edison, Inc., New York, New York].  Archie who lives in a mansion just two blocks down the street from my daughter, he raised two kids [D.J. Holloway and Marcus Holloway] there, he still lives, I saw him the other night at the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] affair.  He's going to spend four months in Florida and come back, and the other families, but they, Graves lives there, you know, but he's got this great big huge piece of property and his children are gone.  They don't live there any longer.  I don't know how much longer Earl will stay, but he's there.  But it's there, if you got the money, but the youngsters who live in the other areas that I mentioned are very happy, they got kids.  Some of them go to New Rochelle High School [New Rochelle, New York], some go to private schools, and so that's what my daughter explained.  She said you know, why, why not have your friend live next door?  Yes, they have some, I'm sure, white friends too.
Story_ID: 372285
Speaker 1: One of your quotes is, you've said that all black doctors have similar training, hopes and aspirations, but historically factors of segregation and the high proportion of poverty among black people tend to give black doctors a slightly different perspective on medical matters.  What did you mean by that exactly?
Speaker 2: I mean by that that if you just take most black doctors, the majority, treat black patients, and so what is our pool of patients come from?  Who are these people we're treating, comparing them to other ethnic groups?  Usually they are poor, less well-educated, with many, that goes with more medical problems.  Okay, so not only are you going to be treating people who are sicker, who come later with their cancer, who come later with their pneumonia, but what are you going to do about making things better for them and for other, their kids and your kids and other physicians.  You're gonna have to do something else.  You can't just go to their office every day, which is what too many of our folks do.  How many take active parts in these civil--really active when it comes to civil rights and so forth. How many do you see out there doing what we think should be doing?  Huh?  That's the main thing that I'm pointing out, that you don't see enough of them.  Now I'm not, I've got colleagues, black colleagues who work much harder than I do in so many ways, so many ways, but I think that those who are trying to do the right thing, these are their problems, these are our problems.  It's a lot, heck of a difference when you have to worry about making sure that your kids are well-trained so they can go ahead and do, you going to look out for your patients and their kids?  There are other things, but these, this is where it really, it really means something, other than just going to the hospital or going to medical conferences, how many times, how many times have I heard with great big medical meetings, American College of Physicians, so and so and so and so.  How many times, yes, they may have a session on disparity, oh yes, they're beginning to have more and more.  Disparity, illness and healthcare among black.  We didn't hear much of that at all years ago.  Now you hear that.  But how often do you hear?  I've never heard of it, of discussions in these major medical conferences.  I mean they go on for weeks.  We hear conferences about emotional aspects of trauma, racial segregation, stress.  This is what causes so many of the problems.  Why isn't that ever discussed in length?  It is in the National Medical Association, yes.  They do a very good job of it.  And some of the, many of the people in National Medical, outstanding, far more than I could ever be.  And so these discussions, when you look at the meetings and the schedule and what's going on and the things that really hurt black folks and make them sick, you don't hear a lot of that discussion, at least I haven't heard it when it comes to certain state medical meetings or the AMA [American Medical Association] and this and that.
Story_ID: 372286
Speaker 1: And you're saying nationally, it's--
Speaker 2: The National Medical Association, which is the colored, we have a very small group, relatively small group.  I think a couple of the articles that my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] had written were printed in the journal of the National Medical Association.
Speaker 1: Which were, is it about six thousand black doctors?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And it's getting worse.  You see that's the problem (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what issues would you say are discussed there?  I mean, list them for me, that you think aren't discussed in the broader arenas.  You feel that--
Speaker 2: Oh, everything that's discussed in the broader arena is discussed.
Speaker 1: I mean amongst the black doctors, I mean specifically, you were saying that that you feel that stress is something that brings more problems on.  I mean things that you discussed that may not be discussed.
Speaker 2: Everybody.  I'm talking not so much about stress, I'm talking about what goes on, that's that mental hygiene.  That makes it easy.  A huge number of problems that go on.  And are made much worse by the circumstances which, in which the black population.  This is never addressed, have you ever heard, go to medical meetings, in large, primarily Caucasian meetings, whereas this is discussed much more.  This may be why my father was a psychiatrist, much more, and because it is such a serious, it's a serious illness among everybody.  Look what's happening with the post-traumatic stress syndrome and these white kids committing suicide.  There are not enough doctors to go around and to discuss these issues and not enough attention is paid to that by major medical groups.  That's why I go back to that thing where I--if black physicians and primarily black doctors, black patients rather, is going to have some special concerns other than treating the diabetes and getting the blood pressure down and treating the infection, routine thing.  There are other things you got to do besides practicing medicine.  Just like a good black lawyer, or a good--I talked about this young guy John L. Walker, he went to Mississippi, a civil rights lawyer, lives in a great big mansion, his aunt Cora Walker [Cora T. Walker], outstanding, (background noise) outstanding black lawyer.
Story_ID: 372287
Speaker 1: You were just stressing some of the problems that comes along with treating a population of people who are poorer and have less resources than other populations.
Speaker 2: And if you look at the number of problems that we have, so much a larger number of black women for example, whose breast cancer did not, was discovered later.  You'll find so many instances of cardiovascular disease where if they had gotten treatment earlier, they wouldn't have devastating disorders.  And it goes on and on.  And this is related in large part to education.  People who got money don't have too much trouble getting good healthcare, you know.  This healthcare, we've got how many, 40 million Americans in pretty good shape, have no health insurance.  Husband and wife working and, now that shouldn't happen.  Now if you stop looking at the poor ones, of course you're gone to have those on welfare and Medicaid.  You're gonna have, and you're not going to get the same type of care.  You're not going to be turned into the Harkness Pavilion [New York, New York].  You're lucky if you can get into a poor hospital in the inner city, and they're closing down the big hospitals in the inner city.  Closing down St. Vincent's [St. Vincent's Hospital Manhattan, New York, New York], closing down Mother Cabrini [Cabrini Medical Center, New York, New York] and another closing, over seven or eight in the State of New York, and this affects many times poor people.  So that's--
Speaker 1: What can be done in your opinion, Dr. Branche [HistoryMaker George Clayton Branche, Jr.], to change some of this?
Speaker 2: All the things that are involved in getting better education, with getting jobs and getting rid of poverty.  We're still in bad shape in terms of schools.  They're going to close three high schools in New York City [New York, New York], front page of The Times [The New York Times].  Three are going to be closed.  Instead of making more better schools and doing other things, you're making it worse.  How many, how many, we've talked about the fact that some minority kids, how many black youngsters have been in jail or are in jail?  Is it 2 million or something?  How many are in college?  Is it six hundred thousand?  What are you gonna do?  You're going to have to do something that is going to get more education.
Story_ID: 372288
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your program that, the second chance program [Youth Shelter Program of Westchester, Inc., Mount Vernon, New York].  You were there last night (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a program that was started over thirty-eight years ago.  A group of forward thinking people found out that there were a number of youngsters who were going to jail who really shouldn't be in jail.  Jail is not a good place for youngsters to go.  Kids sixteen, seventeen, twenty-one, that's the group that we're dealing with.  And so this group, I give them credit, they're fantastic, decided that we got to do something.  Let's deal with our judges.  I think Judge Bellantoni [Orazio R. Bellantoni] ran, I voted for him last week, so the judges understand, so we've got this old building.  You can't put it in the nice section of town.  You put it over in the industrial area, a building, a stable building, and at one time, we were able to get as many as twenty kids.  Now we were breaking rules because that was too many kids in that building, and we've had to, over the last twenty, thirty, we've had to go through major, major changes.  Every time we do something they'd find something else wrong, and now we're down to where we've had facilities for twelve youngsters.  Now these children, most of them, they range just like in jail.  They range from from black, Hispanic and white.  The majority of this group in Mount Vernon [New York] are black, but it's not restricted to Mount Vernon, anywhere in the area.  We have an executive director who knows a lot about criminal justice, we have program directors. We have counselors and we, at our meeting last night, our board meeting, we discussed the many, many problems that we have, and I, the thing what is happening, the thing that makes you proud, we're having a party on the 22nd at the YMCA.  The kids don't have to stay right at the facilities.  They're taken out, one of our fellows is getting our van in shape and paying for all for it.  They go as speakers, they give talks to other kids, and you see a group, if you go into that place for a little occasion, you'll see twelve kids, all in shirt and tie, talking to you better than you'd be talked to by Scarsdale [New York] kids from Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], and the statistics are good.  After one year, after they've been there, maybe they've stayed here a year or six months, whatever.  After a year, they've been discharged, less than 30 percent have to go back to jail or to us.  In jail, those same kids, over 70 percent go back to jail.  We've had some who've gone, one kid went into the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  I don't know if that's, and several have gotten their GEDs [General Educational Development].  They take part, we take them over to nursing homes, doing jobs at the Wartburg nursing home [Mount Vernon, New York].  Our problem now is getting staffing and getting good responsible counselors.  This is what it's all about, and we've gone through a number of changes and we're still in business.  But it's a headache, it's a headache.
Speaker 1: You hit on something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you don't have enough of those, you see.  Suppose we had one of those in every community?  We get over eight hundred and some thousand from the department of social services.  We're trying to have a little fundraiser, that's why I gave you that thing.  That's one thing and then there are other organizations I belong to within the county [Westchester County, New York].
Story_ID: 372289
Speaker 1: What about the Higher Aims group?
Speaker 2: That's with the Westchester Clubmen.  That was a group of guys that got together about, let's see, in 1962.  A group of guys in Westchester County [New York].  These were professionals and felt that they should, we got together initially to have fun, a party, a group of guys that sit around and discuss things.  When I came up from Virginia, three of my buddies were in the group, and they brought me right on in, and Westchester Clubmen, that's what it was called.  And we had fun, and we would more or less meet at each other's homes and boast about what we were doing.  Cab Calloway was a member, Sidney Poitier was a member.  Several other guys, they've moved on.  Sidney went out west and left his, and Cab passed, and, but later on we began to feel that we should do more.  And we decided to start making scholarships available to young outstanding students in our midst.  And when we first started, we would give a sch- have a little fundraiser and give a scholarship to some young person who was not necessarily, they could be from fairly well, we didn't pay any attention to whether they were well-to-do or poor, and I remember that just, and we'd give a scholarship, nice scholarship.  They'd be going, they usually went to good schools, and then we decided, let's do more, let's try to give several scholarships, let's try to give some tutoring.  We tried that, and then we tried a variety, then we went back and forth, and we still weren't really achieving that much.  There's a picture there in the other room where there's a young woman who, what is one of the outstanding dermatologists in Chicago [Illinois] with L'Oreal.  She, I was her mentor.  She was outstanding, brilliant child, Vicky Holloway [Victoria Holloway Barbosa].  And she went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and she went to Yale medical [Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut], then she went to Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], and she was hired by this company, and she was married last year and my companion and I were invited out to Chicago to see her.  Now Vicky would have done that without us, so we decided, we started before this, but I just told you her story.  We found that there are a lot of little kids in elementary school who weren't even making it in middle school.  We found out that waiting until a kid is in high school is too late.  For a kid who is from an at risk, what's at risk?  At risk is maybe single parent, no job, welfare, and so we, one of our members was active in the school board.  He said, let's take about fifteen, eighteen, the number.  We started with smaller numbers.  Let's take about ten or twelve youngsters at risk, ages ten to twelve, and let's see what we can do.  And we were fortunate.  We had this guy who had after-school programs.  That was at after-school.  And, break this down very fast, among those, as I say, ten kids, at least, at least 90 percent stayed in.  Every last one of them did better with grades.  Some went with failing to honors.  And farther on up to the seventh, eighth, and we were not supposed, we were supposed to stop there because we figured we'd done our job, but some of the guys said, "Let's follow them on through," not as much mentoring because they were in high school and so they did, they do follow them but without that much care and attention.  And that's called the Higher Aims.  That's been going on for about seven or eight years now, at least seven or eight years.  And so that's where we have stayed.  Some of the very ambitious young guys in our group feel that we should be doing more, and so they, the program we had has been in White Plains [New York].  Now they want to move, add to this, the same thing in New Rochelle [New York], the same thing.  And I, some of the old buddies, the old guys like me, say maybe we should just stick with one, but these guys, that's what they want to do now.  Now I wish them luck, I support them and we may donate, we make, we contribute a fair amount, and we have a big fundraising thing that has enabled.  Archie Bankston [Archie M. Bankston, Jr.] is in our club and a lot of the guys you know.  I'm sure you know them.  [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price who was with the Urban League [national Urban League], Tom Price [Thomas Price, Jr.], the cardiologist in Mount Vernon [New York], and but since some of the guys get older, their interest is not as great as the youngsters coming in.
Speaker 1: They have some fire in their bellies.
Speaker 2: So that, that's the other of the groups.  I'm no longer active, I'm emeritus because I don't have the energy or the time or the finance, but I support the fundraising activity.
Story_ID: 372290
Speaker 1: How would you describe the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: I think the Boule has come a long way in what it started out.  Of course, nothing, did you ever read the little sheet on how our Boule started?  How the Boule started.  The, W.E.B. Du Bois, are you familiar with that?  You know how he started it with a group of people and then he, of course, after twenty-five years, became discouraged and felt that we weren't doing enough.  And, as far as I know when I, my father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] was in the Boule, I was in the Boule.  I'm not aware that we ever did anything other than it being a social action thing.  Not social action, social having fun, having a ball.  Well, it's changed now, I'm happy to say.  I'm sure Du Bois would be happy and we're in the process now of one of our huge multimillion dollar projects to do things for less fortunate people.  When I started in the Boule, they were only, there weren't many chapters.  In Alabama, with my father, there was one Boule.  I told you when I was in Virginia in 1961, but only one Boule.  Now there's several Boules.  We've got three with right in New York, Brooklyn [New York], Westchester [Westchester County, New York], Montclair, New Jersey, and I'm sure that each one is doing something to help other less fortunate people.  Now I told you what we did the other night.  We were told in advance, I hope, Zeta Chapter, we were the host chapter.  Ted Shore [ph.] is in our chapter, so Ted's gotten up and told us what to do.  I don't know how strong that message went to the other Boules who were invited.  Two other Boules were invited, but I know that when they said, when you come, our charity this Christmas, common charity, is to work with the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and I, I saw a number of envelopes and it had the great big thing there and I had told Ted I was going to send something, and I put in a nice envelope with a very nice, very nice check.  And if they all did that, that was going to help.  And Ted expressed his appreciation at his lecture that he, so I'm sure that I can't imagine the others not doing as much, if not more than we're doing.
Story_ID: 372291
Speaker 1: Dr. Branche [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.], what are your hopes for the black community, in the future, for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is that things will be much better, and they can only be much better if there's education.  Education, education, because the other things follow having a good education, you're not going to get a good job, you're not going to be able to be responsible, you're not going to be able to be a good loving parent, you're not going to be able to help others, as I've told you over and over.  It's been my teaching that if you come on this earth and you're not going to help others, there's no point in being here.  You don't need more parasites.  And when I listened to my buddy Bill Cosby, whom I admire so much, and people are chastising him 'cause he gets after parents, parents are the ones, how are you gonna, education and, of course, of course, and many other things.  If we've got nice outstanding young football players, tennis players, all this stuff, that's that much, you can't see it when you got millions in jail.  And so I think hard work.  We do need to have, is the program on tonight on racism, or was that last night?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: There's a big program on racism with Paula Zahn.
Speaker 1: Paula Zahn, yes.
Speaker 2: A big one tonight, I think it's tonight.  Because this is a horrible thing in our country.  It's a horrible thing.  It has ruined, it's, you see what has happened it has suffocated so much talent, oh boy, when you look at these brilliant kids.  John Chavis, as I said, you can take it but I got to have it back.  When you read that, you are going to be so amazed that you don't know.  How can this happen?  John Chavis, 1738, was the outstanding teacher who taught children Latin and Greek, well to do, and then you look at so many, there's so many other instances, you just go on and on and on and on.  And the talent is there, you got to get rid of racism and let people realize we're losing so much, so much, so many brilliant lives.  And the thing that's happening in this country is the demographic changes.  You get on that elevator now and go down and you find most of the young couples, Japanese, Indian.  I saw a lady today, very pretty young woman, 'cause I love to say hello to pretty young women.  And I said, "My, how are you?"  And she said hi.  I said, "What is your name?"  I said, "You are very pretty."  I said, "You remind me of my daughter-in-law."  I said, "She's Indian too."  And she said, yes, yes.  And I said, "Her name is Kamla [Kamla Branche]."  Oh, isn't that nice.  So what we're saying is, we got to get on the ball.  And I'm so disappointed with what goes on in our schools.  We've got forty black students at Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine] when there should be a hundred and forty.  I can't get, I can't find enough kids.  Schools are waiting to take them into medical school.  The girls are doing better, the black girls, but it's, you got to have hope don't you, you got to have hope, otherwise what's the point.
Speaker 1: What's the point?
Story_ID: 372292
Speaker 1: What is it you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Oh, somebody who had a wonderful life, tried to do, tried to practice the Golden Rule, and being generally friendly and humorous.  I have a little more humor on the stage.  I've been very lucky, I've been very lucky.
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, what stands out most for you at this moment?
Speaker 2: The fact that I have been very lucky, how did it happen that I had like this great-grandfather who was born in 1863, and turned out to be this type of person?  How could a person have a better father and a mother than I had?  I don't know of any parents that have done what my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] and father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] did to travel from Alabama to Boston [Massachusetts], leaving my father to make sure the kids got a good education.  I've been very, so fortunate, and I don't think that I, and I tried, I haven't been able to do as much as they did, but I tried to make sure that my kids got the best deal and that other youngsters like them got a better deal.  That's been the fun, that's the fun.  That's the fun.  The fun is not having a big car or big boat, this or that.  That's no fun.  The fun is seeing people smile, like when you see a patient, a sick patient, and they smile and say thank you.  Boy that's something.  That really, that does it for you.  And I wouldn't do anything, many things different, although we learn by our mistakes.  I've learned an awful lot.
Speaker 1: What mistakes have you made?
Speaker 2: Certain decisions about, I sometimes wonder what I did with my son, my older boy.
Speaker 1: Why him?  What did he do that--
Speaker 2: Because he wanted, when he, he was very, very bright.  Obviously a very bright child.  No boy could make a parent more proud than George III [George Clayton Branche III], and he wanted to go to, when the kids finished, when the kids finished high school, they chose a school that is the hardest to get into.  Well he was accepted to all of them, of course, and he chose Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].  I wanted him to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He said Harvard is too cold.  He went to Princeton and, unfortunately, had a miserable time.  He never sat down and talked to me about the problems, but it was obviously had something he felt denoted racism and I told him that his great, great-grandfather went to Princeton and left because of racism.  But he didn't listen, and then he said to me after a few months, "Dad, can I transfer and go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]," and I said, "No, you go ahead you went to, you made your bed, sleep in it."  And so he finished Princeton and had a lousy four years.  But you know what, I blame him, because as smart and resourceful as he was, he could have gone ahead, behind my back, made a few trips over here to Columbia, gotten in and said, "Dad, by the way, you know, I shifted gears."  There was nothing I could do.  He'd have had me.
Story_ID: 371905
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nobody could be more proud of a child than my son [George Clayton Branche III].  When he got time to go, he left Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].  He wanted to go, decided to go on into medicine and he was accepted to my school, but he didn't want to go to school up north, he wanted to try Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  He was accepted and he did beautifully there.  He really did well, and he had not played basketball or tennis for Princeton the entire four years, which I think was, was too bad.  So, he went on through Howard, did extremely well and decided, decided that he wanted to go into anesthesiology.  I said no.  He said, "I like it, I like it."  A few weeks later he called me when it was time, he was getting ready to graduate in a few months.  He said, "Dad I made a mistake, I had a nightmare, I woke up dreaming that all I was doing was putting people to sleep every day."  He said, "I went to Dr. Epps [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles H. Epps, Jr.]."  You know Dr. Epps?  Dr. Epps, I call him my son's godfather.  Dr. Epps said, "Well son we filled up all the programs."  I don't know if I told you this or not.  He said, "See if your dad or some of his friends can get an internship in surgery, and I think I can get something the next year."  He wanted orthopedic surgery.  So the only person I knew was Harold Freeman [HistoryMaker Dr. Harold Freeman], and I said, "Harold, can you help me?"  This shows you how friends and contacts are so important, and this is what we need.  And Harold said, "Sure, sure George [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.]."  He said, "We have an opening and my son went there to Harlem [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] for a year with Harold and they have never seen anybody work as hard as my son did.  He fell asleep one night on his way from Harlem and the only thing that saved his life, he went through one of those things under the Bronx River Parkway where you scrape up and he heard something scraping at two o'clock in the morning, woke him.  He knocked out, scratched up, destroyed the tires but it woke him up.  I told him, don't ever leave the hospital at that hour, stay in the overnight quarters.  Then he went onto Howard and went back and got in, Dr. Epps took over for him, and he became one of the outstanding orthopedic surgeons, specializing in sports medicines.  And also not only sports medicine, but doing only the shoulder and the knee, and never making any incision.  He does only arthroscopic surgery, and he's operated on people all over the whole country.  I sent several people down from here, and now he's with the medical situation as it is, he's having a tough time making a good living because of the, as it goes, but he's got two nice children [George Clayton Branche IV and Katherine C. Branche].  A little boy, my youngest child is the one who, my youngest, his boy who's sixteen is a tennis player and so, and he's doing very well.  My daughter [Leota Susan Branche], as I said, she married a fine young gentleman from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  You may have heard of him.  His name is [HistoryMaker] Douglas Holloway.  He's with Universal NBC [NBCUniversal, New York, New York] and he's president of the, one group there.  What is the cable network?  He travels all over the world, which is a little difficult for the family.  We were out the other night there.  But she and Douglas have raised these two fine boys [D.J. Holloway and Marcus Holloway], twelve and nine.  They live in Scarsdale [New York] and they do well, and I'm very proud of her.  My, but as I say, she's busy in her field in psychology, awful busy.  And Douglas, of course, how can you be busier?  That's one of the rough spots.  If I guess you're gonna do well in some of these businesses, you won't be with your family very much.  My third child [Scott Branche] is, came ten years later.  He wanted to do his things and deal with hobbies.  He finished the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], but decided he wanted to go into business and he went into business and went bankrupt.  But he's getting married, divorced, it didn't last long.  He's got a one-year marriage.  He's single again, and he works at a manager in a big hobby concession where he not only sells various things, but makes, he makes rockets.  He's a specialist on model rocketry, and on radio, everything radio controlled, radio controlled cars, helicopters and he lives in a nice little house down in Laurel [Maryland], and is happy, but he has a turtle and three ferrets.  He's allergic to cats and dogs, and I talk to him periodically, so he's, I guess I'm happy that he's doing okay.
Speaker 2: And you've done good.
Speaker 1: We'd hoped for other things but that's not right because as I've gotten older, I've seen so many of my friends whose kids have done that and decided there, and the parents are happy, parents are happy.
Story_ID: 371906
Speaker 1: So what are you happiest about your life?  You said that you were so lucky, your parents [Lillian Davidson Branche and George Clayton Branche, Sr.], if you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I had so many nice things that happened to me.  From the time I was born, as you will see in the pictures, and then, as I said, to grow up in a place like Tuskegee [Alabama].  Everything was taken for granted.  Everything would be taken for granted that you would run out from your elementary school and wave to George Washington Carver.  Or that you'd play with Booker T. Washington's grandkids, and grow up with them.  We always thought, we never had any, as children, a feeling of being in a racist society.  My parents tended to keep that from us.  And then I was very fortunate in having loving friends who took me in to Boston [Massachusetts] as if I was their own child, and that grew, until my mother came.  And I was protected from so many things that went on in Boston.  I didn't realize that Boston was such a racist place.  South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], ooh.  My son-in-law [HistoryMaker Douglas Holloway] went to a little school, and he's from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], went to school called Emerson College in Boston.  He went there before he went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] to get his M.B.A.  That's when he met my daughter [Leota Susan Branche], and he said he'd better not go over in Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts], they would whip him good.  And I did not, we were always, we lived in a nice section of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  We walked from Roxbury to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], go from Boston Latin to Bowdoin [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] in Maine.  We come back, we go from my little house in Roxbury to medical school [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] and you were always protected, never saw the racism that existed in Boston.  Boston was not a nice place.  As I say, each step of the way, I have been very lucky.  I've been lucky, lucky, lucky.  Internships, Boston City [Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], residencies, the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs].  I was, I had a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you can think of that we left out that we should cover before we conclude today?
Speaker 2: No.  I've been very happy that my kids have been well, I've been very happy that I belonged to groups that are doing something.  Sometimes it's a headache and I can do less and less, and I have been told I have to do less and less.  They offered, the people, some of these groups offered to drive me home at night, but I made it home, and they realize that they, as I said, I'm taking a little more time in church.  No matter what happens this coming weekend, I've got to be in church this Sunday, to pray for the good Lord to help me (laughter), but I've been very fortunate as you can see, I've been very fortunate.
Story_ID: 371907
Speaker 1: After I left Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], I entered the Boston University School of Medicine [Boston, Massachusetts].  This was about 1944, and this represents a picture taken of several of my brothers in Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  Most of us had finished college and were in graduate school or medical school, and most of us had been enrolled in various colleges and universities around the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  This is a picture of me, among that group of guys, all fantastic men.  Unfortunately, as time goes and you leave the area, you lose contact with all of them.  That was over fifty, sixty years ago.
Speaker 2: What year was that taken?
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1944 and I don't remember having seen any of these men, fantastic men, in the last fifty years.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my dad, a very dapper young physician, who happened to be chief of the neuropsychiatric service at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  This was taken in the mid-'30s [1930s] to late '30s [1930s].  That's George Clayton Branche [George Clayton Branche, Sr.], my father.
Speaker 1: All these pretty little children are my contemporaries when I was a youngster, about five or six.  Those are our parents, the two older ladies in the background.
Speaker 2: Which mother is your mother?
Speaker 1: My mother is not on that picture, but my mother, she's a contemporary of those ladies.  They all look alike.  This was taken behind our home at the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus] in Tuskegee, Alabama where I grew up for my first eleven years before going to Boston.
Speaker 2: This is taken almost eighty years ago.  This is my closest friend, John Garrett [John Garrett, Jr.].  John is to the right, I'm to the left.  We're only six weeks apart.  John left Tuskegee, was sent to Boston to go to school and then his family took me in in Boston one year later.  We both finished the Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts].  John went on to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and I went to Bowdoin.  We stayed in touch over the years.  We are still hanging in there at eighty-one years of age.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken about forty-four years ago.  To the left is my mother, to the right my former wife June Granger Branche.
Speaker 2: And your mother's name?
Speaker 1: Lillian Davidson Branche.  That was on the front porch of the home down in Oxford, North Carolina, which is now a museum.  It's our museum.
Speaker 2: The Branche Museum?
Speaker 1: It's called the George C.--George Clayton Branche Museum [sic. George Clayton Shaw Museum, Oxford, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: What's in the museum?
Speaker 1: Some artifacts that had existed for the past times.  We put back old pieces of furniture.  There's a chance I will put that piece of wrought iron furniture back there later on.  There are several things in my apartment here which came from the old house, but it was built in 1921.  As a small child I remember going up staying there with my family when we would go from Tuskegee to North Carolina.  I have many pictures of that, which I think you've seen many of the pictures in some of the folders?
Speaker 2: This is my great uncle, George Clayton Shaw, who was really the patriarch of our family, born in 1883.  Dr. Shaw later opened the Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina, and the Timothy Darling Church [Timothy Darling Presbyterian Church, Oxford, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And he adopted your father, correct?
Speaker 2: He adopted my father, who was his nephew, when my father was a little fellow about three years old.
Speaker 1: So do you refer to him as your grandfather?
Speaker 2: We call him Uncle George.  He raised my father.  And my father was named after him.  I was named after him, my son and my grandson.
Speaker 1: This is my Aunt Libby.  Her name was Mary Elizabeth Lewis [Mary Elizabeth Lewis Shaw].  She was from Pennsylvania, grew up in a very well-to-do family.  She was an outstanding teacher and my Uncle George married her in 1889 or 1890 and she continued teaching at the Mary Potter school for many years.
Speaker 2: This is my cousin.  She's actually my father's first cousin.  Her name is Mrs. Wyonella Dent Cotman.  Wyonella was my father's first cousin, approximately the same age as my mother.  She was married to Thomas Cotman, who is an outstanding food service manager at Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And Wyonella was a librarian.  We stayed in close touch with each other over many years, over many years.  They did not have children and Wyonella would often say that she adopted me as her little boy.  A more loving person I have never known than my cousin Wyonella.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name for me?
Speaker 2: W-Y-O-N-E-L-L-A.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken of me down in Tuskegee when I was a little fellow about eight or nine years old.  Several years later I was sent to Boston.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my dad, George Clayton Branche, in uniform.  He was an outstanding neuropsychiatrist.  Here he is in uniform.  This was taken in the very early 1930s.
Speaker 1: That's a good picture.  This is a picture of my very beautiful mother when she was about eighteen or nineteen years old.  She and my father were to be married just several years later.  She attended Mary Potter high school.  That's where she met my dad and was very, very close to his family, his Aunt Libby and his Uncle George, and took care of my Aunt Libby years later when my Aunt Libby was very sick.  This is the lovely lady who took me and my siblings to Boston and stayed with us until we were all well-educated.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me and my younger brother Matthew [Matthew Branche], who was two and a half years younger.  He was about five and a half, and I'm about seven and a half, about eight, about eight years old.  In the middle is our cousin, a young lady named Beatrice Standstill [ph.] who was a cousin of my mother's, who lived in North Carolina.  She lived under circumstances where she had inadequate schooling and my mother brought her from North Carolina down to Tuskegee to make sure she got through high school and then she left a few years later going north.  That's Beatrice.  That's my brother Matthew.
Story_ID: 371908
Speaker 1: These are three outstanding ladies.  The one to the left with the pink dress on is my cousin Wyonella [Wyonella Dent Cotman], the one to whom I referred to later on, who is the one who sort of adopted me as her little baby boy.  Next to her is Diana Dent [Diana Savage Dent], one of the most famous people in education we've ever known.  She taught with an outstanding lady who ran the department of home economics at North Carolina Central college [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  In fact, there's a huge building named after her, Mrs. Diana Dent.  To her right is another cousin of mine.  Her name is Bayetta Dent [Bayetta Dent Blount].  She is the, one of the other sisters of the three Dent sisters.  There were four altogether.  She lived in Columbus, Ohio and was the mother of a very, very outstanding ophthalmologist by the name of Wilbur Blount [Wilbur Clayton Blount]. Wilbur passed just a few months ago.
Speaker 2: After my mother [Lillian Davidson Branche] and father [George Clayton Branche, Sr.] moved to Tuskegee [Alabama], I was born within the year after they arrived.  That's my mother holding me, George Clayton Branche, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. George Clayton Branche, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Here's another picture of my mother holding me.
Speaker 2: And another picture of my mother holding me.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me being held by a friend of ours.  I don't recall her name.  That may be my mother, but I'm not certain.
Speaker 2: That's my mother holding me when I was less than a year old.
Speaker 1: And again my mother holding me.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me in North Carolina at the Mary Potter school [Mary Potter Academy, Oxford, North Carolina], and we're standing, I'm standing behind an old Hudson Eight that my great uncle owned.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me as a little fellow less than two years old, feeding the chickens.  You can see the chickens in the background.  And this is in the backyard of our home in Tuskegee.  And I'm busy feeding the chickens.
Speaker 2: Here's a picture of me with my father.  My father is in his uniform that he wore as a medical officer at the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Home; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And that's my dad holding me when I was a little over a year old.
Speaker 1: There's a picture of me sitting on the front porch of our home in Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: And this, of course, is a picture of my mother holding me as a tiny infant.
Speaker 1: This, this is my Uncle George Shaw, Clayton Shaw [George Clayton Shaw], holding me in the yard, in the driveway of his home in Oxford, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: And this is me when I was several months old.
Speaker 1: I spent about seventeen and a half months in South Korea, from January 1953 to May of '54 [1954], and one of my main assignments was in the Jeonju valley of Korea, and here I am posing with some Korean youth.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken about twelve or fourteen years ago of me and my late sister, Martie Branche Baudult.  This picture was taken in a village way out in the outskirts of Bangkok in Thailand.  We were on our way driving up with some friends up to Chiang Mai in Thailand. We had a wonderful vacation in the Far East.  I had a number of friends there, some of whom I had trained in the medical field.  That's in Thailand.
Speaker 1: Now this picture, to the left is my son-in-law, [HistoryMaker] Douglas Holloway, holding his son, little Douglas Jesse Holloway, D.J. [D.J. Holloway] as we called him.  Douglas is the president of Universal NBC [NBCUniversal, New York, New York] cable investments.  And the next to him is me, and to the left of me is my son, George Clayton Branche III, and he has on his shoulders my grandson, George Clayton Branche IV, and to his left is my youngest child, Scott Davidson Branche [Scott Branche], who lives in Maryland.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken last year at a large celebration that we had honoring a number of outstanding citizens.  I'm posed with the young man who's the CEO and president of Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  It's of interest that he had gone to Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] and finished several years behind my son, George Clayton III.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken of me in Richmond, Virginia after I had started practicing there in the late 1950s.  That would be about 1960 that that picture was taken.
