Story_ID: 658410
Speaker 1: We're going to begin by my slating.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm your interviewer.  Isaac Feldman is our videographer.  Is your assistant gonna be in the room?  What's his name?
Speaker 2: Antoine Braxton.
Speaker 1: Antoine Braxton is our observer.  I'd like for you to say and spell your name, say what you do, today's date and where we are please.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Tai Beauchamp, T-A-I, B as in boy, E-A-U-C-H-A-M-P.  What do I do?  I'm an entrepreneur, media personality and media person.  And today's date is October 7th, 2014, and we are in my apartment in New York City, Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Excellent.  So--and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: January 7th, 1978.  I'm like when was I born (laughter)?
Story_ID: 658411
Speaker 1: So let's start with some People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I would probably have to say is a cross between black and blue.  And that is not a good combo (laughter).  The black and blue is not a good combo, but both of them are my favorite colors.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year I would probably say is fall.  Now is a good time of year.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food right now I would say it's kale.
Speaker 1: Your favorite travel destination?
Speaker 2: My gosh, my favorite travel destination.  I can't choose just one.  I like going to new places all the time.  Most recently I traveled to Israel and loved there.  I also recently went to San Sebastian, Spain and loved, I love (unclear) France, so I, I can't name one.  Bodrum, Turkey maybe.  Africa, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: A favorite saying or phrase.  It's funny, I would probably say, "To whom much is given, much is expected."  And then secondarily, recently I've been saying a lot of, "To thine own self be true" [William Shakespeare].
Story_ID: 658412
Speaker 1: So I wanna start with your family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell me your father's name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where he was born, if you know his birth date and tell me about your dad.
Speaker 2: So his name is Mark Hopkins.  He was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey.  And I believe his birthday is March something, 1958 or '59 [1959].  I grew up with my father's family, very close to his parents.  But I mean my father was around, but I wasn't raised by him, I was raised by his parents.  So you know my relationship with my father right now, I would, you know, is estranged.  It's, it's not a connected relationship at all, but it's one where I know who he is and I know where he is.
Speaker 1: What, what does he do?
Speaker 2: By trade, he's an engineer.  So his background is he studied engineering at MGIT [Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, India] and he's worked for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and other companies.  I know he's in Atlanta [Georgia].  And yeah he's a, he's a big personality is how I would describe him; and interestingly enough, though I wasn't nurtured by him environmentally, I have a lot more of his personality traits than that of my mother's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott].  So that's an interesting fact.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me about his family, his parents and--
Speaker 2: Sure.  His father, Leonzie Hopkins, actually whose flag I have, who passed in 2000, his veteran's flag.  He passed Jan--
Speaker 1: Leonzay?
Speaker 2: Leonzie, yes.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: L-E-O-N-Z-I-E, Hopkins.  And Pop Pop's birthday, I know he was born in 1923.  Pop Pop's birthday--April--it's all upstairs on the death certificate, which is--but I think it's April, like 24th, 1923.  But he passed on January 23rd in 2000.  And so I was very, very close to him.  He was born in South Carolina, outside of Columbia [South Carolina], in a small town called Hopkinsville [South Carolina].  He was one of either eleven or ten.  I met his mother, whose name was Mary [Mary Hopkins], so I knew her.  And she passed, I wanna say it was probably in like 1991 or '92 [1992].  And my grandfather was the oldest of all.  I think it was ten of them, so he was the oldest of ten.
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: My grandfather worked as--in a factory.  He operated a, a freight in a factory in New Jersey where, you know, I guess he must have come to New Jersey sometime after the war where he met my grandmother Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] who--all my--obviously paternal.  Whose, you know, ancestry is tied to Tobago [Trinidad and Tobago] and also to the West Indies somewhere, but she was born and raised in New Brunswick, New Jersey.  And I never met her, her parents.  But I did meet and know her sister, Aunt Bert [ph.], who is still alive, actually.  And she and her husband, Uncle Tom [ph.], live in Florida.  And their daughter actually, you actually may know, is Cheryl Washington, formerly of CNN.
Speaker 1: Yeah she--
Speaker 2: Yep, so that's my father's first cousin, who lives in South Orange, New Jersey, who I grew up with.  So--because my Aunt Bert and my grandmother Sarah were very close.
Story_ID: 658413
Speaker 1: Now you said that your [paternal] grandfather, Leonzie Hopkins, grew up in Hopkinsville, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Is his surname as a result of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my understanding.  I mean I, I have been to that town, or I can't even call it a town.  I mean what do you call those?  I know--I understand my memory--if my memory serves me, it's seventy miles east of Columbia [South Carolina], is all I would remember.  And that's what they called it 'cause all of the family literally lived there.  I remember in 19--let's see in 1980, (unclear) so maybe in 1987, no, no.  My grandmother [Sarah Hopkins] died, my grandmother died in 1986.  In 1984, so two years--I remember my grandfather talking about installing a bathroom in this house.  And I visited there when I was probably about six or seven years old.  And at the time, you know, quite a few of his sib- siblings were still living.  I remember actually his brother, brother John [John Hopkins] very well, who actually had moved to New Jersey as well.  I hadn't thought about any of this stuff, so oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: Back to Hopkinsville.  Do you know was--can you trace the family back to slavery?
Speaker 2: I'm sure we can.  I'm, you know, I, I'm sure we can.  I hadn't, because it--I guess it's one of those things that a lot of us as African Americans have you know, dealt with and as I will explain.  You know I was raised by my grandparents.  And so also I was very young, so it's not like they were sharing a great deal of historical information with me.  I think I was fortunate in the sense that I knew my great-grandmother, you know actually knew three, four of my great-grandparents well, you know.  So my grandfather's mother Mary Hopkins, I remember meeting her and she died when she was like 104.
Speaker 1: Wow. So--but you--what, what you don't know is how this little town was--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) created, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you--did Mary work?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Your great-grand--
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother.  I don't, I don't know any of that.  I mean quite frankly, I can't imagine her working with ten kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: She had a different job.
Speaker 2: You know I think I remember my grandfather saying something about them being sharecroppers, because I remember when we, when we did visit--no I must have been a little older than six.  'Cause I must have been about seven or maybe even eight.  Because I remember them going out onto this land where there was this--it was this little old house.  It wasn't anything elaborate, but it now had you know, it probably had like four bedrooms, but a flat house, you know, with four bedrooms and, you know the--now the new bathroom that my grandfather had installed.  And they went out and they were hunting, like the men went hunt- hunting.  So I imagine that there must have been some ties in some way.
Story_ID: 658414
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mom.
Speaker 2: So my mother is a--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Taiwanda [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott].  Her maiden name is Beauchamp, but now it's Scott.  So my parents weren't married when I was born, which is why I have my mother's maiden name.  And my mother was born in North New Jersey, December 14th, 1961.  And that was one of the reasons why my [paternal] grandparents [Sarah Hopkins and Leonzie Hopkins] were so instrumental in raising me, because my parents were so young when I was born.  And so that way my parents to go into college and have their life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old was your mom?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, you were saying that your mother could go to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so my mother is a fourth or fifth generation New Yorker, fourth generation New Yorker.  And she is an educator by trade.  She studied in undergrad, I don't know if it was education or psycho- psychology.  Her master's [degree] is in social work.  She actually just recently retired, (laughter) which frightens me because she's so young.  But she's had so many years in the school system.  So hopefully she'll find another life.  (Laughter) But you know, very amazing woman who I think, you know, persevered because I tell people all the time to have been born to teenage parents, you know, in the late '70s [1970s], right, in Newark, New Jersey, you know where my mom was from.  My dad [Mark Hopkins] grew up in Linden [New Jersey] and in Westfield [New Jersey].  But you know my, my trajectory could have been very different, and quite frankly it should have been, you know, statistically.  But my grandparents, you know, were there to really support and raise and bring me up, so I'm really grateful for that.  But my mother is a, is a very interesting, loving person.  I will say it's been interesting over the years because it's like now that I'm older, and I can't even imagine like I'm thirty-six, having a nineteen or a twenty year old now.  Oh my god.  I can't even imagine.  So literally it, it wasn't until probably about five or six years ago that our relationship really evolved in a very positive and strong way.  Because before that, she was like a big sister who was obviously around, like very, very present.  Like you know she didn't miss not one basketball game while I was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She traveled with me when I played sports, so it was very present.  But my grandparents were my caregivers, my primary caregivers.  So it was a very--
Speaker 1: You knew she was your mom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, yeah, yeah.  I mean she was there.  I mean you know and it was very shared and communal.  It's interesting 'cause it was a very blended situation.  So from the time I was zero to eight, because my father's mother Sarah was a stay at home mom, I stayed with them during the week until she passed when I was, when I was eight or nine, eight.  Until she passed.  And so like during the week, I would be at my father's house from the--from Monday through Friday, and then I'd go to my mother's family house on the weekends.  So it was all very blended and very shared.  So it was like the new normal family like in 1978 (laughter).
Story_ID: 658415
Speaker 1: So your--I wanna talk a little more about your mother's family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me did she have siblings, were her parents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, so my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] has two siblings.  She's the youngest of three.  Her brother is--he converted to Islam, so his name is Ibrahim Mohammad [ph.].  His birth name was Howard Beauchamp, Jr. [ph.] (laughter).  And then my aunt was Laverne Beauchamp, who is the eldest.  And you know, they all grew up in Newark [New Jersey].  My uncle is still there and my aunt now lives in North Carolina, and my mom and my stepfather, my parents, live in Piscataway, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And do you--how far back can you trace your mom's family?
Speaker 2: So I actually have some materials on this and I was--I, I actually was trying to find it.  I might be able to look it up on my phone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can just tell me what you--
Speaker 2: But so on my mother's, on my mother's father's side, that's the Beauchamp side.  My grandfather was born in Newark.  His mother moved to Newark from Alabama when she was like three or four years old.  His father also was born in Newark, and his name was Y.C. Beauchamp I think.  My mother's father's, my mother's father's, my mother's father's mother was Louise Beauchamp by marriage to Y.C.  I knew her, I knew Louise.  She died in, she died in 1988.  He, my grandfather, my mother's father Howard [Howard Beauchamp], is--was one of six, he was the oldest of six.  He actually was a history maker himself.  He was this famous black cowboy.  He left our family in Newark to go to Houston, Texas to become a cowboy.
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes, Howard.  And so he's known for having rode the horse from Texas to New Jersey in 1986 [sic. 1985].
Speaker 1: Wow, that's a long way (laughter).
Speaker 2: Crazy.  So we often, you know, chide with my mom and her, her siblings and say, "Well your father's a cowboy."  It's pretty funny.  Especially like you know being from Newark, but he was really passionate about the outdoors and this wild, wild west (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where did he even find horses to ride in Newark?
Speaker 2: Well there were stables in Newark back in the day, and he also, my grandfather being a man who cared about the outdoors, he served in the war too, which is how my grandmother met him.  'Cause my maternal grandmother, Mary [Mary Beauchamp], who I'm very, very close with, who I help take care of now, was from Portsmouth, Virginia.  And they met when he was serving in, in the [U.S.] Navy in Portsmouth.  But he, his background was--so my mother and her siblings all went to Barringer High School [Barringer Academy of the Arts and Humanities, Newark, New Jersey], which is the third oldest public high school in the country.  And my grandfather and all his siblings also went to Barringer High School.  So there's a, really kind of cool legacy there.  But my grandfather was always like into the outdoors.  So as I understand it, like he taught at the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America], he taught kids how to swim.  You know he was all into archery and like there were all these camps, and there was a stable there.  So it was a passion that he always had and then you know when he and my grandmother were going through stuff, I guess he said I'm leaving and moving to Texas.  So I actually remember when he rode the horse from Texas to New Jersey.  It was kind of crazy.
Speaker 1: From Texas to New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like it was written up in Jet, it was--you know he got the key to the City of Newark like it was kind of a big deal and kind of crazy at the same time.  But I--it's funny because when I think about that as, as much as I am my grandmother's child who cares about beauty and fashion and style, I love outdoors and I'm like well where in the heck did that come from?  And it's obvious that there's something in the blood, you know, where I got it.
Story_ID: 658416
Speaker 1: So my grandfather has--all of his sisters are still alive, actually.  And I know all of them very well.  He was one of three boys and, and all of them are now deceased.  He's the oldest, Howard Beauchamp [Howard Beauchamp], Woodrow [Woodrow, Beauchamp], and then Earl [Leslie Earl Beauchamp, Sr.].  My uncle Woodrow moved to Denver, Colorado many years ago and has a family there with--he has six kids there.  And now I think they're kind of spread out.  And then my Uncle Earl has three children.  The oldest is Leslie [Leslie Earl Beauchamp, Jr.], Janice [Janice Beauchamp] and then June [June Beauchamp], who I'm very close to because she's the youngest of the first cousins, and I'm the oldest of the second group of cousins since my mom [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] is--.  And actually, my mom met my father [Mark Hopkins] through my cousin Janice because Janice went to college, went to, I'm sorry, high school and grew up in the same town as my dad.  And so when my mom would go visit my dad in Linden [New Jersey], or go visit my cousin in Linden, that's how she met my dad as a teenager.  So we can probably trace a lot of things back to Janice (laughter).  And then my--the girls, the oldest girl is Aunt Carol [Carol Beauchamp].  And Carol, Aunt Carol has two children, Veronica [Veronica French (ph.)] and Skippy [Skippy French (ph.)], French [ph.] are their last names.  And then there is Aunt Joan [Joan Beauchamp Clark], and Aunt Joan has three kids, their last name is Clark.  And that is Elizabeth [Elizabeth Clark], Elizabeth, why am I blanking on their names?  I know these people.  She has three kids.  And then who else is there?  And then Aunt Ann [Ann Beauchamp Reeves (ph.)] has two kids, Mark [Mark Reeves (ph.)] and Paige [Paige Reeves (ph.)].  And Mark lives in New Jersey, Aunt Ann now lives in Florida with, with her daughter Paige, Reeves [ph.] is their last name.
Speaker 2: So there's a large family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess.  I guess I--it, it's weird to say that there's a large family because I grew up as an only child.  And yeah having grown up as an only child and I think the older my mother has gotten, the closer she is to them.  Well what's so interesting is that all of my family now, my mother's aunts, all live in the same area with the exception of Aunt Ann.  So my Aunt Joan lives near my mom now.  She lives in Scotch Plains [New Jersey].  And Aunt Carol lives, you know, a little bit further south, so--
Speaker 2: And these are her siblings?
Speaker 1: Those are my mother's aunts.
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: On her father's side.
Story_ID: 658417
Speaker 1: So I want you to think back to your childhood.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  Earliest childhood memory.  That's a good question.  I guess I would probably have to--interestingly enough, I would probably have to say I was maybe about four or five, and it would be my maternal, my maternal great-grandmother.  That's Mary's [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother Mary Beauchamp] mother.  So we haven't talked about Mary.  That's my mother's mother's mother, Ruth.  And her, her name was Ruth Whitaker [ph.].  And she was born in North Carolina.  I wanna say Kelford, North Carolina, which is where my grandmother Mary moved back to after she was, she was born in Portsmouth [North Carolina] and then they moved to Kelford, North Carolina, which is where my grandmother's--Ruth, my great-grandmother Ruth's family was.  Would be sitting on my great-grandmother Ruth's sofa and she had this amazing grandfather clock that chimed.  And I loved the sound of the clock.  And she had pictures of my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] and my aunt [Laverne Beauchamp] and my uncle [Howard Beauchamp, Jr. (ph.)] you know, high school graduation photos, there.  And my grandmother Mary who I help take care of, took care of her.  And remarkably, I mean we'll go into talking about Mary, but she is my inspiration.
Speaker 1: Mary.
Speaker 2: She's a woman who after my grandfather Howard [Howard Beauchamp] decided to go be a cowboy and I don't mean to say that jokingly, because there's something so beautiful about him living his dream.  But you know she had three children.  All of whom were in high school or graduated high school and in college.  And then her youngest, my mother says she's pregnant.  And my grandmother had moved her mother from Virginia to New Jersey to take care of her 'cause my grandmother was, my great-grandmother was getting old.  And you see how I say--'cause I call Mary Mommy.  So that's why I sometimes--grandma, great-grandma.  And my grandmother went to college and grad school and helped raise me.  And took care of her children and her mother and worked, all at the same time.
Speaker 1: As a single mom at this point.
Speaker 2: Single.  I can't even imagine, you know, and I remember sitting on my grandmother's sofa because when I would come from my father's [Mark Hopkins] family's house on the weekends, or even if, you know some- sometimes I would stay with my mom's family.  And my mother and my grandmother had two different places at the time--once my mother was of age.  But my grandmother would go and see her mother on the way to work, and then on the way back as well.  So seven days a week, you know, and going to college, and raising kids, and raising a grandkid, and taking care of a mother who was blind, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Ruth.
Speaker 2: Ruth.
Speaker 1: What age are you when you remember sitting on the couch?
Speaker 2: I was probably about four.  'Cause I remember one time I peed my pants and so I was still, still relatively young.  Actually I have maybe memories older than that, but you know--and I remember my grand- I remember Mary saying, "Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp] you're too old to be going to--," and Ruth who was blind, would say, "Leave her alone."  You know like I could do no wrong.  Because she did, she did see me.  She didn't lose her sight until like I was about two or three.  So you know from '78 [1978] until '81 [1981] she had her sight.
Story_ID: 658418
Speaker 1: S- I wanna ask about your, your name.  So starting with your surname Beauchamp.  Was--do, do you know the origin of your name?
Speaker 2: You know there has been a lot of speculation.  Interestingly enough as I understand it, so I was gonna talk about Louise's [Louise Beauchamp] family.  Her--
Speaker 1: Louise is?
Speaker 2: Louise is Howard's [Beauchamp's maternal grandfather, Howard Beauchamp] mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was McCullough [ph.] from Alabama.  Like right near the panhandle, like near Pensacola, out in Florida, like around there somewhere.  Dothan, Alabama is where it is.  I have some materials upstairs somewhere or on email with her family tree.  She married my great-grandfather [Y.C. Beauchamp], but there isn't a lot of history on his family.  So the last name Beauchamp is inherited from him, but we don't really know all the origins.  There has been speculation that, you know while some have said that he was born in Alabama, others have said that he was born up north.  So we don't really know.  We know that there's some French connection, but you know, that could be Louisiana, it could be, you know.
Speaker 1: You don't know how far--how, how far back can you trace?
Speaker 2: Beauchamp, you know I think the last we really know is really of my great-grandfather.  And you know he and my grandma--my great-grandmother Louise didn't split amicably.  Or he passed like you know and so with, with--I don't wanna say with some tragedy, but with some, you know, some issues.  And so there was kind of like who knows?  What's interesting though, is that in Newark [New Jersey], like everyone knows the Beauchamp name.  But I don't know if they just know it from my grandfather and his six siblings, or if it's something further back than that.
Speaker 1: And Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that based on your mom's name, Taiwanda [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott]?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Even--where did her mother get--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I always--it doesn't make sense to me.  I'll say that because my, my mother's siblings' names are Howard, Howard, Jr. [Howard Beauchamp, Jr.; Ibrahim Mohammad (ph.)] and Laverne [Laverne Beauchamp].  So I, I would say to Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp] all the time, it's like, "Where in the heck did you get Taiwanda in the '60s [1960s]?"  I'm like girl, you're doing the most, I'm like--I don't know, I don't know.  I mean Mary also was very much a writer and a creative person.  So who knows, who knows?  I don't, I don't even, I don't even know.
Story_ID: 658419
Speaker 1: I want you to put yourself in the home where you grew up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and tell me, describe the sights, sounds and smells of your home, your neighborhood [in Linden, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: So that's always interesting 'cause I had several homes growing up, which I must say never felt weird.  I didn't know anything was weird about it until I was probably about twelve years old.  And I'm grateful for that because I imagine now if I were to think back to what it could have felt like, I, I could have felt shuffled, and I didn't feel that way 'cause every place I went, I felt loved.  So at my [paternal] grandparents' house, that's Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] and Lee [Leonzie Hopkins], Lee, we call him Lee, Pop Pop and Mom, it was a busy house because my grandmother Sarah was a, a woman of the community (laughter).  And a woman of people.  She actually ran like a small daycare, so there were kids at the house.  She, you know, traveled the world as a missionary.  She was very, very religious.  She traveled the world as a missionary, like Haiti and Africa.  So there would be sometimes people in our house that she took in who were coming to live in America.  There was always noise.  There was always ruckus.  But love, so much love.  And the smell interestingly enough, I would probably say is coffee and toast with jam in the morning with my Pop Pop.  My grandfather they said was a miserable man before I was born.  And they said after I was born, he was really changed.  Like they said he, you know he was an alcoholic before and you know just wasn't a great person.  My mom [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott], even though she never spoke a lot about my father and his family to me, even though it was kind of blended, but my mother never said much about her relationship with my dad [Mark Hopkins] to me.  Like still to this day.  I'm still like how in the hell did you guys meet?  Like, you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: But like my grandfather and I were so close.  So every morning he would get up to go to work and he worked either the overnight shift or the early morning shift.  And we would have breakfast together and I'd sit on his lap.  And it's one of the reasons why I love coffee, because I would sit on his lap and he would make Sanka.  No real coffee here (laughter).  But he would make his Sanka and he would make it nice and caramel looking, and sweet.  And he would--it was so interesting 'cause here was a man from the sticks of South Carolina, right, but he was so proper with his coffee.  So he had a mug and he had a saucer.  And then he had his side plate with his toast that was done very brown with his, with his Welch's grape jelly.  And I would sit on his lap and he would let me have whatever coffee fell into the saucer.  So I would intentionally hit his arm (laughter) just to have the coffee.  So I remember the smell of coffee.  The sounds, I remember as just people.  And my grandmother, who--Sarah who was very, very religious, also prayed a lot.  So I remember prayer and like one of the reasons I believe I am a speaker now is because at three I was reciting the 23 Psalms [Psalm 23] at three.  And I think that they probably encouraged me to read so young just so I could read the Bible (laughter).  Because she was very religious.  So it was very interesting there in that home because there was this interesting dichotomy where my grandfather as I said before I was born, wasn't a man of God.  And after I was born, you know he joined the church, became a deacon in the church.  Now they didn't go to the same churches either.  So my--no they didn't, very interesting.  They didn't go to the same church, so my grandmother was Pentecostal and my grandfather was Baptist.  So he would drop her off at church and she'd be there all day long.  And he would go to his church and then go back and pick her up later.
Story_ID: 658420
Speaker 1: But I remember lots of love, you know.  I think--and now that I'm able to recall and look back, now that I'm older, what I believe all grandparents do outside of just love with a deeper and richer love of knowing.  They also love with an intent to improve and better who they are as people.  Because for all of their mistakes, their frustrations, their lack of knowledge that they had with their own children, they really look to, at least in my case, to reinvest in the new way, right.  And it's not just an investment in me, but it's also an investment in themselves.  So I say that to say like you know my father was only nineteen at the time, so he was still a kid.  But I saw the way that, you know, he lived his life on his own, and it was about me, you know.
Speaker 2: How old were your [paternal] grandparents when you were--
Speaker 1: So Lee [Leonzie Hopkins] was born in '23 [1923].  I mean I had no concept of this then, but Lee was born in '23 [1923], and so if this was 1983, he was sixty years old.  He didn't seem that old.  I brought some pictures of him.  I have a few pictures of him.  And then my grandmother Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] was born in--I think she was a little older than he, I think she was born in '21 [1921].
Speaker 2: Do you know how they came to make the decision that they would take you?
Speaker 1: I think my, I think Mary you know, my--no, Mary [Mary Beauchamp], my mother's mother, Sarah and Lee came together and said, "Okay, this--Taiwanda's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] pregnant.  She has to finish school, you know."  And they just said, "Okay, how do we make this work?"  It's, it's, it's kind of beyond me, quite frankly, because you know I also know that my mother and my father didn't have a very long relationship leading--I mean at that point she was fifteen when they met.  You know it wasn't like this very long relationship.  I think the thing that probably worked in, you know our, or my favor, is that the connection was is that Mark [Mark Hopkins] my father, grew up with my cousin Janice [Janice Beauchamp] who lived two blocks away.  So there were some familial connections, but I don't know.  I have no clue.
Speaker 2: She met when they were fifteen.  She didn't have you 'til she was seventeen.  So there, there was--
Speaker 1: I mean yeah, but going--
Speaker 2: They were kids.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were kids.
Story_ID: 658421
Speaker 1: So you were--do--tell me about the other households--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the sights, sounds and smells.  So with Mary [Mary Beauchamp] it was always food.  Mary always cooked.
Speaker 2: Just so we're clear--
Speaker 1: Mary is my maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: And the grandparents you just mentioned are your--
Speaker 1: Paternal grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now we're at Mary's.
Speaker 1: Right, and Mary and Howard [Howard Beauchamp] were not together because Howard had left to be a cowboy.  So Mary had her own home.
Speaker 2: And at what point did Howard leave?  Like how old was she, do you know?
Speaker 1: It was not long right be--it was not long before I was born.  So I think they separated maybe in '77 [1977], '76 [1976] officially maybe they separated.  I don't think he moved to--no he must have moved to Texas not long thereafter.  I have a very early photo of me with him in New Jersey, obviously.  But I think he had, he had moved by then.  Like I didn't know--I didn't come to know Howard until like super--I mean I always knew of him, always talked on the phone with him, always got birthday cards and things like that from him from Texas.  But I didn't come to get to know him until I was ten when I was living full time now with my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott].  And I had a--I was, I was involved in a, in a car accident and had been hit by a car and had to be home from school, and was home schooled for two months.  And my grandfather had come up to New Jersey because his mother had just passed, Louise [Louise Beauchamp] had passed.  And so this was all in 1988.  So when he came up from New--to New Jersey from Texas when his mother died, he stayed with my mom and I because I was home from school, to help take care of me.  So I came to know him better then, but I didn't really have a relationship like you know, seeing him regularly.  My, my closest grandparents were Sarah [Beauchamp's paternal grandmother, Sarah Hopkins], Lee [Beauchamp's paternal grandfather, Leonzie Hopkins] and Mary.
Speaker 2: Okay, so we're at Mary's house when you were a little girl (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mary's house.  So Mary's house was always--
Speaker 2: This was also in Newark [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: No, this was in Orange [New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Orange, okay.
Speaker 1: In East Orange [New Jersey].  She--so East Orange, Orange.  'Cause later she moved to Orange.  I would say it was food.  I just remember food and fragrance and perfume.  And the sights are lipstick and--lipstick and crazy jewelry.  I have very vivid memories which I've written about before about how Mary would apply lipstick.  And it was always like this very, very--do you remember, do you remember mood colored lipsticks?  So she was obsessed with mood color lipsticks.  So you know they were like green in the tube, right, and then you'd apply them and they'd become this other color.  And so she had her mood colored lipsticks, but then she also had her red and fuchsia lipsticks.  And what was so interesting is I remember saying to her something about the, the mood colored lipstick and whether or not she would apply it to her cheek and would it change on her cheek.  Because she used to always take the red lipstick and apply the lipstick, and then dab her cheeks with it.  And I remember her fragrance.  And Mary, Mary--and she's still with us and with me, but you know her state is not--she's, she's paralyzed and has dementia and is bedridden and doesn't necessarily always talk, not always mindful and present.  So I say sometime speaking in past tense even though she's still here.  Mary was just such a light.  She was just a person who just loved everybody, welcomed everyone, engaged everyone, and was just so beautiful, so stylish, so fabulous.  And at the same time still so--and when I think about it, I mean like you think about her experience, so weighted, right.  Like--but I always smell--I, I would say, I would say collard greens.  She cooked collard greens with pot liquor for my grandmother [sic. Beauchamp's maternal great-grandmother], for Ruth [Ruth Whitaker (ph.)] all the time.  And she would make spinach and try and fool me, which she did.  'Cause I, I would think that it was mustard greens or something and I'd eat it.  And cornbread.  There was no doubt about it, that Mary was a southern girl (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 2: And did, did Mary work?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What did she do?
Speaker 1: So she was a counselor when she retired in 1996.  I don't remember what her job was at this point, but when she retired in 1996, she retired as a counselor for the Department of Labor [New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development] for the State of New Jersey, which--
Speaker 2: Did she--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Which she had done for like thirty-five years, something like that.
Speaker 2: Did she remarry?
Speaker 1: No, my grandmother--they never separated.  Mary and, and Howard never divorced or separate--they were just apart.  They never divorced, which was interesting.
Speaker 2: And he never--
Speaker 1: He never remarried, not that I know of (laughter).  You know, all kinds of things come out sometimes.  Not that I know of.
Story_ID: 658422
Speaker 1: And what was the third home?
Speaker 2: So the third home would be my mom's home.  You know, which I will say was ever evolving because she was so evolving, right.  So I--it's interesting, I remember back to one of her first apartments and she must have been nineteen.  And I remember her being proud of her apartment, but still at the same time always being at my grandmother's place (laughter).  You know when I think back to those days, honestly it's hard because I, I don't know if I ever saw that as home, even though it was--I had a bedroom there.  So by the time I was like ten and she had a, a new home, I remember that, like so when I got older 'cause at this point, by the time I was ten I moved full time with my mother and my grandmother, between their homes.  Because my [paternal] grandmother Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] died when I was eight, nine.
Speaker 1: So full time between Taiwanda's mother and Taiwanda [Beauchamp's mother, Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott].
Speaker 2: Yes.  So--cause before, before Sarah had, before Sarah had passed, I was between the three homes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: But, but my mother and my grandmother lived very close together.  So they were like five, ten minute drive away from one another.  Whereas my father's [Mark Hopkins] family lived thirty-five minute drive away.  So how--I mean how will I say it?  Like on the weekends if, on the weekends if I was going to church service with Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp] early in the morning, I would just stay at her house.  Or some nights I'd just stay at my mom's house and then my mom--my grandma would come get me from--you know what I mean?  So it was, it was like shared, but different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had clothes everywhere, you had--
Speaker 2: There were no suitcases.  There was just stuff there.
Speaker 1: Now you are how tall?
Speaker 2: Five eleven [5'11"].
Speaker 1: Growing up were you tall?
Speaker 2: Yup (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is it--who else, who else in your family is tall?
Speaker 2: Everyone's tall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother is 5'8", my father is 6'3" and a half, my--Mary is 5'7", Howard [Beauchamp's maternal grandfather, Howard Beauchamp] was 6'2", Leonzie [Beauchamp's paternal grandfather, Leonzie Hopkins] was about 6'2", and Sarah was the short one.  She was probably about 5'.
Story_ID: 658423
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to private school.  So except for the--from kindergarten to third grade when I lived with my [paternal] grandparents [Sarah Hopkins and Leonzie Hopkins] because the public school system where they was, was a pretty good public school system.  So I went to School No. 5 [Linden, New Jersey], I went to School No. 1 for--there--
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In Linden, New Jersey.  So in elementary school in Linden goes from kindergarten to second grade and then it's third to fifth grade, and then it's junior high.  So School No. 5 and School No. 1 until third grade, and then I went to Blessed Sacrament [Our Lady of the Most Blessed Sacrament School].  That was in East Orange [New Jersey].  Was it?  East Orange.  And then I went to St. Mary's [St. Mary School] in Newark [New Jersey], and then I went to Saint Vincent Academy high school in Newark.
Speaker 1: Do you know why the decision was made for you to go to Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Because my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] was a educator in the Newark public school system, and so she was just like you know, it was interesting 'cause my grandmother wanted me to go to public school.  So--and what was funny is that my--because of where they worked, it was also about convenience of someone being able to pick me up and drop me off.  So it needed to either be in our town or in--on the way or in Newark close to where they went.  And Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp] wanted me to go to Science High School [Science Park High School] in Newark, which we didn't even live in Newark.  So she was like, "Well maybe we can figure this out."  'Cause she just thought it was such a great--and my mother was like, "She's not going to--."  So--
Speaker 1: She didn't think the education was good (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I think the other thing was is that coming from Linden I was sheltered.  So it was a very different environment when you come to a more urban area like you know, even though Orange [New Jersey] is outside of Newark, I mean it's, it's still a lot more urban than it was where I was, where I'd grown up.
Story_ID: 658424
Speaker 1: So Linden [New Jersey], what was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Everybody knew everybody on the block.  Actually it's so funny, people still hit me up on Facebook.  Miss Bernice [ph.] sent me a Facebook message the other day saying, "I don't know if you remember, but I lived across the street from your [paternal] grandmother."  Dr. Ford [ph.] lived across the street to the left, diagonal to the left.  The Ropers [ph.] lived directly across the street.  I can't remember the name of the people that lived in the house between them, but then it was Miss Bernice.  The Solomons [ph.] lived directly next door.  And there were a lot of kids on the block.
Speaker 1: And what was the ratio makeup of the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: You know interestingly enough, Newark [New Jersey], I mean Linden then in my elementary school classes from kindergarten through third [School No. 5, Linden, New Jersey], I was one of maybe four black kids in my class then.
Speaker 1: In the public school.
Speaker 2: In the public school.  But it, but Linden was very advanced too.  And did I tell you this was the town my dad [Mark Hopkins] grew up in too.  So he, he went to the high school there.  He went to the same elementary school I went to as well.  It's evolved so much.  But I think that they were advanced also in making sure that the schools--'cause they bussed kids from each part of the town, to go to schools in other areas.  So you could live in one part of, of the town and get bused to the other side.  So I think that they wanted to make sure that it was diverse.
Speaker 1: So you--who paid for you to go to school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: High--school?  Like the collective.  I mean what do I call them?
Speaker 1: The family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--my, my grandfather.  I mean my grandfather didn't die until I was a senior in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So like he was my father figure and financial provider from a male figure.  But my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] and my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Beauchamp] and my grandfather.  It was really a collective.  Like even after my [paternal] grandmother Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] died and my [paternal] grandfather Lee [Leonzie Hopkins] was dating other women (laughter), like he would come to our house for holidays and everything.
Story_ID: 658425
Speaker 1: And so your father [Mark Hopkins]--you, you talk a lot about your father's family being very important to you.  How, how present was your father?
Speaker 2: He--I don't remember him past ten, really.  I really don't remember him past ten.  Maybe, maybe eleven.  He was absent, you know.  And I think I referenced the, the, the point of my grandparents like maybe trying to reinvest.  But he was absent.  You know he, he wasn't there.  He didn't take responsibility for me or anything or anyone, you know at that point.  So--
Speaker 1: Did he ever get married?
Speaker 2: He did.  So I have, I have a brother [Antoine Braxton].  Obviously I'm my mother's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] only child, but I have a brother from another relationship that my dad had who's fourteen months younger than I am, who I grew up with.  'Cause he would, he would come to the house.  He didn't live there full time, permanently, but he would be there at the house.  And then my father married my sister's mother when I was six or seven.  I think I was in second grade [School No. 5, Linden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: So this one is old or younger?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest, so this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then so my sister is, how old is she, she's twenty-seven.  But I grew up with her too because my, my mother and her mother made sure that we had a relationship.  She and my--her mother and my father divorced when my sister was two, though.
Story_ID: 658426
Speaker 1: So as a girl, how would you describe young Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp]?
Speaker 2: The same as old Tai (laughter).  I would describe her as energetic, curious, happy, extremely inquisitive and loving.  I--you know it's so funny, you know when I'm--people see me from my childhood, they say I'm exactly the same.  And that's one of the most amazing compliments in some ways.  But it's also I think just a testament to you know, the creator and like once something is instilled in you, it's really there, it's planted.  And then I just can be grateful that my grandparents and my mom nurtured it.  I, I don't--I mean my cousin June [June Beauchamp] who I mentioned earlier, she goes to the same hair salon I go to now.  And she and I were very close and closer at other times even, even more so.  And her niece Janai [ph.] and I are very close as well.  That's her brother Leslie's [Leslie Earl Beauchamp, Jr.] daughter.  And June, I overheard her saying in the salon one day, "Tai is exactly how she was."  And it, it, it made me well up, you know she said that, "She was always super opinionated, always super outgoing, but always super loving, always super kind."  And I don't, I don't know if I would remember that about myself, you know.
Speaker 1: As a child, what did you do for fun?
Speaker 2: Skate.  We skated on the ground, in the, in the streets.  So that's--Linden [New Jersey] offered that.  Like we skated in the streets, double dutch, I played a lot of double dutch, even though I was awful, I was so bad.  I got better later.  And then by the time I got to high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey] and, you know, by the time I got to high school and also I would probably say like junior high school-ish [Our Lady of the Most Blessed Sacrament School, East Orange, New Jersey], you know, I was more into fashion and things like that.  So you know, creating my own magazines and you know, creating--putting posters all over the walls and decorating and that sort of thing.  And then because we lived so close to New York City [New York, New York], by the time we were thirteen and fourteen, you know we were able to come over to the city with one family's friend.  You know, like--
Speaker 1: And who's we?
Speaker 2: Some of my girlfriends, you know, who I'm still very close with.  I remember us getting on the wrong PATH [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey], someone getting off the PATH train when you're supposed to stay off, and then one person being like on the train and everyone else being off, it was crazy.  And then I, I was in every type of dance class.  They had my tall self in gymnastics, it was wrong.  It was just wrong.  (Laughter) Like first of all the kid is huge, why is she in gymnastics?  My feet would like touch the bars if I--so I did karate, I did gymnastics, I took piano, I took ballet.  But I wasn't really interested in any of it, to be quite honest.
Speaker 1: What were your interests back then?
Speaker 2: Well it was--this was when I was young.  I was probably like five or six.  And so this would be on the weekends when I would go to my mother's family house.  And my mother, because she was a young, hot mom, would be coming to New York City and hanging out.  So Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp] would want to drop off at dance school at seven o'clock in the morning on a Saturday and I'd be like, "No, I really want to just go with Taiwanda [Beauchamp's mother, Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott]."  So that, you know--and shopping.  The older I got and--
Speaker 1: What--as, as a child, what did you think that you wanted to do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I thought I wanted to be a doctor or a lawyer.  I mean is there anything else for young black kids (laughter)?  Doctor or lawyer.  And actually what's crazy is I--honest to goodness, I had had my first byline in O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine].  I'd been out of college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] for maybe three months and Mary was still doing well then.  And because, you know, education was so highly valued in our family.  She says, "When are you going back to get your master's [degree] to become a teacher?"  I was like, "Dude, I'm not, I'm not, Mom.  I'm not, Mom."  She was like, "You always need something to fall back on" (laughter).  So you know, I would say to her, I was like, "Mom, I think I'm gonna do all right" (laughter).  "Think I'll do all right."
Story_ID: 658427
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey], you said your family stressed education, so did you always know that you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  I mean I started thinking about colleges--I had a cousin who was--so June [June Beauchamp], my cousin--so June who I said was ten years older than I was--and I actually--so when my [paternal] grandmother Sarah [Sarah Hopkins] passed away, it was during the middle of the school year, in my third grade year, in November of 1986.  Excuse me.  And so the remainder of the school year, in order to finish the school year there, I lived with her parents [Jean Beauchamp and Leslie Earl Beauchamp, Sr.], who lived around the corner, Janice [Janice Beauchamp] and--which is the other side of the family, my mother's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] side of the family.  And so June and I were very close and she was in college that year at Pace [Pace University, New York, New York], right around here, actually not too far from here.  And she had another friend who had gone to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that I just thought the world of.  And of course we were watching 'The Cosby Show' and they were talking about--that was something that my grandmother Sarah as well as I did with Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp], we watched TV together.  We would sit and watch TV.  'Head of the Class' I remember, 'The Cosby Show' obviously.  And I always loved Denise [Denise Huxtable] (laughter).  And this friend of June's I just thought was amazing.  And so I started researching then and asking questions about--
Speaker 1: About Spelman.
Speaker 2: About Spelman.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Eight, nine.  And then you know--I just knew college, you know, I just knew college.  But I started asking questions then.
Story_ID: 658428
Speaker 1: And when it came time to look for colleges, did you apply more broadly than Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I applied to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], which is where Mary [Beauchamp's maternal grandmother, Mary Beauchamp] went.  That was my safety.  I was a, I was a scholar athlete, so I'd gotten recruited by schools to play basketball as well.  So I applied to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I applied Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I applied to UPenn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Spelman.  There are probably a few other like smaller liberal arts colleges that I applied to.  Thank god for the common application.  But Spelman was my number one choice.  But interestingly enough, and this is, this is where I can really affirm again and again the grace of God in my life.  So you asked about where money came from for me to go to private schools.  You know, they made it happen.  I decided I was gonna go to Rutgers because at the time Spelman was fifteen thousand dollars a year.  NYU I was waitlisted.  Other colleges wanted me to play basketball and I really didn't wanna play basketball.  I had visited and seen the people practice in the morning and I wasn't that serious about it; I wanted to preserve my nails, honestly, I was really that girl.  And my high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey] is a very small all girls high school, I'm actually still on the board there.  There was a wealthy philanthropist who is my mentor now, by the name of Ray Chambers, who is literally an internationally known philanthropist.  He's the special envoy to the UN [United Nations] for the Millennium Development Goals [Millennium Development Goals Advocacy Group].  And he's also a fellow Newarker, he was born in Newark [New Jersey].  He happened to be at my high school graduation, seen one of my classmates, one of sixty-two, so there was sixty-two girls in my graduating class, graduate because she was a part of a program that he had started called the READY program [Rigorous Educational Assistance for Deserving Youth].  I guess twelve years prior where they took kids from inner city and sent them to private schools.  So he was there seeing her graduate.  And he spoke to my administrative director, who he asked, you know, "So where are the girls going to school?"  And my high school has a 100 percent college acceptance and college attendance rate.  It's very--a school that does extremely well.  And she started to talk about where the girls were going to school and you know, what they were doing.  And he asked about me in particular.  And, and I don't remember how he heard me speak or something like that.  And she said that, "You know well she's been accepted at all these schools, but her mother's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] a single parent and her grandparents help take care of her, and so she's going to go to Rutgers, but she really wanted to go to Spelman."  And he said, "I will pay for her to go to Spelman."  On my high school graduation day.  All I remember is my mom--'cause we graduated across the street at this church, just literally just giving me the thumbs up while I'm sitting up here and I'm looking at her like she's so dramatic.  But to learn that I got a full scholarship to the school that I wanted to go to.  I literally had to rescind me declining my, my seat at Spelman because at this point I had already taken my admissions exams and everything to go to Rutgers, which was nine thousand dollars a year versus the fifteen dollars a year, not to mention the travel and, and he is, I mean to this day, you know, I later worked with him.  So when I left publishing later, I later worked with him, but is my hero and a godsend.  And also I think a testament to just God's grace.  Because you know do I think I would be the person that I am today without my Spelman experience?  I don't think so.  Would I be a good person?  Absolutely.  But certainly not the person that I am.  And Ray is just beyond--and not to mention just to think of the, the burden and the responsibility that I think he alleviated of my family to just know.  And yeah, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: And this is while--during graduation?
Speaker 2: During graduation.
Story_ID: 658429
Speaker 1: So like up until this point of June 2nd, 1996, I was going to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey].  So I find out after graduation [from Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey].  So at the end of the ceremony.  You know my mom [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] is like, "You're going to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]."  I'm like, "You're, what?"  And I just hear whispers, like throughout the girls.  We all dress in white for our graduation.  "Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp] just got a scholarship.  She just--," and I'm like, "What?"  Like I was clueless and in a state of shock.  And honestly, it still didn't feel real until I got there.  Still didn't feel real until I got there.
Speaker 2: Well and you had to, you had to make sure there was still room, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--but they--Ray's [Ray Chambers] office helped with all of that.  So once I knew I had the scholarship, I think that following week--we graduated on a Sunday, so like that following week my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Beauchamp], and I had a car, my [paternal] grandfather [Leonzie Hopkins] was always so--spoiled me rotten.  So we drove up to the office in Morristown [New Jersey], which is where his family foundation [MCJ Foundation; The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey] is still headquartered, where I worked with him for the last--for eight years, up until two years ago.  And they contacted Spelman and you know said, "Could we still--could she still get reserved for a spot, you know.  Draw down off of this endowment."  You know, 'cause he had set up an endowment there as well as at some other institutions.  Working with Dr. Cole, who I later worked with, who was my incoming president.  But who I later worked with in partnership with the foundation.  Like it was just--
Speaker 2: Dr. Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Johnnetta Cole.
Speaker 2: So you--this blessing comes.
Speaker 1: My god, huge blessing.
Story_ID: 658430
Speaker 1: And you go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Do you know what you wanna do when you're going there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I thought I was gonna be a doctor then.  By this time I'd changed from lawyer to the doctor.  Started out as a bio major, and bio didn't agree with me at all and I didn't agree with it.  I, I had never--you know I performed really well in high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey], you know, I was in National Honor Society and class president and a student athlete and so you know getting Cs and things like that, I knew nothing about.  I think I got a C in gym my freshman year of, of high school and I cried, like freaked me out.  And I almost got a D in biology, so I withdrew.  And then I said I'm gonna try a second semester.  And then I finally sat down with Ray [Ray Chambers].  I took a general science the second semester of my freshman year and I finally met Ray, 'cause I hadn't even met him.  Hadn't even met him at this point.  He had given me a scholarship; I hadn't met him.  So then I finally sat down with him the, either spring break or summer going into my sophomore year, somewhere around there.  And told him, you know, I had done some modeling in high school.  I don't think I shared that, but I had done some modeling, local stuff you know like the Macy [Macy's, Inc.] show here and you know, things like that.  And he knew that I loved fashion.  And he said, "Well I know that you love fashion and all of this, so what else do you like?"  And I said, "I love writing."  He said, "Well why don't you write about fashion?"  And it had never dawned on me.  Meanwhile Ray earned all of his money in finance.  And it never dawned on me, even as much as I loved magazines and had plastered every, you know, Essence and Harper's Bazaar and Vogue cover and Seventeen on my wall, it never dawned on me.  And so it was he also who introduced me to my industry mentor, Ellen Levine.  And who is now the editorial director at Hearst [Hearst Communications].  At the time she was the editor in chief of Good Housekeeping.  And so he later introduced me to her.  I gave him after we had our meeting, I sent him a list of twenty magazines that I was interested in, along with a portfolio, along with a letter, along with my resume, 'cause I had jobs during college and also during high school.  One summer actually--the summer of my junior year when I wanted my car, I bribed my [paternal] grandfather [Leonzie Hopkins] and said I'll put the down payment down.  So I worked three jobs that summer.
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: I worked at Mid-Atlantic Bank filing checks.  I--this one, this one didn't last long.  I worked at Bloomingdale's as well on--in their cafe.  And then I worked at Ponderosa restaurant [Ponderosa Steakhouse] waitressing.  All of my girlfriends worked there.  So I had the cash to come home, then I had the twelve dollars an hour from Mid Atlantic Bank which was good money then.  I was killing it.  But yeah so I--he introduced me to Ellen.  And so that was what really sparked the interest in magazines.
Story_ID: 658431
Speaker 1: As--while you're at Spelman--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what was, what was the Spelman experience like for Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--if I had it to do all over again, I would, I would indulge and, and really kind of go full throttle, not only in the Spelman experience, but the college experience.  I was always a little bit more mature.  I think that, you know, partly being raised by my grandparents influenced that.  I think the other piece of it, living so close to New York City [New York, New York] and having access to New York City influenced, like the maturity.  So I didn't wanna party with the kids.  I, I didn't, sadly.  And I wish I would have done that more.  I do, if I had it to do all--I tell the--any young person I mentor now.  I'm like listen, you work hard, but you play hard too.  You know, and you figure out how to create balance with that.  Because the rest of your life is not about balancing 'cause there's always gonna be more than two things you have to focus on later in life.  But I loved, you know being in an all-girls environment was nothing new to me, I went to an all-girls high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey].  So that wasn't a stretch.  It was interesting my freshman year I had four roommates, three roommates, it was four of us in one room.  Not quite the size of this room.  Being an only child, that was a little bit crazy.  And it didn't have any dividers.  We didn't have an AC [air conditioner] in 1996 at Spelman College in August in Atlanta [Georgia].  It was brutal.  But I loved, I loved the sisterhood.  And the sisterhood, that felt natural to me.
Speaker 1: Did you join a sorority, did you participate in any student government, any of those things?
Speaker 2: I didn't join a sorority.  I did--I was the social chairperson of the Tri-State area club [Tri-State Club].  I had a boyfriend back in New Jersey at the time (laughter), so I was flying home to New Jersey every six weeks (laughter).  So that's what I mean.  I would have probably tried to experience the college experience a little more.  I would have indulged a little bit more.
Speaker 1: What happened to him?
Speaker 2: He is married now.  He actually is the--I don't know if this is his title now.  But he was the CEO of the New Jersey school construction board [New Jersey Schools Development Authority].  Very smart dude, childhood boyfriend from the time I was fifteen to twenty-three.  I actually thought about his parents yesterday.  Lovely guy.  I believe he's married, hopefully having a family and a great guy, great guy.
Story_ID: 658432
Speaker 1: Yeah well you said Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], was that--she started at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] when you started, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Well she left after my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Dr. Cole was--I remember her and I knew her then.  I had the pleasure of actually working with her on campus too.  But she left after my freshman year.  So I had one year of Dr. Cole.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your important teachers or who was, who was--what are the other students that you might know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Oh my gosh, why am I blanking on names right now?  Oh my god, I can't believe I'm blanking right now.  I didn't have didn't have Dr. Beverly Guy-Sheftall [HistoryMaker Beverly Guy-Sheftall], but she was there when I was there and I listened to her lecture several times.  And it was a close colleague of hers who was a, a really important professor to me that actually I participated in quite a few programs with her.  Like we, we actually did a, a salute to Toni Morrison with her, and I can't--she left Spelman to go to another, another school.  It's gonna come to me.  Dr. Ray Grant.  He is a, he's a comedian and also a creative writer, and he taught my creative writing class and I just loved him.  It's so funny, I think his daughter friended me on Facebook recently.  Her name is Rae [Rae Grant] too.  But he was an important professor to me.  And so many--you know what's so interesting?  I can probably think about so many different experiences at Spelman that just really shaped my thinking; that broadened my thinking; that expanded my mind and my horizon, be it with teachers or with my roommates or with my friends.  Most of whom I'm still very, very close with.  My college roommate, one of my college roommates, my freshman and sophomore year college roommate Tanisha [ph.] just had her second child.  And we spend time together, you know.  She comes and hangs out here (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Coughs) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: --good friend so.  Spelman just provides that kind of like amazing sisterhood network.
Story_ID: 658433
Speaker 1: If you think of some of the people were at school with you, who were some of those women who we might know today?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Keisha Knight Pulliam was a year behind me.
Speaker 1: The actress (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The actress, yes, I'm sorry.  Keisha Knight Pulliam the actress is a year behind me.  Alish- I'm so--why am I getting so bad at names?  I, I must be getting old.  Alisha--I believe her--Morgan [Alisha Thomas Morgan], is a classmate of mine and she is a, a U.S. representative for the State of Georgia.  Let's see.  Phylicia Fant is a classmate of mine who's a publicist.  There are, there are so many.  I mean it's, it's like when I think about, you know, even who--some people who weren't there with me, but that I have relationships with now who are like really dear friends, like A.J. Johnson [Adrienne-Joi Johnson] and, and Traci Lynn Blackwell.
Speaker 1: And say who they are.
Speaker 2: A.J. Johnson is an actress and a motivator and a fitness guru and just a tremendous cel- celebrant of women.  She just is amazing.  And Traci Lynn Blackwell is a--the SVP [senior vice president] of programming at the CW [The CW Network, LLC], who I later met through my media work and went in to take a meeting with her and we're Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] sisters and then we're hanging out for brunch, and this was five years ago.  And now we speak every week.  There are just so, so many.  And I think the--in so many different ways and in so many different fields.  You know Shaun Robinson, who's also a, you know, a media personality and TV correspondent for Access Hollywood, you know, has become a friend.  And that's the powerful thing about the Spelman sisterhood and the connection.  You know you meet a Spelmanite and it's like okay, you don't even have to, you don't even have to go through like the background of like how do you get to know and connect with someone.  The connection is immediately there.  Rosalind Brewer who's the CEO of Sam's Clubs [sic. Sam's Club], and who's also the chairwoman of the board of Spelman.  You know they're just so many.  And what's so amazing about it is that it's inter-generational and intra-generational, like you know you can literally--I, I bumped into a young lady walking down the street two weeks ago who had on a Spelman tee shirt.  And I said, "What year did you graduate?"  And she said, "2009."  So ten years--no she said, "2012, 2012."  I'm like, "Okay so I wasn't there, but I'm your Spelman sister" (laughter).
Story_ID: 658434
Speaker 1: And when did you graduate?
Speaker 2: In 2000.
Speaker 1: In 2000.  And so when you graduated, what did you do?  What happened next?
Speaker 2: Right after graduation?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I, I was really fortunate.  I landed my first job at O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine] right after graduation.  I started there I wanna say July 5th of 2000 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So then, so then let's back up because didn't you work at Family Circle?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  I never worked at Family Circle.  I interned at Good Housekeeping.
Speaker 1: Excuse me, okay.
Speaker 2: So I interned at Good Housekeeping.
Speaker 1: While in college.
Speaker 2: While in college.  And then Hearst [Hearst Communications] had their very structured internship program that I was fortunate to get a part of after meeting Ellen [Ellen Levine].  And I interned at Good Housekeeping with Ellen.  And then the--that was the summer of my sophomore year, and then the summer of my junior year I interned at Harper's Bazaar.  And then I maintained those relationships.  And the day after graduation, I flew home and interviewed at Cosmo [Cosmopolitan], Oprah, Marie Claire, and like two other titles, all in one day, and then landed the job at O.
Speaker 1: This was when O first began.
Speaker 2: O, O was launched in May of 2000 and I started there at the end of June, July.  So I worked on the third issue of the magazine.
Speaker 1: Now I'm curious the, the magazines that you mentioned.  All of these are top tier magazines, not African American magazines.  Did, did you ever wonder whether you would be able to work at any of those publications?
Speaker 2: Did I ever wonder whether or not I would be able to work at like O and Harper's Bazaar (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, just--
Speaker 2: No I didn't.  Well I mean I think--let me just say this.  I also feel like I can't stress enough just God's presence.  Because it was such a blessing to just even be introduced to Ellen, right, who is you know, wasn't an assistant at a magazine, but the editor-in-chief.  So I don't know if I had time to think about it.  You know what I mean?  And so I think that that was a blessing in and of itself because sometimes we, we wanna, we wanna just kind of shape every single thing.  And I didn't have time to think about it.  And I just had to be prepared and go in and do and respond and be ready and rise to the occasion.  But what I will say is that once I--after my Good Housekeeping experience, after my Harper's Bazaar experience and actually specifically during my Harper's Bazaar experience because--especially there.  Because it was a high fashion magazine, but also at Good Housekeeping there were no other African Americans.  They tried to pair--they paired me with an African American mentor who I think was in a more administrative role, not in the creative editorial role.  And at Harper's Bazaar, you know this was right after Liz Tilberis had passed, who was the famed editor of being there, and it was a very interesting time there.  But there were no African Americans there.  I mean I did have the great fortune of working with Tonne Goodman and Beau Quillian and Sasha Charnin [Sasha Charnin Morrison] and Sasha--you know, so great people.  But there was no one to follow, to emulate and to look after, so to speak.  But once being there, I realized the importance of being there.  I realized why it was important because I realized that without a presence, we would never be heard in those spaces.  Now that was interesting for me coming from a place like Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, that was predominantly black, or all black.  I mean--so that environment to go to this environment.  But it never, it never dawned on me that to question how or why I should be there.  Once I got there, I realized the importance of being there.
Story_ID: 658435
Speaker 1: Being the only one there, did you ever feel like a fish out of water?  Like what, what was your experience like?
Speaker 2: I, I felt--I don't know, I don't know if I would say I felt like a fish out of water.  I did feel, I did feel single.  I felt--I didn't feel like a fish out of water because one of the things that my [maternal] grandmother Mary [Mary Beauchamp] has always taught me is that no matter the occasion, when you're there, you just rise.  So it's not about being out of water, you know even when, when you know, when you don't know the surroundings, you get in, you assess, you learn and, and you, you're there.  I didn't feel like I had to adapt though.  I think that was the beautiful thing.  I think I, and I don't know if this was just something that I learned from being in different environments all the time, right.  So now when I think back to even my history and like how having three different homes and going from a school that had, you know, four black kids in the class to predominantly black kids or you know, being in my church [St. Mary's Parish] in Newark [New Jersey] or being at the Pentecostal church or at the Baptist church.  I always learned to adapt.  And it wasn't something that I felt was forced or I had to even--it wasn't contrived for me 'cause I always felt comfortable in myself too, right.  Not always obviously fully evolved, but always comfortable.  But I--once I was there, I realized the importance of being there.  And at O [O, The Oprah Magazine] there were a few more people of color.  Not very, very many more.  I always tell people like, I was like--people are always like "Oh, how was Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] magazine."  I said like, "It's publishing and so it's still publishing and there's still very few of us."
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: But one thing I did do even after my first year of interning with Hearst is that I got Hearst [Hearst Communications] to recruit down at the AUC [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  I don't know how successful they were, but the HR [human resources] manager who hired me at Hearst through the introduction from Ellen [Ellen Levine], who is still at Hearst magazines.  I'm still, I still--I'm still in contact with her.  So--and my god, that was 1998.  So fifteen years later.
Story_ID: 658436
Speaker 1: So you go to O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine], it's a startup, obviously a startup with--
Speaker 2: Resources.
Speaker 1: Resources.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Deeper pockets than many.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] magazine.  So what is your experience like and who, who's there?
Speaker 2: The most amazing experience, the most--being at Oprah was the most amazing experience that I can, even 'til this day, I can say I've ever had.  Because I was young and dumb, I didn't realize it was this big thing.  I didn't know, I, I really didn't, I didn't, I didn't get it.  I think I was still very green to even really understand the magnitude.
Speaker 1: To understand about Oprah?
Speaker 2: No, I knew about Oprah.  But honestly, oh my gosh, I don't know if I should say this on camera.  I loved Oprah, I love her now.  I adore--I'm obsessed with her now.  But then I wasn't like a huge Oprah fan.  I knew who she was, obviously but and my best friend Yasmeen, my childhood best friend was like, "Oh my god, you work at Oprah."  And I was like okay.  To me it was like Good Housekeeping, Harper's Bazaar, Oprah.  Okay.  Like I didn't, I didn't realize the magnitude of what it meant.  But now I do because me starting my job there at Oprah, number one, not even from a growth standpoint, is what shaped my belief and understanding and the importance of empowering women.  It was already nurtured from--the seeds were planted by my family, right.  By going to an all-girls high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey], by going to an all-women's college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But I think about it now.  Had I started my career at--even where I work now, or the brand I work with now InStyle, or, or Harper's Bazaar or Vogue, my, my viewpoint and my position on why style is important to women would be very different.  I would tell you, or even Essence.  You know I would tell you about the aesthetic, I would tell--but it wouldn't be about making a woman feel good.
Story_ID: 658437
Speaker 1: So going back to the experience of working in a startup that's O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine].  Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] is there.  What do you--tell me the first time you met her.
Speaker 2: Well the first time--so there was a senior staff meeting happening and you know these were before glamorous magazine offices.  They were not glamorous.  And I walked past the conference room and I do remember what I was wearing.  I had on a pair of long, high waist, wide leg Dolce and Gabbana jeans, I do remember that, and super high heels.  And I remember her saying, "Well who is that tall drink of water?"  As I walked by and then she came out of the office and her security detail Willie [ph.] was standing in his place and she came by and she said hi.  And that was kind of it.  But at the time when--you know at the beginning of the magazine, Oprah was--came to the office at least once a month, once every two months, but often enough because she was shooting the covers and--
Speaker 1: And what year is this?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].  So this may have been--and I at this point I had had a very close relationship with Gayle too.  So Gayle had become--
Speaker 1: Gayle King (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gayle King, sorry.  I'm sorry.  So Gayle King and I had developed a very close relationship.
Speaker 1: From being--
Speaker 2: From O, from being at O.
Speaker 1: And, and what was her role at that time?
Speaker 2: Gayle's role at the time at the magazine was the same as it is now, was editor at large.  So I think at the very beginning she's been the editor at large.  But Gayle King came into the office every single day.  And as we stated, there were very few of us, people of color there.  And Gayle and I immediately struck a rapport.  So she became my kind of internal mentor there in the office and we would sit and spend time and go to lunch all the time.  But when Oprah came in, you know I met her that one time and then I remember like maybe a couple of months or so later she came in.  And we were standing at the elevator together, getting on the elevator.  And she knew Ray [Ray Chambers].  And I think she had just spent time with Ray in Sun Valley [Idaho] at Allen and Co. [Allen and Company Sun Valley Conference].  And Ray must have said, "You know, one of my godchildren or whatever or mentees is working with you."  And, and she said, "I didn't know you were related to Ray."  And I said, "Yeah," she goes like, "I was just with him."  And so then we had a rapport that--but I remember you know, feeling honored to be working with her, but I certainly wasn't like my gosh, Oprah.  I mean I also was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] right before that, so I didn't sit around watching 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] every day either (laughter), you know.  But I totally appreciated her for being the fierce woman that she is.
Story_ID: 658438
Speaker 1: What was your role starting at O [O, The Oprah Magazine]?
Speaker 2: So when I started at O Magazine, they hired me as fashion and beauty assistant.  So I worked both in the fashion and beauty department.  About three or four months in, I was promoted to beauty associate.  And that was when Amy Gross came on as the editor in chief, who I will also be forever grateful to because she saw something in me.  And I know Gayle [Gayle King] as well who encouraged her and, and she said to me that, "I wanna fast track you.  I wanna make you a beauty director in a year."  Okay I was twenty- I didn't know what the, what the world that meant.  I had no clue what that meant.  My beauty director at the time, Christine Fellingham, who hired me, was going out on maternity leave too.  And you know they were trying to just, you know, support growth.  And I took the bull by the horns.  You know I was real- when I, I, I, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], I just can't say enough.  I was so fortunate because three months into my job, you know, I was at big time beauty events which is, you know, not common in that space.  You know it takes typically a year and a half of being an assistant before you're promoted to associate.  Sometimes two to three years before you're promoted to associate.  And I was at major events with advertisers at the beginning of the magazine's launch.  So you know that's when it's imperative too because you know obviously the brands that are sponsoring and advertising need to have a connection to understand what the editorial voice is going to be.  And beauty is the largest category in terms of ad dollars.  And so I think Amy really saw something and also taught me a lot about understanding both the creative side and the business side, which then later has impacted what I do now.
Speaker 1: So you're--you were at O for how long before you were promoted?
Speaker 2: I was--about three months.  And then I got promoted again seven months later.
Speaker 1: To what title?
Speaker 2: So I went from beauty and fashion assistant to beauty associate, and then I was associate beauty editor.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And, and so this is very unusual as you described.  I mean usually you have to bump around different publications, or else it take years.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: How large is the staff?
Speaker 2: At O at that time?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I think there were about seventy of us.
Speaker 1: So it was large.
Speaker 2: On the ed- on the edit side.
Speaker 1: Seventy, seven zero.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a large staff.  But our beauty department was not that big 'cause our beauty pages weren't typical beauty pages either, right.  We were, we were doing a lot more storytelling and, and you know obviously product features too.  But our beauty department when I first started as beauty and fashion assistant, was three people.  So there was a freelance beauty assistant, myself, who went between fashion and beauty, and our beauty director.
Story_ID: 658439
Speaker 1: So you--you described these different events you got to attend.  Can you, you know show, show me one of those.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I did have outer body moments at some of these events, obviously as a twenty-two year old.  You know my, one of my first major events was at Tiffany and Co. on 57th Street and Fifth Avenue.  And I mentioned I called my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] when I first hailed my New York City [New York, New York] cab when I was interning at Good Housekeeping when I was nineteen.  And I think I remember calling my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Beauchamp] and saying, "Mom, I'm going to Tiffany and Co.," and having lunch there in this beautiful room with forty people, you know.  And there, you know I was one of two, Mikki Taylor was there from Essence.  And obviously at that level that's my point with these events.  The most senior people go to the advertisers' events.  And here I was a, a new fresh faced intern almost, or assistant, attending these events.  And it was, it was out of body.  Those were very out of body because--but I remember saying to myself you belong here.  I remember saying to myself you belong here.  And it wasn't because it was Tiffany.  It wasn't because I was surrounded in this, you know in this lux environment.  It wasn't because everyone was so posh and sophisticated.  It was just that I know that wherever you dream of being, you have to know you belong.  And I belonged there and I befriended Kerry Diamond who sat next to me and who was so amazingly gracious and generous and friendly, (laughter) which is not typically how that space is.
Speaker 1: Say who Kerry Diamond is.
Speaker 2: Kerry Diamond was then, I think she was the senior editor for WWD [Women's Wear Daily] at the time, but she later went on to become the beauty director of Harper's Bazaar and then the VP [vice president] of communications at Lancome and all these.  But she was this beautiful, and is this beautiful young woman who literally took an interest in me (pause) yeah.
Story_ID: 658440
Speaker 1: Now you've also been quite interested in fashion for a long time.  You mentioned as a twenty-two year old wearing Dolce and Gabbana high waisted jeans--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Where did this--how, how was the fashion interest born?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Beauchamp] really birthed the fashion interest.  I mean my grandmother was always super stylish, always decked out.  And for me also I think I was an only child; fashion was a creative expression outlet for me.  I remember having, you know, this one skirt that had--it was actually a two piece outfit.  It was a skirt that was blue and red striped, and it kind of had a--I wouldn't have described it this way then, obviously Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], but I can say this now.  Had a bandeau top so that way you could roll it down and roll it up.  And it had kind of like dolman type sleeves, boat neck, drapey thing.  This was when, when I was in second grade.  And I would sometimes hike the skirt, skirt up where it's shorter.  I would make it longer, so put the bando down here and make the skirt a little bit more circley.  I, I--the creative expression always mattered to me.  And then I did do some modeling in high school and you know, it was just a way to kind of be.
Speaker 1: And as a young editor wearing designer clothes, were you--how was that working?  Were you going to sample sales?  How were you able to buy all these fabulous clothes?
Speaker 2: How was I able to--so sample sales, definitely, the Gucci outlet in Secaucus [New Jersey].  Syms [Syms Corporation], do you remember Syms?  I don't know if Syms is still around.
Speaker 1: It's not.
Speaker 2: So Syms, and--
Speaker 1: Which is--which was a designer discount.
Speaker 2: Which was a designer discount place.  The DKNY outlet in Secaucus, which all of my girlfriends and I started doing--in Century 21.  We were going to Century 21, we would catch the PATH [Port Authority of New York City and New Jersey] train over to Century 21 when we were in high school [Saint Vincent Academy, Newark, New Jersey].  So we were always--that was the beautiful thing about growing up close to New York City [New York, New York].  We had the access and you know we listened to Biggie Smalls [The Notorious B.I.G.] too, so "D-K-N-Y, oh my, I'm jiggy" ['Player's Anthem'] was inspiration as well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well and hip hop.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You, you were coming of age as hip hop was maturing.
Speaker 2: I--so I talked about, you know when you asked what I did as a kid growing up and I said skating in the street.  You know that was really, you know, the beginning of the hip hop era when we were thinking about, you know, people dancing in Central Park [New York, New York] and with the skates in Central Park.  But even after that, and because my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] was so young too, my mother was coming of age during the hip hop era.  So I was influenced by her too.  I remember when she bought me my first pair of Jordans and I will never, ever forget how proud she was that she bought these Jordans.  And my grandmother looked at her and grimaced because they cost ninety dollars, like and I was in the fourth grade.  So I remember, and I remember going to visit my cousin in Virginia with those Jordans and them being like, "Man, those are hot, those are smoking."  But I also remember Pumas and putting taps on our sneakers.  And the fat laces.  So I was totally, you know, inspired by the hip hop generation and I think actually to be honest that probably inspired a lot of my fashion too.  Because you know hip hop fashion, especially during the '80s [1980s]--I will never, ever forget my first New Edition concert at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], and I wore a sweatshirt with my name on it in graffiti.  I will never forget 1985, never forget.  Had on a pink pair of corduroys and a--.  But all of that influenced--crea- that was creativity.  And I think my mother in her own way took and pulled from it.  My mother is a lot more reserved and very sophisticated and kind of like--which is very interesting.  I, I think when you think of her history and her experience, I think she's kind of--she's just very reserved.  And--but she pulled from it; she extracted some things from it and it totally inspired me.
Speaker 1: Now that influence served you well.
Story_ID: 658441
Speaker 1: Was, was your next job when you began to create Suede?
Speaker 2: Yep, that was it, that was my next job.  So I went from Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine], and then--
Speaker 1: How long were you at Oprah?
Speaker 2: I was at O for two and a half years total.  So I left Oprah in 2003 and I went to what would become Suede.  I can't even say--I say pre-Suede because it didn't even have a name then.  I worked on--I can't remember if it was two or three prototypes for what would become Suede.  And I was--and I was so super excited about that.  Because let me just tell you this.  While I was at Hearst [Hearst Communications], even as that young editor, I was pitching them that they needed to do a, a magazine for women of color.  And I kept telling them I was gonna be the editor.  Because at this point, I had my gumption and confidence.  And I was telling them that's what I wanted to do.  I would say that to Ruth Diem, who was then the, the president of HR [human resources] at Hearst.  I was telling it to Michelle Hucks.  I remember saying it to Ellen [Ellen Levine], like, "I want you guys to do a magazine for women of color."
Speaker 1: And how did they react?
Speaker 2: They were always--I had--I realize that my experience at Hearst was a one in a lifetime and a one in a million experience.  I realized that, at least during that time.  When I went back, it was a different thing and I'll get to that.
Speaker 1: But, so they didn't do it.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't do it, obviously, but--
Speaker 1: So at this point has Time Inc. already bought Essence?
Speaker 2: So when I went to Suede (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was the bridge time, right?
Speaker 2: It was the bridge time.  It was the time when Time Inc. owned 49 percent and Essence owned 51.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I stayed, I stayed until bef- until before they fully acquired Essence.
Story_ID: 658442
Speaker 1: So could you describe what Suede was?
Speaker 2: Right, so Suede was a magazine that you know was the, the brainchild of [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and the--
Speaker 1: Who was the--
Speaker 2: Who was then the editorial director.  She was no longer the editor in chief.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: She was the editorial director of Essence.  And the whole concept was to do something that was more fashion forward magazine for younger women of color.  And by fashion forward, they really wanted it to be, they really wanted it to be, you know, in your face fashion forward.  So--
Speaker 1: And how long was the development process?
Speaker 2: So before I got to Suede, I think I--I'm trying to remember.  I think I went there in March of 2003.  They had already developed one prototype.  And that's why I can't remember if I developed two or three.  But I think in total they put together four prototypes.
Speaker 1: And who was running it at this point?
Speaker 2: At the time, Elayne Fluker was the editor that Susan had appointed.  And Elayne Fluker had been the entertainment director at Essence, who she brought over to head up the, the prototype in the, the beginning and actually I think hopefully to be the long term editor in chief of, of what would become Suede.
Speaker 1: There was a British woman too, right?
Speaker 2: Briti- so Susan came after I left.  I was gone by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--this is now your second startup.  I mean your career began with a startup.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Certainly with great resources, but then going to Essence with this bridge publication, but there are resources again.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There were a lot of resources.
Speaker 2: There were a lot--I mean--
Speaker 1: Which is now atypical of Essence to have a lot of resources.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I worked there for a long time; they didn't have a lot of resources.  But suddenly they have a lot of resources, and this publication becomes something very, very, very different.
Speaker 2: It was beautiful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and your role was?
Speaker 2: So I was hired then as the beauty editor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I headed up the beauty department and oversaw all of our beauty pages.  But what was also so amazing about that role, is that obviously when you're working in the startup en- environment, not unlike Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine], but different in Suede in the sense that there weren't seventy people on the staff at this startup for Suede, right.  There were only like eight of us or nine of us.  So is that it was very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a real startup.
Speaker 2: It was a real, real startup.  It was really--yes, it was a real startup.  But I got to contribute in other sections too.  So I would be on fashion shoots, you know, which I had had experience doing, but I was able to contribute to the ideas of that.  And even just coming up with the entire layout and the rundown and the table of contents and, you know, the slugs and the decks, which are the sections of the magazine.  To decide whether or not we have a health section, whether or not we have a beauty section.  Like literally being in those conversations.  Going into focus groups, like sitting in on focus groups, you know behind that glass wall and mirror and listening to people and their responses of what they want.  It was a, it was a, it was a defining moment for me though, too, as a black woman.  Because what I realized then more than anything is that there was a thirst and a hunger for us to be connected with and spoken to and communicated with about what we wanted.  And so prior to that, I was always mindful and, and Oprah I must tell you, the magazine is very diverse.  One of the most diverse and, and organically so where you see every ethnicity, every skin texture, every--all of that.  But where now it was expressly for us.  And that felt good, that felt good.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there?  Not so long.
Speaker 2: Not very long.  I didn't stay there very long because the launch kept getting pushed back.  So if you know anything about a startup too, even with resources, you know, it becomes about advertisers coming on.  It becomes about whether or not this is the right makeup, whether or not we have what it takes, whether or not we are ready to invest more resources in putting it together.  So I was there for about ten months.  And I will be perfectly honest.  I had these moments where obviously I was completely committed to the project, but where I was like I didn't leave O Magazine to sit in this office and have this launch not happen.  So from a professional standpoint, I was like you know and also in the magazine world, out of sight, out of mind.  So if you are off the radar for but so long, it's like okay, next.  And so at this point, at twenty-four years old, I'm also thinking about long term career.
Story_ID: 658443
Speaker 1: So you, you then go to Seventeen.
Speaker 2: I then go to Seventeen.  And--
Speaker 1: This is now, what 2004.
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004].
Speaker 1: And what, what is your role when you go to Seventeen?
Speaker 2: So I go to Seventeen.  Hearst [Hearst Communications] bought Seventeen magazine, so now it's almost--it was going back home, right.  Because Hearst had nurtured me from the time I was itty bitty.  They bought Seventeen magazine and I went there as the beauty and fitness director.  I was twenty-five years old, which is unheard of to have a director title at twenty-five.
Speaker 1: Well isn't--weren't you the youngest person to assume that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in recent history.  I mean we don't know 'cause Seventeen was sixty years old at that point.  So perhaps in the '20s [1920s] they had a twenty-four year old or whatever.  But yeah, the youngest and the first African American.  It was a huge deal that I didn't recognize was such a huge deal then until I realized the way that I was impacting young people.  That is when--it wasn't about the title for me.  You know and now that I'm a lot older and more mature.  It was something about the money, though (laughter).  It was great to collect--get that bigger check, you know, that was a nice thing.  But I, I realized how big it was when--'cause what I pitched to Seventeen and what I pitched to the then editor in chief who hired me and brought me on, was you know--and when I say pitch is that when you interview for the senior level jobs, you literally have to put together an ideas memo.  They ask you questions, what will you do to the pages?  You put together almost a mock-up of a magazine of sorts.  And so I did that for this role.  And my pitch was, "Seventeen beauty is your beauty."  I wanted the pages to reflect real girls.  So my pitch was is I wanted real girls on the pages.  I wanted real girls to showcase the hairstyles.  So this is in 2005, '4 [2004], I can't--
Speaker 1: Four [2004].
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004].  So this is a time when you--this is before social media.  It wasn't about people.  Now granted, I had had some of this experience at Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine] was really about connection with real women, so I was drawing, drawing on some of that experience.  But that certainly wasn't what Suede was about.  We wanted it to--we wanted images of women of color to be in the pages, but it wasn't about real women, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that was my pitch.  And so it landed me the job.  And that was huge.  And I realized it when I had real girls coming into my office talking to me about what they liked about beauty.  So here I was twenty-five years old, not much older than these girls, you know, and I was casting literally fourteen to twenty-three year old girls, or women.
Speaker 1: Now was, was Ellen [Ellen Levine] instrumental in this?
Speaker 2: Ellen, no, had actually--so funny, later I learned that Atoosa [Atoosa Rubenstein] didn't even know I had a relationship with Ellen until she went to an ASME [American Society of Magazine Editors] event and I was in the video congratulating Ellen on receiving her ASME award.  She was like, "I didn't know you knew Ellen."  I was like, "I've known her since I was nineteen."  Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: So you did this on your own.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 658444
Speaker 1: And as, as you are moving along, does it ever cross your mind that, "I'm an African American woman pitching for this mainstream publication.  Could that stand in my way?"
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) It didn't.  That never dawned on me and I don't--I, I don't know if I ever--and I think, I think that's a really great question, Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole] because I think, you know obviously there are real barriers, there are real challenges that we face, no doubt.  And--but had I thought about it that way, would I have created the barrier more so than anything.  But I must also say that Atoosa Rubenstein who was the editor in chief, was also the founder of CosmoGirl.  She was a very young editor.  She founded CosmoGirl at Hearst [Hearst Communications] after leaving Cosmo [Cosmopolitan] at twenty-six.  And so she was kind of legendary in her own right and respected within the Hearst family and the Hearst community.  I, I also must credit her too because she as a--I think she's Armenian [sic. Iranian], I think she's Armenian--also I think has expressed in the past and I haven't had conversation with her in years, but had expressed in the past feeling other.  And so I think to her credit, her feeling other is also what made her more welcoming to other.  And--but that's what made that, that book and that opportunity also for me and for other girls so, so huge, which I didn't realize then.  Like I said, until I started interacting with the young girls.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay at Seventeen?
Speaker 2: I was at Seventeen for about a year.  It was hell, to put it mildly.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, everybody--so a whole new team came over with the new editor in chief, so Atoosa hired a whole new team.  And it was just a very crazy environment.  It was a very, very crazy environment of--which is often the case I think sometimes in magazines and in creative spaces, right.  So when you're dealing with a lot of creatives, you know, do you want this, do you want this, do you want this, do you want that?  Do you not want this?  So that was one piece of it.  And I think it was challenging for a number of us for that reason.  But to make it very personal and to also realize my growth opportunity and you know what I learned on the other side of it, is you know being managed is one thing, but learning to manage up and down is, is, is also a very, very necessary skill.  And quite frankly at twenty-five, you don't have it.  So it's one of those things that I say to young people now who tell me that--they give me their business cards and you know they're very ambitious and very bright eyed, and I love that and I encourage that.  But their cards that say CEO and mogul and I'm like darling, you don't have to, you don't have to crawl before you run that marathon, but you, you gotta, you gotta take some steps.  And I have an appreciation for that now, 11 years later.  And I actually I gained a great appreciation for that probably two years later as I started to learn business more as well.  But I was there for about eleven and a half months, and I remember going to Ellen [Ellen Levine] and telling her that I didn't think I was gonna make it.  I was working sixteen hour days and we were growing and doing very, very well, but the demands were great.  You know I had to--I was doing television in the morning for six a.m. shoots and you know TV shoots and segments, and then going to shoots all day and then coming back and editing, and then having to go to events and then come back and close books and was managing a team of three or four, some of whom were older than me and had been trained by the same people that I had been trained by as well.  So there were a lot of nuances, but a lot of learning.
Story_ID: 658445
Speaker 1: And what did you do when you left?
Speaker 2: I left there.  So I, as I was burning out (laughter), I, I sat down with Ray and I said to him, I said, "Look, you know I think I wanna do something different.  I wanna kind of take a sabbatical.  I wanna be of some utility," 'cause I had this aha moment when this young girl came into my office and told me I changed her life by sending her to the dermatologist.  And here my parents are teachers and educators in Newark [New Jersey], and Ray has amazing programs and projects that he does in Newark and beyond.  And I said, "You know I wanna do something different."  And he invited me to come work with his family foundation and oversee their educational giving in Newark.  So I quit and I started consulting with Ray's family foundation and oversaw his educational giving and started a program in Newark right now that's now run throughout the city and implemented by Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey].  A job readiness training program, and I started working with kids.
Speaker 1: And what's the name of his--
Speaker 2: The program is called RU Ready for Work.
Speaker 1: And what's his family foundation called?
Speaker 2: The family foundation is The MCJ Amelior Foundation [Morristown, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And what is Ray's whole name?
Speaker 2: Ray's whole name is Ray Chambers.
Speaker 1: Ray Chambers.
Story_ID: 658446
Speaker 1: So you go to Ray's company.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. His family foundation [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey], not the company.
Speaker 1: His family foundation.  So how does this come about?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was burning out.  So as a, as a mentor like Ray [Ray Chambers] and I have regular check-ins, you know once every three to six months and I sat down with him and I said like, "I'm tired.  I think I wanna do something else."  He was like, "Are you sure?"  I also had a conversation with Ellen [Ellen Levine] who said to me, "Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp], you know you're on your way.  You'll be an editor in chief soon.  Don't, don't leave."  And I just really--something just pulled at me.  And it was literally when that young woman came to my office and so Ray said you know, "Let me introduce you to my daughter [Christine Chambers Gilfillan] and some of the team that works at the family foundation."  And so I met with them.  And he was really interested in doing things with his high school alma mater, which is a public high school in Newark [New Jersey] called West Side High School.  And he said you know, "We haven't had a person to oversee what we're doing there and oversee some of the other programs."  I mean I had no clue about education outside of my parents and those conversations.  But I was up for it.  I wanted to do something super meaningful.  And wanted to take a break from lipsticks (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so what did you do?  Did you pull together a team--how, how does that--
Speaker 2: So literally it was weird.  I, you know I, I went and met with the school principal.  I met with the district administration, asked what were the needs of the schools.  Because you're ultimately partnering with the schools.  So you know we have a lot of foundations that underwrite and fund programs to be at schools, whether it's a after school program, whether it's a, a training program for teachers or a program for parents.  And what Ray's goal was is to become a part of the fabric of the school community, right.  So to almost be a community partner with the school.  But I ultimately served as an executive on loan from the foundation to the school.  So for the first couple of months, it was literally a lot of learning.  And I started some time during the summer, so I was doing my own research on what a community school looks like, developing, you know, reports and understanding what that--visiting other places, talking to organizations like, you know charter schools and all of that.  And I literally had an office in, in the high school, in the comprehensive high school that had sixteen hundred kids.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And what was amazing and crazy about this experience, but also very, very humbling, and so rewarding, is that at this point, never did I feel like my life growing up was so different and so far removed from these young peoples' experiences.  But yet and still so close, you know.  West High School is located on the corner leading from downtown Newark up to South Orange [Avenue] and to Short Hills mall [The Mall at Short Hills, Short Hills, New Jersey], which everyone knows, right.  You go--one stretch of, of a street, of a--not even a highway, it's a street.  And I grew up probably four miles away from there, four and a half miles away from there, but in a completely different environment.  And so I felt close to these kids, but at the same time my church was--that I grew up going to, Mary's church [St. Mary's Parish, Newark, New Jersey], was five blocks away.  You know and the needs were so great.  And then looking, you know, knowing that my parents taught at a school that was a feeder school to this high school, actually.  It was a, it was an amazing and also a heartfelt, but hard experience.  I was--that was when I was a fish out of water.  You know here I come from my very cushy job on 50--no, then I was on 40th [Street] and Broadway.  But I had a nice glass office, you know, with windows and here I was now in a school that didn't have air conditioning in the summer, you know because the building was built in the late 1800s or early 1900s.  That is a literally filled with kids who are struggling with life.  Like you know, whose parents are, both parents and maybe even their grandparents, have fallen on hard times.  Everything from substance abuse to incarceration to everything.  So that's what I did.
Story_ID: 658447
Speaker 1: And the program [RU Ready for Work] that you created is--
Speaker 2: So the whole program, the whole idea of Ray [Ray Chambers] at first said, "Okay, we want this community partnership."  And then he says, "We want to make sure that five hundred kids next summer have jobs out of these sixteen hundred kids."  So then I started talking to corporations and finding out what we could do to get these kids jobs.  Learning that none of these kids are employable.  The social skills, the, the, the office skills and so then I backtracked into that and learned that we would have to start a program that would teach them these skills.  And I developed a tiered program, a multi-tiered program for each year so you go through the training and as you go through the training, you grow through the training.  And each summer you're placed in different types of work opportunity that pay you incrementally higher based upon your experience.  So it's a job readiness training program.  I started it with a community partner called Communities in Schools [Arlington, Virginia] and then I moved it over to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] to help institutionalize the program so that way it could grow throughout the city [Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And this you did over the period of a year?
Speaker 2: The first year I developed the program.  And I worked in earnest on that program for three and a half years, four years, three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed then with the foundation even as you cont- continued your editorial career?
Speaker 2: Right.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started that program and then a year and a half into doing that, or maybe two years, I can't remember exactly.  It was 2006 or '7 [2007].
Speaker 1: Six [2006].
Speaker 2: Okay, '6 [2006].  So a year and a half into doing that, VIBE Vixen called and they were looking to re-launch their magazine.  I wasn't really looking to go back into magazines.  But when they called and it made sense for me because here I was working with this demographic now, right, that read Vibe, that looked to Vibe.  So even before that, like Vibe wasn't a magazine that I, I loved, obviously at some point, but I wasn't reading.  It wasn't my, my background 'cause I was in women's lifestyle and service, right.  So when they called, I was like okay here is an opportunity to help mold a title that the kids that I'm working with are like (yells).  So it made sense.
Story_ID: 658448
Speaker 1: So you mentioned re-launch of VIBE Vixen.  When, when did it first launch (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the, the--I think it launched a year before, but it was quarterly.  So they were re-launching it to go bi-monthly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So again to your point before, even Seventeen was a re-launch.  So I've only worked on launches and re-launches.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Only launches and re-launches.  Yeah, but it was a re-launch.
Speaker 1: So you came in for the re-launch of VIBE Vixen which you said it, it's targeting this young, urban demographic that you're working with.  How are you managing your time?
Speaker 2: My god.  By the grace of God is how I was managing my time.  But because VIBE Vixen was bi-monthly, I negotiated going into their office three days a week and then doing my philanthropic work on the other two days a week.  And the beauty of it was obviously I was consulting with Ray's [Ray Chambers] family foundation [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey], so I wasn't a full time employee.  So I was able to continue consulting with them two days a week and then do the VIBE Vixen the other three.  Which was really when I saw the birth of my entrepreneurial kind of side.  I didn't really know that that's what it was, but--'cause I was forging what I wanted to do.  And managing two different, completely different things, but that--
Speaker 1: Very different.
Speaker 2: --that tied into one another, though too.
Speaker 1: And you describe how it makes sense because you, you know that audience.  And also the brand of Vibe is huge at this time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which is why they even could create a spinoff for women.  Who, who were the players that you were working with at Vixen?
Speaker 2: Right, so at Vixen, Danyel, Danyel Smith was the editor in chief of Vibe and Vixen.  And so I met with her.  Was Len, Len, Len wasn't there.  It wasn't--Len wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Burnett?
Speaker 2: Len Burnett [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] was not there.  It was the guys from the--from--
Speaker 1: Kenard [Historymaker Kenard E. Gibbs]?
Speaker 2: No, it was from, the guys from the Wicks Group [Wicks Group of Companies, LLC, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The, the VC [venture capital] company that owned them at that time.  So it was a time of transition for them too, which is why I think they decided to re-launch this.  So I worked with Danyel Smith and then we hired Erika Perry, who's now at Essence, who was my creative director.
Speaker 1: And what was your role?
Speaker 2: I was deputy editor.
Speaker 1: And what did that mean?
Speaker 2: I oversaw Vixen entirely because Danyel was, Danyel was also another great editor and boss to have because what she said to me was like you know, "I don't know the women's audience.  I know music, I know entertainment, I know hip, I know Vibe, I know this audience very well.  I want you to come in and make this magazine."  So she gave me free reign and latitude to really lead the entire magazine.
Speaker 1: So while you were called deputy editor, you were basically the editor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Editor, yeah I was the editor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And h- what kind of a team were you working with?
Speaker 2: So I--small (laughter).  So this was, this was--
Story_ID: 658449
Speaker 1: You're at VIBE Vixen--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and now it's, it's ten months.
Speaker 2: It was six, it went to six months, six times a year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay I'm sorry, six times a year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now, I mean you're still really young and now you're in charge of a whole magazine.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you have another job [at The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: And I have another job and my [maternal] grandmother got sick, and Mary [Mary Beauchamp] fell sick that year.  It was, it was more than a notion is all I can say.  I was, I was--interestingly enough, I was very--I don't want to describe it as hungry, I was more passionate at that moment than I had ever been because I think I saw a huge connection and benefit to what I was doing in both places, right.  So you know we talked before about my experiences at O [O, The Oprah Magazine] and at Seventeen and you know it felt great to have those jobs.  I was fortunate to have them, but I didn't necessarily feel the immediate payoff and benefit.  So here I am working with these kids who you know, I'm putting in jobs, but then I also I'm mentoring and talking to them about life and life experiences and telling them I grew up four miles away from here and telling them about my journey and interestingly enough when I was talking to them, I wouldn't necessarily always talk about my professional work experience 'cause I wanted to be a lot more like them than unlike them.  But then when someone introduced me in a larger speaking setting and they heard where I had worked and where I had been, I realized that that--I was part of the possibility for them.  And so I put all of that energy and all of the possibility that I was for them into what I was building with VIBE Vixen, which is why I was like we need a health section.  I want them to understand you know, having a home and creating a surrounding and environment for them that's positive.  Now granted the high school kids are a little bit young for the VIBE Vixen demographic, but I'm thinking of them reading up.  I'm also thinking of their older sisters and their cousins and their moms and just something that was gonna be relevant but also inspirational in a way that it wasn't gonna talk down to them.  But it was also gonna be accessible.  So--
Speaker 1: And how effective was it?
Speaker 2: It was--I still meet people to this day.  I meet young women 'til this day who tell me that they remember my VIBE Vixen letters and my editor letters and how amazing VIBE Vixen was and, "After Honey, that was a magazine that we could read and that really understood us."  And so I think it was extremely effective.  And then in terms of the work I was doing in Newark [New Jersey], I am still very much in touch with a lot of those kids that I, I mentored who are now twenty-five years old (laughter).
Story_ID: 658450
Speaker 1: In this same year I believe, so you're now--it's 2006.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're twenty-eight years old.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You also launch your own business.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So because--so I realize at this point I was doing all this consulting, so I was consulting with the foundation [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey].  I was actually employed by VIBE Vixen, but I realized, you know the opportunity to expand and grow.  And quite frankly, you know I also saw that the market was--something was happening with the magazine market and publishing and things weren't gonna be so nice all the time.  So I started my company.  So that way I could consult after.
Speaker 1: And what is your company?
Speaker 2: So then when I started it, it was called the BluePrint Group [BluePrint Group LLC].  And the whole point of the company was to work with brands to really help bridge the gap between brand marketing and social impact.  Kind of drawing on what my areas of expertise had become, leveraging the relationships that I had in fashion and beauty and entertainment, and you know working with them to help them identify ways to create social impact through great content.  And you know it's evolved since then and now the company is called Tai Life Media [Tai Life Media, LLC].  And it's less about having that quote, unquote mission of social impact and brand marketing, and more about using style to empower women and creating content and media that surrounds and lives in that space.  So it's also a loan out for [HistoryMaker] Tai Beauchamp as a personality.  But it really is a reflection of who I am and what I stand for, which first a lot of people don't realize, but is not about fashion and beauty and style.  It's really about people and women and empowering them.  Style and beauty and fashion is just the vehicle to do that.
Speaker 1: So you're working with the family foundation really helped to anchor you in the space, is that--
Speaker 2: I would definitely say that the--what I realize about my complete journey is that one experience has really fueled and fed the next, right.  So working with the family foundation taught me all I needed to know about business, because I was also managing a budget of five hundred thousand dollars a year plus, sometimes upward of a million [dollars], you know.  But I understood business savvy because I was learning from my mentor Ray [Ray Chambers], who's one of the most amazing businessmen in the world, probably.  And working with the family foundation where you understand how--what you do can impact and affect others from, from a, from a, a, a systematic and even a small scale.  Like you realize that everything that you do has to have purpose and you know I say to young people now when I mentor them, you know, stop worrying about your brand.  Be more purpose focused, purpose led.  Like what are you meant to do?  And your passion should fuel that in some way.  But it really helped put me on purpose, it really did.
Story_ID: 658451
Speaker 1: And how did that feed into your then working at iVillage?  'Cause that, that comes soon after (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  So I just became a contributor to iVillage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was one of its, one of their early bloggers along with Isaac Mizrahi.  And--
Speaker 1: When they first started.
Speaker 2: So I don't remember what year iVillage launched.  But this is when they had maybe about three regular bloggers.  And this came about because Elayne Fluker who I had worked with at Suede, became--she was the editor of two of their channels; of their style channel and their lifestyle channel.  And so she brought me on to be a contributor for them.
Speaker 1: And were you still VIBE Vixen at this time?
Speaker 2: No, so at this point VIBE Vixen folded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So VIBE Vixen folded in 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After about a year of being in publication, it folded.  And then I started doing--focusing on my business [BluePrint Group LLC; Tai Life Media, LLC].  The foundation [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey] was still my biggest client.  I went back to working with them a little more than two days a week, probably about two and a half to three days a week.  And then I was working with other clients.  More people in the fashion and beauty space because this was around the time of Project Red too where brands were starting to think about how to be socially conscious.  And I was consulting with brands on that.  And then simultaneously I started contributing to iVillage.
Speaker 1: And iVillage at the time, this is 2008--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the Internet is still new, isn't it?  I mean people are using it, but this is a big--
Speaker 2: It was a big platform.
Speaker 1: Platform, right.  Can you describe iVillage?
Speaker 2: So iVillage was, I would call it--what would I call it?  Like iVillage in some way was like kind of a precursor to Huff Post [Huffington Post] for women.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, but it was all--it wasn't--it was, it was news, it was lifestyle, it was health, it was wellness, it was all finance--it literally was a hub of content for women.  And the target demographic I would probably say was somewhere between twenty-five and fifty-four.  So really a hub of information for women around all things her life.
Speaker 1: And what were you writing, blogging about?
Speaker 2: My column was called--my god, my memory is so bad--but I talked about things that mattered to me.  It was mostly fashion and beauty, but for instance I ran the, the New York City [New York, New York] marathon for Malaria No More and I blogged about that.  But I incorporated beauty products that sweat pretty, right.  So I, I was trying to give meaning to what was becoming my, my new and clear voice.  It was--I think it was always a part of who I was, obviously.  It was always a part of my DNA.  You know I saw it at Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine], I saw it at Seventeen, bringing real girls there.  But I don't think my voice was really formed just yet, and I think it was becoming more formed that I wanted to stand for something in celebrating women, but still be fabulous doing it.
Speaker 1: Well and then you were recognized for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the next year by Essence magazine.
Speaker 2: I was, right.
Speaker 1: This was the, the power women issue (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Issue. Yeah, you're right.  I forget about these things (laughter).
Story_ID: 658452
Speaker 1: And in that year you did a lot of things.  Do you, do you remember what your activities were then?
Speaker 2: No, probably not, but--
Speaker 1: So I'm seeing you went to Africa for the first time with Millennium Promise [The Millennium Promise Alliance].
Speaker 2: Right, I did.  That was a life changing experience.
Speaker 1: What is Millennium Promise?
Speaker 2: So Millennium Promise is the organization that Ray [Ray Chambers] was, or is--was the founding chair, board chairman of and so our foundation had funded it quite a bit.  And so my work with MCJ [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey] focused mostly on Newark [New Jersey], but I also had the opportunity to really kind of consult on other projects that we did.  And so I went to Africa with Millennium Promise, which is an organization that literally seeks to end poverty, and extreme poverty and are developing in third world countries.  And so there are villages that they have this approach where they provide health care, you know, education, work opportunities, all these resources.  And so I went to visit four countries in a matter of thirteen days in Africa.
Speaker 1: And then you co-produced 'World Malaria Day Events'?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  That was in what year?
Speaker 1: Same year, oh 2009.
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009], that was a good year.  Yeah, so I, I you know Malaria No More was an offshoot of, of Millennium Promise that Ray was also really involved in and he still is.  So I, you know, the foundation drawing on my abilities to kind of create content and build and produce, let me do that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it looks like that year, in 2009, there, there was an interesting balance between this humanitarian work and beauty work.  'Cause while you have Millennium Promise, 'World Malaria Day,' you were on ABC's SOAPNet 'Holidate.'
Speaker 2: Right.  I did that, yeah.  'Cause I think this is when I started to--it was interesting and I, you know, so those things were happening and people are, are attracted.  Essence recognized me, which is huge, you know.  And so you--when you're starting to do what feels good to you, people recognize.  And so this opportunity came to me to do a television show and I was like I don't know, reality show about my dating life.  I don't think so.  But I did it, and it was a really, really great experience and opportunity 'cause it was around that time that I said maybe I do wanna try TV.
Speaker 1: And you, same year, were a style expert on the Style Network, ABC and BET [Black Entertainment Television].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's when I started to figure out the TV--I was like I, I started to express it to the world that I wanted to do TV.  I don't know--before then I don't, I don't think I was really--I, I liked being an editor.
Story_ID: 658453
Speaker 1: So I, I just wanna run through a list of some of the other things that happened in that year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, totally.
Speaker 1: So in 2009 you became a Big Brothers Big Sisters [Big Brothers Big Sisters of America] mentor.  You received the Thurgood Marshall College Fund Prestige Award.  You consulted with Sundance Channel, Avon [Avon Products, Inc.], Tractenberg and Co. [New York, New York] on content production, social responsibility, and served as a video host.  I mean you were--this is all through your business and through Ray's [Ray Chambers] foundation [The MCJ Amelior Foundation, Morristown, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's it.  That was all--that was the year of me realizing I would become an entrepreneur, number one.  But then also me just tapping into all of the things that mattered to me and that I had an interest in.  And figuring out a way to combine them.  I wasn't able to bring them all together until probably three years ago, two years ago even.
Speaker 1: Which would be about five years after that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I--I mean I feel like, I feel like I'm just--I, I feel--I said to a friend the other day I'm just beginning, so anything that I've done right now I'm really, really grateful for, but this is the beginning.  I haven't begun to scratch the surface of what I wanna do.  I just realized that, you know, building a platform, having a presence and having a voice and, and sharing that voice is what's going to enable me to get the resources and the backing to do the other things that I wanna do.
Speaker 1: And what are those things?
Speaker 2: So if I had to describe what the Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp] life is and what Tai Life Media [BluePrint Group LLC; Tai Life Media, LLC] is, I mean my long term would be a Ryan Seacrest meets Heidi Klum meets Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].  That's what I want.  'Cause I wanna produce content, and where it makes sense for me to be in front, great.  I wanna create brands and licensing.  That all, you know, are anchored in the, the idea of supporting and empowering women, you know, outside in and inside out.  And you know with, with real heart.  You know with real grounding.  You know that really speaks to all that she is.
Story_ID: 658454
Speaker 1: And as you are developing this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so in 2009 it starts gelling.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your family is also in crisis.
Speaker 2: No, it was--that was past crisis in 2009.  The crisis started in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother fell and broke her--so Mary [Mary Beauchamp] fell and broke her neck in 2006.  So suddenly this, prior to vibrant, energetic woman who lived alone, you know, not in a senior citizens' home, but in a beautiful doorman building, you know, by herself.  Happened to be visiting my parents and thankfully 'cause I was out of the country traveling, and she got up in the middle of the night and fell and broke her neck.  She hit her head on the sofa table in the hallway and has been paralyzed ever since.  Never went back to her home, September 2nd, yeah, 2006.
Speaker 1: And by 2009, what's happening with your family?
Speaker 2: By, by 2009, I mean it was--she literally probab- my grandmother just stabilized in the state of where we haven't been back and forth to the hospital.  From 2006 to 2010, we were in the hospital more than we were at the nursing facility because she suffered from double pneumonia several times.  She, you know--infections, you know, congestive heart failure.  Everything you can possibly imagine.  So while I'm doing all of this, and also let me just be very frank.  My mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] is--has grown immensely through this process because during these earlier years, she was very reliant upon me because you know, one I am a very--I'm not necessarily--emotion isn't the first thing that kicks in with me; I'm more analytical and logical, so what has to be done.  So while my mom is crying and you know obviously from a traumatic experience and feeling very sad, I'm just like well what has to be done?  So she, she leaned on me very heavily.  On top of the fact because I'm an entrepreneur and because my parents are educators, they don't really understand entrepreneurship.  So I think that they think I'm sitting home, chilling out all day anyway (laughter).  And like, "What are you--," "Mom, I'm working."  But because I also had a flexible schedule, I was there more, you know.
Story_ID: 658455
Speaker 1: And at the same time you're traveling so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The, the next year, 2010, you went to Nigeria.  Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: So I was invited to go to Nigeria to speak to about four thousand young people.  It was a, it was a, a conference that was put on by a church and it was all about--the speech I gave was about you know, living your most beautiful, full and, and life--a life that is full and rich, that is blessed and stylish.  And so there, there were four thousand young people and they were between the ages of eighteen and I think twenty-six.  And it was a really, really good experience, really, really amazing experience.
Story_ID: 658456
Speaker 1: You know as, as these opportunities are coming, are you working with an agent?  How are you, how are they coming to you?
Speaker 2: So at that time I had someone who would--I didn't have an agent, I didn't have a TV agent until after 'Holidate.'  So I think I got my first TV agent maybe in 2010, maybe 2009, 2010.  And then--so 'Holidate,' they found me on their own and then I think I got an agent after that.  And then I had a person who had reached out to me that had some people who were interested in booking me for speaking, but I wasn't really signed officially to anyone, with any of that.
Speaker 1: So you're getting these different gigs, including in that same year, Black Enterprise magazine.  You, you produce a web series--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'The High Life.'  What was that?
Speaker 2: So 'The High Life' and it's so interesting, Elayne went to Black Enterprise, Elayne Fluker went to Black Enterprise.  And we had sat down and talked, I was like, "I wanna do something on digital."  And Elayne by this point was literally a, a digital guru.  I mean because she had done iVillage, she had done latino.com and all these other places.  And I said I wanted to create something there.  I had ties to the people at Black Enterprise prior too.  I've known Butch [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.] and Michael [Michael Graves] and Mr. Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] and Mrs. Graves [Barbara Graves] through personal relationships.  And so it, it, it was really great that they embraced me and Elayne and I created this, this 'The High Life.'  And then we started shooting it.
Speaker 1: So what's interesting to me about that is the use of basically television on the web.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is when it's becoming popular, the beginning.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Two thousand ten [2010] is still pretty early.
Speaker 2: Early, yeah.
Speaker 1: For video content like television content, to be on the web.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Technically was this a challenging experience for you, or--
Speaker 2: It was new.  I mean being, doing digital content was very new for me.  I knew something about it from Vixen [VIBE Vixen] because we did a lot of vibevixen.com while I was there and I oversaw that too, even though I had an editor who managed all of that.  But it was new for me.  Also I mean quite frankly while I had done TV and had, you know, been media trained and all of that, I, I'm still an editor.  Like so it's--I'm not--I wasn't one of those people who grew up saying I wanna be on TV, you know.  I liked--I grew and loved being behind the scenes.  So it was all very new for me, which is why I like producing.  Which is why it wasn't enough for me to just be like okay, I'll be a talking head.  But I loved engaging with people.  So the content and the concept of talking to people and learning their stories, I mean we see a theme here, right?  Like it's always about people for me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And editorially you, you are maturing as publishing's changing completely.
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: The printed product is now not necessarily as valuable as what's happening on this--the new wild west, which is the Internet.
Speaker 2: The greatest frontier, literally, it's the greatest frontier.
Speaker 1: And, and then--but, but you kind of go back and forth.
Speaker 2: So you're doing this 'High Life,' which is--which exactly what was it?
Speaker 1: So the, the whole concept was the high life where we would talk about interesting places, people and things that are, you know, obviously related to Black Enterprise in some way.  Sometimes it was covering events that Black Enterprise had.  Other times it was shooting people that might need to be featured on Black Enterprise.  But anyone that was a part of this high life.  And by the high life we mean it's not like the social elite life, but more interesting, dynamic, big life that you need to know about what's happening.
Story_ID: 658457
Speaker 1: So this content you're creating on the web, but you still have a foot in the traditional editorial door when you start working with InStyle.
Speaker 2: Right.  But it--
Speaker 1: But from a different perspective.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but in an untraditional way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I started working with InStyle, it was to be the face of the magazine in TV and in public.  So what I--
Speaker 1: And this is in 2011?
Speaker 2: This is in 2011, right.  So it was to--what I started to realize about publishing actually even before Black Enterprise, and even before iVillage.  When I was at VIBE Vixen or in my editor's letter, and I remember distinctly having to do this because I had to call my little sister to help me with this.  I put a Facebook link on my editor's letter asking people to hit me up on Facebook.  Now this wasn't when you could do Facebook back slash taibeauchamp.com.  It was just like facebook.pcp, whatever it was.  And you had to have an email address at a college in order to even have a Facebook page.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I was thinking about where people were going before, but that was also because I was connected to younger audiences, then, right.  So I was working with young--, "What are you doing, where are you?"  But with my role with InStyle magazine is that they hired me to be the face, because what InStyle started to realize is that there were all these other opportunities, both in person, on TV and digital, to have a face that meld with what the content was and who understood the editorial perspective, but who was intelligent and could do all of that, but didn't have a full time job putting the magazine together.  So they hired me for that reason.  And when I first started with them, they hired me as national correspondent, which was a role that lived on the editorial side.  But by the second year of my contract with them and now I'm in four contracts with them, this is my fourth contract currently, I am--I live on the business side of things because you know I work with brands.  So they utilize me as the face of the brand to partner with their existing brands and sponsors and advertisers for unique content building opportunities, as well as events.  So I serve as a host for events, at events around the country.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: Such as I hosted an event with David Yurman in Glendale, California.
Speaker 1: Jewelry designer.
Speaker 2: The jewelry designer, David Yurman.  I've hosted events for Clinique, the, the skin care line, Christian Dior, the skin care and beauty line.  I've curated content for them online for Target [Target Corporation].  I've curated--which is a major retailer, I've--you know they utilize me in a lot of different ways.  Presentations with advertisers, to talk to advertisers about the editorial perspective and what's happening in the consumer market.  Because now it's not enough to just have an editorial perspective, but to be connected to audiences.  And so that's where my expertise is very different, and has evolved, but it's always been there thanks to Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine], right, because it was always about being connected to the consumer.
Story_ID: 658458
Speaker 1: And because you are a consultant--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as opposed to staff, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You also have served as red carpet host for the Grammys [Grammy Awards] and, and what else?
Speaker 2: The Grammys, the Oscars [Academy Awards], NAACP [NAACP Image Awards], BET [BET Awards].  I, I mean I've done most of the big awards.  I've done a lot of hosting there.  I now, actually I just shot a pilot with BET [Black Entertainment Television], which I'm really, really excited about.  I continue my work with InStyle.  I have a regular segment that comes on 'The View.'  Hopefully this fall it'll go to bi-weekly.  I thought it was gonna be weekly at one point.  And yeah so there's just a lot of building that continues in the TV space.  Independent of that, I'm launching my own content based website that will really kind of mirror what the Tai Life [BluePrint Group LLC; Tai Life Media, LLC] is about, and it's called thetailife.com is the website.  And that's gonna be a destination and a place not only for my voice, but voices that really reflect the Tai Life voice, and a place for them to live, to talk about everything from, you know, fashion, beauty, style, inspiration, travel, all the things that really matter to me that I think speak to what the Tai Life is, which is also a play on 'The High Life.'
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658459
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned to me earlier that clearly you have been on a fast track professionally, which is what many young women are taught.  I mean probably from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] days you're taught focus on your career.  And at this stage in your life, you did something that many women have talked about, considered, not so many black women have done it I don't think, freezing your eggs.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you tell me about that and also why and what your reflection is?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So I froze my eggs a year ago, August of 2013 at thirty-five.  And I froze my eggs for several reasons.  One, I had really great girlfriends who are a lot wiser and older than I was that told me you know in my thirties when they saw me on this fast track and saw Tai [HistoryMaker Tai Beauchamp] as only about work, she's no play, you know, freeze your eggs.  And when they told me at thirty, I was like okay girls, no, I'm good.  Like and I had broken an engagement.  And so I had been in a relationship and all of that.  And I decided to do it last year because I said if I hit thirty-five and was unattached and unmarried, I wanted to preserve my fertility.  That's not to say I don't have any, thank god, as far as I know no challenges right now.  But I know that I want a, I want a family.  And I wanted to preserve that.  And I also was diagnosed with fibroids, which is very prevalent in the black community, and my mother [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] and [maternal] grandmother [Mary Beauchamp] both had them and both of them had either a hysterectomy or a partial hysterectomy.  My mother actually had her, her partial hysterectomy at thirty-six.  So at my age right now she had her, her, her hysterectomy performed.  And I just, I just knew that I wanted to preserve it.  I really think, and you know I shared with Essence this story and they did an amazing job of writing about this journey and why I chose to do it.  But I think that we really have to shift the dialogue for young women.  Of young women of color especially because like in the case, in my case being raised by two single black women who were very independent, who were very driven and very hard working, and who valued education as we should.  We're taught to focus on your career and not to necessarily put as much focus on our family lives.  And I think that that's just a result of sometimes you know, their experiences, which have been challenging.  And also historical experiences when you think back to slavery and what have you and the woman having to be there and to do it all.  But I don't think we're meant to.  And so I want younger women, you know, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, once you have some footing and you have some sense of who you are and some perspective of where you'd like to go professionally, to start to--if you want, and to just to start to think more realistically about who you are.  Because who you are is not your career.  Who you are is not you know, how much money you make or the clothes you wear.  And a young lady that I said this to who also went to Spelman, last year I said this to her and she turned thirty.  And she read the article and Janese Sills [ph.] is her name, and she's an executive.  And she sent me an email and she said, "Tai, I realize you know what?  I'm working so hard for my legacy, but if my legacy is not for my children, then who is my legacy for?"  So it's not about us singularly.  And so there's been a really hard lesson for me, that I'm grateful that I've learned.  But I also wanna hope and--to, to really kind of teach other younger women to think differently about it going forward.
Story_ID: 658460
Speaker 1: So you, you have a lot of career and life left.  We, we--
Speaker 2: I hope (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We certainly hope.  But as you, as you envision what legacy you are hoping to leave, what would it be?
Speaker 2: I want to leave a legacy of knowing several things.  One, anything is possible.  And I say anything is possible, and all things are possible because you know, not that I ever experienced this.  I, I never experienced anyone saying you can't, you won't, you're this, you're that.  But when I think back to my history of what it could have been, and what I said earlier statistically should have been, you know, so I, I wanna be, be the inspiration and the example of possibilities, you know, for all women, for all women, possibilities.  And then what I have come to now I would probably say in the last two or so years, is too on my own terms and unapologetically.  Like it's, it's such a beautiful thing when you finally get to that place where you're like it's me and I love me and it's cool and I'm gonna be me.  And it's my truth and I'm owning it, and it's all good.  There's something so powerful about that.  And with that, I will--the last thing would be something that Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] said to me when I interviewed her.  And this is what I want other young women to know in living their truth, in living unapologetically and knowing that all things are possible.  We all just wanna be seen, we all just wanna be heard, and we all just wanna know that what you have to say matters.  And so when we go through life not only experiencing that, but delivering that to others and giving that to others, like there's just so much power.  There's just so much power.  So that's it.
Story_ID: 658461
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Not studying abroad during college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).  That's my biggest regret, not studying abroad during college, 'cause I was coming back to New Jersey to visit that boyfriend.
Speaker 1: And has, has--is there anything that I have not asked you that you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: No.  I think, and I thought about this because he walked out, but you know everything happens for a reason.  I was thinking about, you know, you met my assistant [Antoine Braxton] who you learned is my half-brother, who I just met two years ago.  From my father [Mark Hopkins], obviously, 'cause I really am my mother's [Taiwanda Beauchamp Scott] only child.  That I can promise you.  But there are no accidents, you know.  Everything is just really intentional and I think, you know, the older you get and the wiser you become, the more you're able to really, really appreciate that.  There are no accidents.  The thing about my stepbrother who grew up in the house with my mom, but by that time, I was gone to college, who just published a book, you know.  And he and I are very close.  He just had his first baby and got married.  There are just no accidents.  And so when you look at your life and you wonder or you say shoulda, coulda, woulda, so even when you ask about regrets, I don't--'cause there are no accidents.  This is all divine.  It's all meant, it's all purposed.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you lover.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
