Story_ID: 227979
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, we're going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer, and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Today's date is Wednesday, October--
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, I don't know whether you want to use this, I did get a doctorate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll ask about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Today's date is Wednesday, October 13, 2004, and this is interview is taking place in Ettrick, Virginia.  Now if you would, please for the record tell us your full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My name is Katherine H. Bennett.
Speaker 1: What's the H stand for?
Speaker 2: Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, I spell it with a K some people spell it with a C but I spell mine with a K.
Speaker 1: And Bennett.
Speaker 2: B-E-N-N-E-T-T. I can take off the glasses if you need me to.
Speaker 1: No, you're fine, you're fine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So Mrs. Bennett, would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October 17, 1922 in Elizabeth City, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired teacher.
Story_ID: 227980
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little better so if you could give me short answers to these questions that would be great.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food I guess would be chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like pinks and yellow.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A cruise anywhere.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have a favorite one right now.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 227981
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother.  Would you tell us your mother's name and--
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Annie Howard.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up as a girl?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Elizabeth City, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you any stories about what life was like for her growing up as a girl?
Speaker 2: Well they used to talk about it, and I know my grandfather I understand was a very strict person, and I got to know him shortly, but he died about the time I was about four years old so I didn't get to know him too well.  My grandmother [Annie Howard] married him when she was younger, so he was a little bit older than she, I guess much older because they used to call him--I know I remember calling him grandpa.
Speaker 1: And what kind of stories did your mom tell you?  What was Elizabeth City like when she was a girl?
Speaker 2: Well everybody in Elizabeth City was like family.  You could go to anybody and they would look after you.  She didn't grow up mostly in Elizabeth City; she grew up mostly in Ahoskie, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Where in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: In Ahoskie.
Speaker 1: And what was life like for her there?  Did she live on a farm or did she live in town?
Speaker 2: She lived in town and then they moved--my grandmother moved to Elizabeth City when she was a young child.  I don't know what age she was though but she--my grandmother and grandfather moved to Elizabeth City 'cause there was another aunt, my grandmother's half-sister, also, who moved to Elizabeth City.  And they moved in there about the same time as far as I know.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: My mother worked in a laundry, 'cause she didn't finish high school.  She worked in a laundry, and I think she did finish elementary school and then she got a job.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did she do in the laundry?
Speaker 2: She was a separator, she used to, at the time she used to separate the clothes to make sure of laces and then she could crochet very well so she was a mender.  And I think she dropped out of high school early and started working.
Speaker 1: And did she ever tell you any stories about working at the laundry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, some things she used to talk about.  They made her a supervisor after a while, but she was very good with her fingers, and she could sew, so she became a mender.  If there were things torn, she used to have to do repair work, so her salary went up a little bit better than twenty cents an hour.  So most of them didn't get but twenty cents an hour, and that was about the wage that most of them were making in the laundry.
Story_ID: 227982
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father.
Speaker 2: I didn't know my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did you grow up knowing your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, I lived with my grandmother.  My mother [Annie Howard] finally left and went to New York to work, and she used to send me a lot of pretty clothes, 'cause she had a different kind of job; I don't know what it was.  So she left and went and my--I had a cousin that I lived with--that lived with us, he was an epileptic person, and he had a sitter.  Somebody was supposed to be looking after him, and he fell and hit his back, the next thing you know he started having these epileptic attacks.  So we lived together and he was like a brother to me but we used to get in fights all the time.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Sam.  Samuel Chavis.
Speaker 1: Chavis?
Speaker 2: Chavis.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was named Annie Howard, so I never knew my father.
Speaker 1: Was Samuel older or younger than you?
Speaker 2: He was a year older than me.
Speaker 1: And so what--now what about your--oh your grandfather died--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: My grandfather died when I was about four years old.  I do remember him though.
Speaker 1: And did your grandmother ever tell you any stories about what life was like for her as a girl growing up?
Speaker 2: Well see, I had my uncle who was like a father to me.  He looked out for me, he wouldn't let anybody bother me, and even when my grandmother--my grandmother was very strict in our era, and if you got a whipping, you had to go get your own whip, switch and bring it in, and I used to get it and break it so that she would think she was hurting me, but that's the way it was.  People looked out for each other in the neighborhood and you didn't dare a neighbor tell that you did something bad 'cause' you got a good whipping then.  My grandmother could lay it on you.
Speaker 1: And Samuel, did he take any kind of medication for his epilepsy?
Speaker 2: Yes he was taking medicine, medication, but it never subsided.  They wanted to do an operation on him but my aunt would not allow it because they weren't sure whether it was going to cure him or not, so he lived with it.  But he was a smart guy and he had good handwriting.  He could write beautifully, but as he got older the attacks became--had gotten to a place where he had to be supervised just about all the time, and I used to look out for him, I wouldn't let anybody hurt him or touch him.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett?  Do you know if you came from free people or slaves?
Speaker 2: Well as far as I know, I was from free people, because most of them were living in North Carolina someplace, and my son has the full background, he lives in Chicago [Illinois].  So he has the full background, and he's willing to share it.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother moved to New York?
Speaker 2: Well I was about six years old then, 'cause I had just started elementary school [Banks Street Elementary School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and she used to send me all these pretty clothes from New York.
Speaker 1: What did the other kids think about your clothes?  Were they different from everybody else's?
Speaker 2: Yes I wore them and they said, "Oh you think you're cute don't you, 'cause you've got some new clothes on."  But she was sending me these new jackets and coats and things.  I had a kind of fur coat, fur fur, these lamb jackets.
Speaker 1: And do you remember when she left to go to New York?
Speaker 2: I just remember she left, and I just remember that my cousin was call--I wasn't calling anybody grandma- mother, and my grandmother said, "You don't call anybody mama," 'cause my cousin called her Aunt Annie, and that's what I used to call her.
Speaker 1: You called her Nanny?
Speaker 2: Aunt Annie.
Speaker 1: Aunt Annie.
Speaker 2: You would say, call her Aunt Annie, but my grandmother said, "You don't call anybody mother; you will have to call me mama instead of calling me grandma."  So I started calling my grandma, mama.
Speaker 1: Even though she said don't call anybody mother?
Speaker 2: She said I didn't call anybody mother, 'cause I was calling--my cousin was calling her--calling my mother Aunt Annie and I started calling her Aunt Annie too.  So my grandmother said, "You don't call anybody mama so you have to call me mama."  So I started--both of us started calling her mama.
Story_ID: 227983
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up [in Elizabeth City, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well when I got in--when I was growing up I knew everybody.  We were all--everybody knew everybody on our street and everybody could go to anybody if you were hungry or something, you could go to any of your neighbors and they would always look out for you and they would tell on you too.  You mind everybody; you didn't want anybody telling anybody anything on you 'cause if my grandmother [Annie Howard] knew I was doing something wrong you could get a whipping for that.  You had to respect all of the people in your neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Could you share some other memories with us like what Christmas or Thanksgiving was like in your house?
Speaker 2: Beautiful.  We always waited for Santa Claus to come, you believed in it, but I couldn't understand how Santa Claus could come down the chimney 'cause we had a stove, we didn't have a fireplace we had a stove, and that was up in the bedroom.  There was a stove on every floor.  We lived in a two story house, and that's how I used to slide down the banister.  Did you ever have a banister?  We'd slide down the banister and it would be fun.
Speaker 1: And what were other holidays like, Thanksgiving and Easter, what were they like?
Speaker 2: Fun days, 'cause you got your new outfits for Easter, and you wanted it to be warm and I remember one Easter it snowed on Easter, and we all went to Sunday school--everybody in the neighborhood went to Sunday school that day, the next thing we came out and it was snowing.  It was the first time I'd ever known it to snow at Easter time, and it was cold, but nothing was going to keep us from wearing our outfits.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Annie Howard] come to visit on holidays?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, finally she came back to live by the time I got in--as soon as I started going to elementary school [Banks Street Elementary School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] good, she came back to live by the time I was finishing up elementary school.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of--do you remember the name of the street you lived on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Harney Street.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it?
Speaker 2: H-A-R-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe that street for us and describe your community for us?
Speaker 2: Well, we had--everybody knew everybody in the community and all of us had neighbors, and the neighbors looked out for you, and my grandmother was a person, I think she had some Indian [Native American] blood in her, they used to come to her if anybody got a burn on their hand, they would come to my grandmother, and she would do something over it and talk to them over it, so I think she had some Indian blood in her.
Speaker 1: So did she have what was called like healing hands?
Speaker 2: Yes that's what they called it, but it was a breath thing.  She would do--if they had a burn on themselves then she would take this burn and talk to it, next thing you know she said her mouth would be burning so I don't know what it was about it.  But she never would tell us what she said, but it was interesting if anybody got a burn.  There were different people in the neighborhood that the people would go to for certain things in our neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, one little girl used to suck her fingers, and there was a man that chewed tobacco, and her mother took her down to this man and told him to spit on her fingers.  So she could get her to stop sucking, 'cause she used to suck her fingers and put one hand, one hand would be-she would suck these two fingers and then these other fingers were on her nose holding her face down.  There were a lot of little things we did and everybody had a fruit tree in their yard.  We had a fig bush in our yard but the people next door had a pear tree.  Everybody used to share their food with everybody--the fruit.
Story_ID: 227984
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up [in Elizabeth City, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Watermelon smell, and cantaloupe, and peaches and figs.  We always had fig bushes.  My grandmother [Annie Howard] had a fig bush and she always made fig preserves.
Speaker 1: And what smells, I'm sorry, what sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Nothing particular that I know of except the church bell ringing, we used to hear them.  You don't hear church bells ringing here and now, but in our area the church bell would ring and everybody knew it was your church, 'cause we were close by the church.
Story_ID: 227985
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: They were nice, 'cause I got to play the first--I started playing for the church choir when I was young--very young.  I started taking music lessons, well we didn't have a piano, so I used to have to go down--we had a friend who had a grocery store and his daughter--they had a piano and they wanted somebody to play on the piano to keep it tuned.  So I used to go down there--I used to go take music lessons and I had a bicycle.  Finally my mother [Annie Howard] found twenty dollars as she was doing some work in the laundry and she found this twenty dollars and when she reported it the man told her to keep it.  So she was able to buy me a bicycle, and I was the only girl in the neighborhood who had her own bicycle, so I thought I was something.  When you get a bicycle then--my mother didn't make more than twenty dollars a week anyway, and she found this twenty dollars as she was doing these strips of the laundry things and when she reported it to the man, the manager, he said well you keep it, you found it keep it, and that was kind of odd, but she didn't want to take it unless she did because she didn't want somebody to come back reporting that she took it, and he told her to go ahead and keep it.  So I got my first bicycle which costs about twenty dollars, and I was the only girl in the neighborhood who had a bicycle.
Story_ID: 227986
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Banks Street Elementary School [Elizabeth City, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Banks Street?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I had Ms. Suggs [ph.], and I had a teacher named--my first elementary teacher was named Mrs. Spellman [ph.] and then my third grade teacher's name is Reed [ph.], and then my sixth grade teacher was named Ms. Barnard [ph.].
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your elementary school.  Can you describe it to us, how was it laid out?
Speaker 2: Well everything was on one floor and we had a long hall, and we used to have march sessions, and all of us used to put on--you could do any routine you wanted to do.  We would get up a routine and maybe march, and they thought we were something because we had this routine.  I remember in the sixth grade we won all the prizes that they had out.  It wasn't the prizes you got; it was just that you would do the best you could.  But the teachers were very strict with you, and they would whip you in the classroom if you did something bad.  I remember once the boys in our classroom started rolling up a lot of paper, and started throwing paper over on us.  'Cause the girls sat on one side and the boys sat on the other side and when the teacher came in--Mrs. Barnard came back in the classroom all this paper was on our side, and she had all of us to stand up there and each one of us got some lashes across our back and we were scared to tell--you couldn't tell your parents 'cause you were going to get a whipping at school.  We were so mad and when we got outside we beat up the boys because they told on us.  They said, well, all of the papers were on our side of the room.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I came out as the valedictorian, and I didn't even know what a valedictorian was until one of the teachers told me it means you had the highest average.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject during elementary school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember if you liked math or reading, do you remember if you liked any of those, or did you like them all the same?
Speaker 2: I liked all of them the same, I guess, but I did love literature and I used to read a lot.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, during the elementary school years what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think I was a nice person.  I didn't get into any--I got in a couple of fights 'cause a girl, somebody was pulling my hair.  I had long braids, and there was one girl in there that every time I looked up she was picking on me, and one day she started picking on me, and I beat her up.  So I had something in my hand and I don't know what it was, I think I had a pot or something that I had taken to school one day, and she started hitting on me and I took that pot and knocked the heck out of her, she didn't bother me anymore.  But she was a bully, she used to pick on everybody, she had some brothers and all.  She was--I remember her name was Shirley [ph.].
Speaker 1: During elementary school years did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess I did.
Speaker 1: What did you want to be when you grew up, when you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: A teacher, 'cause I admired my teachers, and I wanted to be a teacher, but I didn't know whether that was--I wanted to be a teacher like they were.
Story_ID: 227987
Speaker 1: I know I asked you about church, what was the name of the church your family attended?
Speaker 2: St. Stephen's Baptist Church [St. Stephen Missionary Baptist Church, Elizabeth City, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And were you pretty active in church?
Speaker 2: Yes, I played the piano and that was the thing too, see, my mother [Annie Howard] got me to--I wanted to play piano, so she got me to take music lessons and it cost fifty cents a lesson at that time, and there was a lady that lived across the town from where we lived, and she taught lessons--piano lessons and I think the lessons was like fifty cents a lesson.  There were several kids who took piano lessons from her, and I had finally--my mother was able to get me a bicycle and I could ride the bicycle to go to take my piano lessons.  So I started piano lessons and the next thing you know I was playing for the church choir.  It started with the Sunday school choir and then I moved up to the church choir and I was getting like $1.50 a Sunday so that was money, and I could buy a pair--in those days you could buy a pair of shoes for about $1.50.
Speaker 1: What did you like to spend your money on?
Speaker 2: Shoes and clothes.
Story_ID: 227988
Speaker 1: Were you still at Banks Street Elementary [School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] during the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: No we didn't, that was just for high school--just for elementary school.  And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you attend junior high?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a junior high, we just had a high school, and it was called P.W. Moore High School [Elizabeth City, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: P.W. Moore?
Speaker 2: P.W. Moore High School and everybody, you went there from seventh grade--no our elementary school went through the seventh grade and then when we went to high school it started at the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you as a young person?
Speaker 2: There were a lot of people.  Mostly my teachers did, and there was a lady named Ms. Reed [ph.].  She taught elementary music, and I wanted to play the piano, so I learned how to play the piano.  I got to take music lessons from Ms. Cook [ph.], she was my music teacher, and your music lessons were fifty cents a lesson.  Every time we went there to take lessons we paid fifty cents.
Speaker 1: What were some of the activities you were involved in in high school?
Speaker 2: We really didn't have many things in high school and that was one of the problems, I think, that came up.  We use to pass the white schools and they had buses and all, and they had bands and everything else and we did not have a band, we didn't even have a gym.
Speaker 1: Did you have sports teams?
Speaker 2: No, not for girls.  They had a football team for the boys and a baseball team but the girls didn't have it.  We did not have things like that. So when I went to college, and all of this stuff was shown to me, I got excited and the next thing you know I wanted to be a physical education teacher and that's what I became.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, let's go back to high school for a minute.  When you were in high school what were some of your thoughts about college?  What were you thinking about college?
Speaker 2: I never knew whether I was going to be able to go or not, but there was a girl that had gone to A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and they found out that they had--well I'll tell you something that happened in the high school.  We had a principal, and there were students who--he didn't have a secretary in our high school so the students used to work in his office and I started taking--he had a niece who was getting ready to go to college, and so the niece said she had taken some lessons in typing and shorthand from a person, and this girl used to go there and she said that the lady needed somebody to clean her office, and she would give them free lessons so that's how I learned it, that's what I did.  I got that job and I held on to it and learned how to type and learned shorthand.  The only thing I could remember how to do was to write dear sir (unclear).  When I went to college I took some typing and shorthand (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, did you find out from this girl that A&T offered scholarships?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't get a scholarship, I just--they found out I could transfer that NYA [National Youth Administration] job that I had to college, so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940], and then I went to A&T.
Story_ID: 227989
Speaker 1: So why did you choose A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but there was a young lady that lived in our community and she was at A&T and so when I--we were all admiring her because she was like Ms. It, and she was at A&T so I applied, and it was through my principal [at P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth, City, North Carolina] who helped me to get started there 'cause I got a job in his office.  They used to have what they called NYA [National Youth Administration] jobs in high school, and they paid you a certain amount of money, so to do that was like twelve dollars a year or twelve dollars a month or something like that.  That was good money, 'cause my mother [Annie Howard] wasn't making much more than that. So--
Speaker 1: What were your mother and your grandmother's [Annie Howard] thoughts about when you told them you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't just say I wanted to go to college.  Well it was kind of like--they were happy, they didn't know how we were going to do it though, because my mother wasn't making that much money, but I got a job during the summer and saved enough to pay for first tuition.  But they were able to help do it and then my mother and my stepfather went back together again.  I think my mother only went back with him to sort of help out, but he was okay, always nice to me.  But she and he used to have it rough and heavy, and his name was Calvin Lewis.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the campus was like when you first arrived at A&T?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was so happy to be there, and it was like I was living in a dream world, and I just got out and walked the campus over.  Somebody said, "Why are you walking here?"  And I said, "I'm writing a letter, and sending it to my mother to let her know that I'm here."  It was just a thought, 'cause I never knew that I was going to go, and there were people in the neighborhood that used to say, I don't know why her mother is going to send her to college, she isn't going to do nothing but come back with an armful of children.  I said I'd never do that, I never did want to do anything that would hurt my mother, because she was sacrificing so much for me to go.
Speaker 1: Why do you think people said that about you?
Speaker 2: Jealousy there was a lot of jealousy, because once I started taking music lessons, the minister used to brag about me in the church [St. Stephen Missionary Baptist Church, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], and other people didn't want to hear him bragging about somebody else's child.  Then the girls would get jealous too.  They'd say--somebody made the statement once that why are they sending her to college, and she isn't going to do nothing but come back with an armful of children, and I said, never would I do that.  I didn't ever want to do anything to hurt my mother or my family or cause anything on there.  So I came back out and I graduated with honors too.
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about some of your experiences at A&T.  What were some of the activities you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Everything that I could get in but the choir, and the only reason I didn't get into choir was because I got in the band.  See at A&T you sold pictures-you sold majorette pictures.  When I got to college they had not had majorettes at that time, and the band director decided this was going to be his year that he was going to have--first time having majorettes.  So there was a call coming out saying, if you are interested in learning to be a majorette, you don't have to know how to twirl.  They were going to have somebody to teach you how to twirl, and they gave us broomsticks to work with.  About thirty girls went down there, and the first thing they did was have us to lift up our dresses so they could see our legs (laughter) and I was embarrassed, all of us were embarrassed, you didn't do no lifting up your legs to let someone see your legs, but we did it.  They said all of us could start out and I started out with--and there were some two girls who were twins and some of the girls quit.
Story_ID: 227990
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, what activities were you involved in in high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I was on the debating team and the cheering squad.
Speaker 1: And did you enjoy the debating team?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And we were talking a little bit about A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], so you'd go to the majorette trial, and the first thing they do is to ask everybody to lift up their dresses so they could see your legs.  And then what happened after that?
Speaker 2: Then they gave us a broomstick 'cause we didn't have batons at that time, and they gave us broomsticks to practice on.  So somebody got these broomsticks from somewhere, and we all had a broomstick and we started twirling--learning how to twirl.  Everybody's arms were black and blue trying to learn how to twirl the baton (laughter).  Finally we did, and then some of the girls left.  About thirty of us went down there and he was going to pick three.  So the girls--there was a set of twins--Inez and Mable Scott, one was named Mable and the other twin was named Inez.  So they were still down there and I said well if he isn't going to pick but two, I may as well stop.  So I didn't go to practice for a good while and he sent for me.  He said why aren't you coming to practice and I said well they told me that you weren't going to have but two girls.  He said did I tell you that and I said no sir you didn't.  He said well until I tell you, I'm looking for you to come on down here.  So I stayed down there and that's how I got picked--three of us.  So I was in the center because I was taller than the rest of them.
Speaker 1: How did you enjoy being a majorette?
Speaker 2: Oh I enjoyed it and that's what I did when I came out, I worked--when I got my first job I worked with the majorettes at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I worked with the majorettes at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And while you were at A&T you were a majorette, you were on the debate team and you were in the band.
Speaker 2: And the drama team, and we all had to be in the concert band, and you had to carry your instrument so because I knew percussions I had to take my drum--I was supposed to carry the bass drum and some of the guys used to help me out with the bass drum, they would take the drum for me.  And then a lot of times--during that time the war [World War II, WWII] broke out and a lot of the guys in the band left, and went with the [U.S.] Navy band.  They recruited them and they went down with the Navy band and ended up somewhere in Michigan.  Somewhere it would start and the next thing you know most of them were brought back to Chapel Hill [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 227991
Speaker 1: When you were in college [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], you had mentioned earlier that you saw all of these sports and activities for women and that's how you decided you wanted to be a physical education teacher.
Speaker 2: Well, we had what they called in our school what was called a WAA--Women's Athletic Association, which had gotten started, and I used to be in that.  They had groups coming in from all the colleges.  All the colleges had--not all of them but several of them like Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] was part of it and Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]--it was called Hampton Institute then and they had what they called the WAA Athletic Association--Women's Athletic Association because they didn't have sports for women, that was the only thing that we had.  So that started then and so when I got, I went (unclear) and I was active in that.
Speaker 1: So what did the WAA offer to women?
Speaker 2: Sports, so that you could play, and then we had all the other colleges that were part of it we had women's sports association meeting and it rotated from college to college.
Speaker 1: And what sports did you play in college?
Speaker 2: Volleyball, and tennis, and gymnastics.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy those sports?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and I think you'll see in one of those pictures over there where I'm sitting on a boy's shoulders, that was in the gymnastics squad.
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Annie Howard] and your grandmother [Annie Howard] think back home? You were--
Speaker 2: Oh they thought--well first place when they saw my picture--we had a paper called the [Norfolk] Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide].  You ever heard of it?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The Journal and Guide was a black paper that was put out, and Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia was the base and the Journal and Guide was a black--handled all black stuff about black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  So when my picture came out, oh everybody wanted to know, how did she learn how to do that, 'cause we didn't have any of that in our high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Your picture from being a majorette came out?
Speaker 2: Um-hm and I still have that picture right now.  It's one of those that came out in the paper.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And they had listed in there that where I went to high school.  And see, everybody was shocked.  "How did she learn how to do that?" You know, so a lot of envy (laughter).
Story_ID: 227992
Speaker 1: And so when you graduated from A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] in 1944, were you ready to teach?
Speaker 2: Well, I got my first job there in Sawmills, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: How far was that from your home?
Speaker 2: About fifteen miles, and the principal lived in Elizabeth City [North Carolina] also so that's how I got the job.  They needed a teacher so that was--and I had an offer in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, but I said since I had been away from my mother [Annie Howard] so long I said I think I'll just stay home with her and Nana [Bennett's grandmother, Annie Howard], since she and my stepfather [Calvin Lewis] had gone back together, so I stayed there, but I didn't stay but one year in teaching.
Speaker 1: And where did you go after that?
Speaker 2: I went to New York University [(NYU), New York, New York].  Well at North Carolina then they would give you certain stipends to attend colleges somewhere else because they didn't want--they still hadn't integrated, and so I got the stipend, and they were paying so much money for you to go somewhere else.  They paid for you to go, that was interesting enough; they paid for you to attend other colleges out of state because they hadn't integrated.  So I applied for that stipend and I got it, it was like a hundred and some dollars per month that they would pay, and it wasn't costing more than that to go to college--go to the University of New York [sic.], New York University.  I stayed with my cousin so I didn't have to pay any rent but I gave her some money and then through her I got a job.  She worked for a lady who was working at the VA and I got a job working--
Speaker 1: Who was working where?
Speaker 2: At the Veterans Administration.
Speaker 1: So what kind of work did you do at the VA?
Speaker 2: At the VA I was a clerk helping with the insurance papers.  These were servicemen coming back out of service and my cousin worked with the lady who was in charge of hiring, and that's how I got the job.  That was able to take care of my tuition along with what I got from the State of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So after you got your master's degree from NYU how did the opportunity at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] come about?
Speaker 2: There was a job opening.  I had gotten an offer to go to St. Paul [St. Paul's Polytechnic Institute] in Lawrenceville [Virginia], and then I found out that Hampton Institute had a job opening, so I applied for that because I was getting my--Bennett [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] and I had just gotten married.
Story_ID: 227993
Speaker 1: And how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: Well there was a young man that had married a girlfriend from my home--he was from my hometown [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and he and [HistoryMaker William Maurice] Bennett had met at Fort Lee [Virginia] when they were both in [U.S. military] service.  He saw Bennett one day and this guy kept saying to me, you need to get married and I said, "I'm having a good time, I don't need to get married," all these guys coming back from service.  I was having a good time.  I was going to track meets and all that kind of stuff.  So he and Bennett met up and--both of them were at Columbia University [New York, New York].  They did work on his master's [degree].  So he had me to come up to the house one day and he told Bennett to come down, he wanted him to meet somebody.  So we met but we didn't hit off good at that time, 'cause he thought he was something and I knew I was something (laughter).  But we met then, and then one day he called me up, and he said, meet me somewhere, it was a bar.  I said, "I'm not going in any bar," and he said "you're not in North Carolina now," and I said, "I don't care where I am, I'm not going in there, you come outside and meet me."  I can't even think of the name of the bar, it was on 116th Street in New York [New York].  And I said, I'm not coming in there you come out and meet me.  I said, I'm not going to walk in any bar.  He said, you're not in North Carolina, and I said, I don't care where I am.  So that's how we met and so right after that we started to date, so we decided we liked each other enough to get married.  So he got a job at [George P.] Phenix [High School] in Hampton [Virginia], and they needed a coach there, so he had finished his master's, so that's where he went first, and the next thing I know we found out about--St. Paul [St. Paul's Polytechnic Institute, Lawrenceville, Virginia] had offered me a job, and I had taken the job but in order to get out of the job, I had to get somebody to fill it because they were going--I guess they might have sued me.  I don't know whether you get sued but they had signed me to a contract, St. Paul, and that was a good ways, so I didn't--and I took the job, I accepted the job because I said, "Well at least I'm in Virginia."
Story_ID: 227994
Speaker 1: And then all of a sudden this job came through at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  So I heard about that, and [HistoryMaker William Maurice] Bennett told me, he said they've got a job opening in exactly what I can do.
Speaker 2: And it was in the physical education department?  And so, well, did you find somebody to take the job at St. Paul [St. Paul's Polytechnic Institute, Lawrenceville, Virginia]?
Speaker 1: I found somebody to take the job.  The girl took the job, she stayed three months. She said she couldn't stand that place at St. Paul.  So I went on down to Hampton.
Speaker 2: And so you really began coordinating a lot of women's athletics.
Speaker 1: Right down there at Hampton.
Speaker 2: Intramural teams--this was in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you meet any resistance from the men there?
Speaker 1: Not at that time, not with that because we weren't a threat to them.  The time it got to be a threat was later on after but during that time women were just--they were not involved.  When Title IX came up and said you could do things, that's when we started to get resistance.
Speaker 2: But that was later?
Speaker 1: That was later.
Speaker 2: Let's talk a little bit about your work at Hampton Institute.  What was it like directing a lot of these women's intramural sports?
Speaker 1: I enjoyed it, had a good time with it.
Speaker 2: Did you find that it was hard (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because see we had been doing some of the same things at A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] so I was aware of it.  It was called Women's Athletic Association [WAA] we had and we had women's sports there at the association.  So I was involved in that from A&T.  So it was just a matter of carrying it over right down there in Hampton.
Speaker 2: And was it hard to find women who wanted to play sports?
Speaker 1: No indeed, the girls were very interested and wanted to play more.  We had sports of the season, like we would do basketball, and then we would do volleyball and we would do gymnastics.  But it was all on a point basis.  The girls were in color teams and you got on the yellow team or the blue team and you would be assigned before you got there on what teams you were going to be on, each team had a color, blue, green and yellow.
Speaker 2: Did people come out to the intramural games--students come out to the intramural games the way they did the men's games--men and women?
Speaker 1: No, these were just girls who would come out mostly, and it would rotate from various schools to various schools.  So like sometimes it would have to be at A&T, and sometimes it would be at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], and sometimes it would be at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], or sometimes at Norfolk State [Virginia State College, Norfolk Polytechnic College branch; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], once a year.
Speaker 2: Did you feel like there was a huge disparity at that time?
Speaker 1: Not at that time because we didn't--nobody bothered you about that then but we just knew we had good times and a lot of girls took part in the sports.
Story_ID: 227995
Speaker 1: In 1953 you came to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, we had just gotten married.
Speaker 1: No, in 1953, when you came to Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Okay, Virginia State.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Your husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] had gotten a coaching job in 1953.
Speaker 2: And then there was an opening for a woman but--they found out that I was available and I found out that they were offering and somebody told me to apply.  So my husband let them know that I was available, and at that time they didn't know whether to--they weren't used to hiring people in the same department.
Speaker 1: Couples, married couples.
Speaker 2: Yes, in the same department and the chairman of the department said he needed me because I had the skills that he wanted and so I came on up and I got the job.  When I came up I was interviewed by the president of the university.  It wasn't a university then, it was Virginia State College and I was interviewed, and he said something to me and I said, "Well I have my own profession," so I said, "if you want me here then you let me know, because I'm my own person."  So he found out that I wasn't going to be--and that he said something about salary and I said, "I can't come for less than what I'm already making, I'm already an assistant professor, so if you want me here I have to come on the same professional basis."  So he realized I had a mind of my own, and I would not be judged by somebody else.  So he offered me the job with more money than I thought I was going to get.  So then I came on down.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things you were doing sports wise at Virginia State in 1953.
Speaker 2: I was officiating and I set up the women's officiating board here.
Speaker 1: What kinds of games were you officiating?
Speaker 2: Basketball, volleyball, anything that came up but it was mostly basketball because women weren't--the high school girls used to do a lot of basketball--that had basketball games but the men were doing all the officiating so I set up the officiating board and started setting up the officials.
Speaker 1: Were they all women?
Speaker 2: All women, no, sometimes I got--later I was recruiting men to officiate the games because some men were officiating games so then we set up the board in my officiating board.  I established the officiating board at Virginia State University, so that we could rate the people.  The girls from Richmond [Virginia] had an officiating board, and mostly they were white, but they came over because I started with them, and they came over, and I became the first president of the Virginia State Association of Health and Physical Education [Virginia Association of Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (VAHPERD)], I was the first black to be the president.
Speaker 1: And when you first got to Virginia State was the women's athletic program--was it as advanced as Hampton's [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] or was it about the same?
Speaker 2: It was about the same because nobody was doing anything outside of the level, and the only thing that women had was the Women's [Athletic] Association [WAA], and that was the same thing that we belonged to when I went to Hampton.  We didn't get started with the division until after Title IX came to be and then everybody started with then Title IX.
Story_ID: 227996
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit just around the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] in terms of women's sports on the collegiate level.  Were you seeing any change by the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Still the same, and actually when you like officiated games, can you kind of tell us what that was like?
Speaker 2: We would do high school games, the high school had games.  So we would go down and officiate the games.  In my classes I would teach, was teaching coaching and officiating and I would have the girls to help out and I would take some of the students with me so they could become officials.
Speaker 1: Did you only officiate women's games?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's all.  The men weren't going to let us, but sometimes we used to travel with the men because they would have women's games too, and the men needed--the men didn't want to officiate the women's games, so that was good money for us.  So I went on and sometimes I would take students with me after they had shown that they could pass the test.
Speaker 1: Were your classes co-ed or were they all women?
Speaker 2: All co-ed--no all women, I didn't teach any men except when I got into sports.  When I came up to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], that's when I started having men in my classes.
Speaker 1: And did that meet any resistance?  Were there ever any men who challenged you?
Speaker 2: No, they knew better.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because I was a rough teacher and they respected my teaching I guess.  But when we came up, we had a female teacher, Mrs. Frasier [ph.], and everybody knew Mrs. Frasier.  Some of the classes--now I didn't teach any of the men sport classes, they had men teaching sport classes.  When I taught the classes they were like co-ed classes, coaching and officiating and stuff like that in methods or teaching.
Speaker 1: And what impact did it or did it not have that your husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] happened to be the head coach of the football team and the track team?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a good coach.
Speaker 1: Were the expectations high for you as a result of that?
Speaker 2: No, because I could hold my own, and they knew it, so they never challenged us and I kept up with the rules and regulations and I attended all the conferences that I could attend.  So I kept up with everything that was going on.  There was never a question, we supported each other very much there was no jealousy there, he supported me and I supported him.
Story_ID: 227997
Speaker 1: Were you feeling like, in the '60s [1960s] that you wanted to see a change in the way women's sports were viewed?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It wasn't--I didn't see any problem but things started coming out.  I said well you know when they started saying something about classes you realized that they were talking about funds that had been coming in, and I said well you've got as many women here paying their athletic fees and yet they are not getting the benefits.  So that was one of the things that got started and so with the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association].  When Title IX came up to be--
Speaker 1: When did Title IX come into play?
Speaker 2: Around the late '50s [1950s] [sic. 1970s] it started in.
Speaker 1: And Title IX basically says that you have to give the same amount of money to women's sports as you did a man's.
Speaker 2: They said put it on an equal basis.
Speaker 1: Were you seeing schools starting to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they started, because if they didn't they were going to lose their funding and then once they started seeing how many women were paying the athletic fees, then I got a lot of resistance from the CIAA, 'cause those black coaches did not want to share anything with the women.
Speaker 1: What kind of resistance did you mean?  Like can you tell us some stories?
Speaker 2: Well, I was appointed by the commissioner of the CIAA to come up with some standards for women in the CIAA, and I got some resistance when a man asked me to set up the guidelines.  I went and got all the guidelines for Title IX, and he was asking me to present them at one of the CIAA meetings, and when I walked in to present it the coaches got up and walked out, and I said, "I will not be subjected to this."  I said, "Either they come in or I will not give my report and I will report it to the commissioner."  So he called them back in, and I told them, I got up and I laid them out.  I said, "You were being very disrespectful to me," and I said, "I have done some research on this, and I had had some of the other women who were working with the WAA [Women's Athletic Association], and they had helped me to form these regulations," and I said, "I object to your treatment."
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was about 1955, I guess or '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: And so when we did we start to see the CIAA opening the doors to women, about what year?
Speaker 2: Around about the same time.  By the time I got through with them they didn't bother anymore 'cause I said you could be reported.  We had gotten some materials on how many women were paying athletic fees and not getting any results so everything opened up about the same time.
Speaker 1: And so what happened at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] around that time?
Speaker 2: Well they already had it, but see I was still at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at that time when this was going on.
Speaker 1: Well in 1955 you were at Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was happening?  Once the CIAA opened its doors to women around mid to late '50s [1950s], what happened at Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Well, we started adding some classes and deciding what we were going to do, and we had a group called--we worked together with the women and we had to deal with some of the men and some of their problems 'cause the chairman of the department and I had a big argument.  He didn't want to share.  I said well you have to, do you want me to report you to the CIAA.
Speaker 1: He didn't want to share what?
Speaker 2: The funds, and I said, "You don't have a choice," and we had our guidelines, and I said we have to do it.  Clark White [ph.] was the chair then, and he tried to report me to the president [Robert Prentiss Daniel], and I said, "You can report all you want, but I'm within my rights," and I said, "I have facts to back it up of how many women we have paying athletic fees and all that, and yet they are not getting any return."
Story_ID: 227998
Speaker 1: So did you see women start--so what happens [after implementation of Title IX]?  So when they started sharing funds then, how did things change on campus?
Speaker 2: Well you couldn't notice really the changes, just that whatever we needed, we got.
Speaker 1: Like uniforms, and--
Speaker 2: Uniforms and practice time in the gym, so there wasn't no problem then.
Speaker 1: Were you starting to see women getting scholarships for sports?
Speaker 2: Yes, it started then.
Speaker 1: What was that like for some of the men when women started coming to school on sports scholarships?
Speaker 2: Half of them didn't know about it probably, they were so intent on their own, but we didn't take anything from them, they just had to add more funds in there for us--for the women.
Speaker 1: Were there attitude changes on campus among the students?  Were you starting to see more students coming out to the games?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they came out.
Speaker 1: And supporting the women?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had that, but they were always supportive even when we were just doing WAA things--the Women's Athletic Association before we became involved in that.  They would come out to our games, 'cause we used to have women's sports, and they would come down every other year.  You would have like the women's sports group coming in with other colleges and so it just sort of came on in.  So the next thing you know I set up a board of women's officials and were training men to call games because they didn't have enough men--we didn't have enough women who were officiators who could call games.  So we had to get a lot of women officials.  So I established the first physical education officiating board at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  So we could train men and women to call games, 'cause a lot of men still call the games.
Speaker 1: Were you seeing more sports being offered to women?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what sports did they add?
Speaker 2: Well they added--volleyball was added.  We had had volleyball but most of the schools weren't doing volleyball at that time, some of them just had basketball, and then there was tennis added, track and field, but basically tennis came out. We had a tennis team and there was baseball--softball rather, the women called theirs softball.
Speaker 1: And so the women's sports were given the same amount of money that the men's sports were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it started, we assumed they were, at least we had enough to work with that we needed, 'cause we weren't overzealous.  We didn't just try to take anything but we looked to see what we would need and then we would request that.  So we needed money for travel and all that so we got it.
Speaker 1: What teams were you coaching?
Speaker 2: I didn't coach any teams then after that, I just set up and I was the head macho person (laughter).  I didn't coach then, 'cause I was working, doing mostly officiating so I didn't coach anything then.
Speaker 1: And did you all travel to different schools to officiate?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And did you see--was turnout the same at some of the other schools?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah turnout was good they came out.  Mostly we were officiating basketball, officiating at the high school level and then started sometimes at the college level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had the first officiating board set up.
Story_ID: 227999
Speaker 1: You started seeing, you know, students coming out supporting the women in games and that kind of thing.  Were women's sports on campus as popular as the men's sports?
Speaker 2: Well it started--well it depended on who you were going to play.  We were playing the same teams that they were playing.  And the women got to do--if the men were going to play the first game, we would play the second or we would play the first game and then they would play the second game so the teams could travel together.  So if we would to play St. Paul [St. Paul's College of Virginia, Lawrenceville, Virginia], the women would come here but sometimes we would play separate.
Speaker 1: And you'd have a pretty packed house with students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that unusual at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] or was that kind of happening at other places as well?
Speaker 2: That was happening just about everywhere else where the women were playing, especially when we would play Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] (laughter) 'cause that's right over there in Richmond [Virginia] you know, competition was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Why do you think there was such strong support for the women's teams?
Speaker 2: Well you had good teams, and the women would just play good games.  We tried to play the same teams that they were playing, and so we just went on like that.
Speaker 1: What was the most popular women's sport?
Speaker 2: Basketball.
Speaker 1: And how did some of the other sports--volleyball and tennis, how did they do?
Speaker 2: Well they did okay, but it didn't have the same thing as the basketball, 'cause all of them loved the basketball.  You see the basketball team, the girls could travel with the men, and then they could play two teams and sometimes some men didn't have other sports, whereas the women were doing track and field too.
Speaker 1: What were some of the changes that you noticed most in women athletes?  You were at Virginia State for almost forty years, so what were some of the changes that you started to notice in the women athletes say like around the '60s [1960s]?  How were they different than athletes of the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Well you just didn't have all these things for the women as you did at that time.  That's why we had what we called women's sports association.  That was a different--that's when we used to just travel for women and do things for women, and then once the women started coming in with the men, then with Title IX making a change.  It just was--
Speaker 1: So you didn't notice any change in the type of athletes you were getting?  Were you starting to get more--
Speaker 2: Well there were more scholarships offered to women then to come in.  Before women weren't getting scholarships, but we saw now women could get scholarships to come play certain sports.  So that was a difference.
Speaker 1: And was it a different type of female student that you were getting?  Were you finding that you were getting more women athletes who played sports in high school and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I didn't notice the difference.  There were just some that just once the coaches would go out and try to recruit, and sometimes we would get some of the same kind of students that you were getting all along.  Some who were interested in sports and some who were not.
Speaker 1: Were you starting to see though that there were more--like you didn't have sports at your high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], were a lot of the students that were coming to Virginia State did they, women, have sports at their high school?
Speaker 2: Most of them did have sports at their high schools, and some of them were recruited from there--from their high schools.
Story_ID: 228000
Speaker 1: In 1977 you became chair of the department of health, physical education and recreation [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]; you were the first woman chair.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well I was--the chairperson retired, and so they needed someone to come in.  So he wanted me to serve as part-time, and I said "No indeed, if you want me to serve, you give me the salary."  So I got the salary, which was a nice boost, and then I took over.  They wanted to kind of just let me serve on an interim basis, and I said, "No indeed, if you want me to do it, I'll serve, but I'm not going to serve on an interim basis, because on the interim basis you don't get the salary.  I said you want me to serve you offer me the job, and I'll take it," 'cause I was already doing the work, so they did.
Speaker 1: How did your responsibilities change as chair of the department?
Speaker 2: Well I had to supervise all the things to make sure that the funds were there and scholarships were offered, and there was equality all the way around, and that everybody followed the guidelines--standards in teaching.
Speaker 1: And were some of the men resentful of your position?
Speaker 2: No, none of them were, they were very supportive and I never had any resistance at all, but they were very helpful and very supportive.
Speaker 1: And how do you think you've changed things as a woman?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I just let them know we could do anything, and the main thing was to make sure you kept the standards up so that your students could pass all the (unclear), and I was very concerned about them passing the national teacher's exam. and so we concentrated on that.  We just made sure that at our meetings, everything was to boost our department.  So then I became chair president of the state association [Virginia State Association of Health and Physical Education; Virginia Association of Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (VAHPERD)], I was the first black to have that opportunity.
Speaker 1: What kinds of responsibilities did that organization have?
Speaker 2: That was the organization that could set the standards for all the schools.
Speaker 1: Public schools?
Speaker 2: All the public schools.  We used to set up--that was state supported, the national association.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of changes were you starting to see for sports for girls in public school?
Speaker 2: They got more scholarships than others, and they were given more opportunities to develop, and they offered more sports, but in some schools you just didn't see it.  Some of them dropped women's sports altogether, and if you didn't have somebody in your school--in your public school who was going to be outspoken then you would lose it.  You had to have some sports, so what we would try to do was is to go to these schools, and say, listen, you're here, you're using tax money.  And you have it, and sometimes they would have to--and we were hoping that our majors who got these jobs would work with it.
Story_ID: 228001
Speaker 1: What kinds of changes were you starting to see in women's sports in general, like in the early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: There were more sports being offered in the schools, and gymnastics.  Now we used to travel to schools and give gymnastic demonstrations when I was teaching, and we would take kids--our majors to the schools to give these demonstrations, and sometimes we would stay around and help with a class or two, and that helped.  Then we got students who wanted to come to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] because they liked gymnastics and some of them would come because they wanted to get some help.  But we tried to recruit good students.
Speaker 1: And around what time do you think--we started hearing a lot of publicity about Title IX probably like in the late '80s [1980s] early '90s [1990s], about how Title IX requirements were forcing a lot of colleges to do away with all sports programs because they just couldn't give women's sports the same amount of funding?
Speaker 2: Well, with us we didn't worry about the funding; we worried about making sure--if you had a good teacher--the teachers were interested in helping out.  So it didn't become a problem with us at that time.
Speaker 1: Well, what are just some--what are your thoughts about some schools where they were saying, look, Title IX is forcing us to probably have to shut down our football program?
Speaker 2: Some of us saw some of that, and we would say, you split it halfway.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's fair though?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on how you were funding your program.
Speaker 1: So what was it like, for example, at Virginia State when you were there, what was the equivalent women's sport to the football program?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't get into the financial part, because I didn't have access to that, and what we did though was put a budget in that we thought was what we needed.
Speaker 1: What sports program do you think got the most funding?  Was it football?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: But that's a sport that women can't play, so how did Title IX benefit them?
Speaker 2: Well the women were really interested more or less in tennis and basketball.  So once they got the funding to do whatever they needed to do in that, they didn't have a problem, and that's what we found out with most of the schools that we were working with.  Similarly it was just making sure we had enough to do our program, 'cause we didn't go into swimming or anything like that.  That was more on a competitive basis with swimming.  The basic thing was with volleyball and basketball.
Speaker 1: And did the women's basketball team get the same amount of funding and support?
Speaker 2: They got what they needed; I guess what they requested as far as I know.  I never heard that they were not getting what they requested.
Speaker 1: And at Virginia State, were the women's games just as packed and just as much of a moneymaker as the men's games were?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, because see sometimes, if people were playing with Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] then we would play the women too.  They would both come, and sometimes it was a separate team, like volleyball was always separate, 'cause the men didn't have volleyball teams.
Speaker 1: Do you think that was unusual that the women's basketball team got just as much support as the men's?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't unusual, 'cause students liked the women's basketball, and especially when we would play Virginia Union and Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Do you think that's still the case today?
Speaker 2: I think it is, but Norfolk has gone in another classification.  They are not in the local CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] anymore.
Speaker 1: So do you think that today, say for example at Virginia State, that women's basketball gets the same amount of funding, the same amount of support--
Speaker 2: I think they get what they request, and they get a game and the gym is packed too.  They come out.
Speaker 1: What do you think Virginia State is doing that other schools aren't, because that's not the case at other schools.  The women's sports don't get as much attention as the men's do.
Speaker 2: I think it depends on what the students request, what you see.  But they like the teams, and if they say you are going to have games at Virginia State and the women are playing, the place is packed also.  I figure it helps with the publicity that we give out and the equality that we try to offer.
Story_ID: 228002
Speaker 1: Do you think that Title IX has been successful?
Speaker 2: In some areas, in some things, it depends on how you deal with it.
Speaker 1: So what areas do you think it has not been successful?
Speaker 2: I don't think they have given as many scholarships to women as they do men, and I'm not too sure of that though because I haven't done any research on it yet.
Speaker 1: And what areas do you think it has been successful?
Speaker 2: With publicity and with--I think the women have been given what they have requested as far as I know.  I can't speak to this for sure but I think what they have requested they have gotten.
Speaker 1: And do you think Title IX has drawn attention to women's sports now?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Story_ID: 228003
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you were most proud of during your tenure at Virginia State [University; Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia]?  What were some of your accomplishments that you were most proud of?
Speaker 2: I was most proud of the teaching aspect.  We had more students going out meeting the standards, and teaching education, 'cause my concern was more or less was the teaching rather than the coaching.  I was more interested in the teaching and making sure that we had guidelines to put out good teachers.
Speaker 1: And were there any things in particular that you were most proud of, like more specifically, projects or things that you worked on?
Speaker 2: I worked on so many projects.  I set up the standards, I set up the guidance counseling program for the school of education at Virginia State where every student had a folder and every student had this--I did this for the school of education and all those other departments started taking (unclear).  When I came in they did not have a standard--when I came to Virginia State, and then I set up the standard of guidance for all teachers, for all schools, all departments, and that meant every student had a folder and every student had--the program was put out with all what the requirements were to graduate and that's still in effect as far as I know.
Story_ID: 228004
Speaker 1: In 1977 you also got your doctorate degree, we didn't talk about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Your Ph.D. [sic. Ed.D]. Why did you decide to do that?
Speaker 2: I got mad with the chairman of the department [of health, physical education and recreation, Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], we had an argument and I said, "You can have this department," I said, "you know what, I don't have to stay here."  We had some guy who came in and we were, we were, we had disagreed on a lot of things, and I didn't think he was competent, and in fact I found out he was not really. I think he may have had the background, but he didn't know how to deal with us, and I said, "Well I don't have to deal with this." And I said--so my husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] said, "I think you need to go on and take a day--take a year off or something," and I said, "Well, I'm going to go to grad school and get my doctorate."  And we had some--there was a guy that was at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] who was a friend of my husband's, and he and my husband used to room together even though segregation was still in effect.  He had talked to--I can't think of this guy's name now who was chairman of the department of health and physical education at Virginia Tech.  He used to say--so my husband called him and he said, "Yeah I need somebody here." And he said, "Tell her to send me her resume and all that and come on up."  So I immediately got tired, and the chairman who was here, we had an argument, and I said "You can have this job," and I went on and applied, and Virginia Tech gave me a stipend, and I got a scholarship from the southern association for education, and I went on up to Virginia Tech.  And came out and got my doctorate and came on out here in two years, and I came on back, and next thing I know I was chairman of the department (laughter).
Story_ID: 228005
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the National Sports Day Association [ph.].
Speaker 2: Well, the National Sports Day Association came about because women did not have--they weren't doing anything for women, and there were a group of colleges that started out.  In fact the college--when I was in A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] the women's sports day was in effect, and this was a way for women to have some activities, and so it was really started out because we didn't have anything for women to do.  So Mrs. Frasier [ph.] used to be here at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and chairman at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--women's chairman at Howard University, I can't think of her name now, she died some years ago got together, and said, let's set up a program for women, and that's how the Women's Sports Day program came up.  All the girls were placed on color teams and when you went to college.
Speaker 1: And was it just for one day?
Speaker 2: No, it was for a weekend.  They would get there on a Friday and they would play sports.  Everybody was on a color team and the girls were placed on color teams from every school.
Speaker 1: A color-coordinated team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could be on the green team, but you were assigned a team at your college.  You had red, blue, green and you were assigned to a color team, so you knew what color team you were going to be on when you get to school, and it rotated each year.
Speaker 1: At different schools?
Speaker 2: At different schools yeah, and the schools that were involved were Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], A&T, Howard University and North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina] and Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], it was called Hampton Institute at that time.  So when I went back to--so when I started working at Hampton, it started when the war [World War II, WWII] started, and we kind of stopped for a while, and then we picked it up again after I got back to Hampton.  So I called all the schools and I said can we get started again and they said yes, 'cause that was the only outlet that women had at that time.
Speaker 1: And what sports did they play during the weekend?
Speaker 2: Okay we had--we would play basketball in the fall and we had volleyball.  We didn't do track and field but we had gymnastics and badminton, tennis.  We had all the sports, we didn't do track and field though but we did the other team sports and tennis.  You would be on a color team, and you would try and win points for your color team, and then the color team would win.  If you were on the blue team everybody on the blue team--and girls--everybody was off--somebody from every school was on the color teams.  So that sometimes a girl from Virginia State might be on the blue team, but everybody was on a different team, and they spread them out.  We had five color teams or six.
Speaker 1: And how was turnout for the event?
Speaker 2: Oh, the kids would come out and root for their color team, and it didn't matter, but you were all--and somebody from every school was on a different team.  So it wasn't like team for team, but it was color teams, and that was the only outlet that women had at that time in the colleges.
Story_ID: 228006
Speaker 1: And in addition to women's sports, you're also very involved in cotillions and etiquette and that kind of thing and it seems like that doesn't necessarily make a good match.  I mean, I don't know, and I think a lot of people may make the assumptions that a lot of times female athletes aren't that involved in cotillions and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well I've been directing the cotillions now for the last twenty five years.  I do the choreography for the dances.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your involvement with the cotillions.
Speaker 2: Well we have a club--the men have a club called the Beaux-Twenty [Petersburg, Virginia], and so the women of the club decided we were going to do the cotillion.  We didn't know it was going to last this long, and we have to kind of limit the students, because so many of them wanted to come in there, but we have been trying to keep it down to eighty, 'cause when you get eighty--forty girls and get eighty--by the time you get to escorts you've got eighty kids out there, and you're trying to teach them how to do the waltz and how to do the routines.
Speaker 1: And what is a cotillion?
Speaker 2: Debutantes, really.
Speaker 1: And what's a debutante?
Speaker 2: Girls who want to be presented to society.  We started out twenty-five years ago.  We had our twenty-sixth anniversary last year--last year we had our twenty-fifth anniversary, and I have a tape I could let you take a look at.
Speaker 1: What's involved with a cotillion?
Speaker 2: Well right now what we do is, we have certain sessions--they have to attend certain things, the girls have to attend, and they have to get their escorts, and they have to go to certain concerts, and they have to go to certain courses--certain activities for manners and all that, and then they have sessions on etiquette.  One of the sponsors gives a tea, and they have to attend those things, and then they have a session where they talk about etiquette and they have to attend the concerts too.  We have a symphony orchestra, so they must attend those activities too.  So we try to give them well-rounded activity, and then we have a minister come in and talk to them on etiquette, and we have somebody from the guidance counselors coming in talking to them about certain etiquette things.
Speaker 1: Do you find that and over the years--twenty-five years you've been doing this, have you found that there are spikes in terms of interests and then, it's up one time and then down?  Are young girls still very much interested--
Speaker 2: No, they are interested, and see when we have it you ought to see the stands.  The kids are coming from their high schools yelling for their girls, and see the girls have to get these guys, and they have to be particular who to get, to get fellows who their escorts are because the escorts--and I could let you take a tape with you if you promise to send it back to me to show how some of the things that we do.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that's important for young women, to learn etiquette and manners and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well we are finding in the colleges is that there are so many things are left out, and some of the girls just don't get these things in school anymore, or they are not listening.  We just find that teaching has so changed a lot, and I'm really upset about some of the courses that the kids are getting now, because I've got some granddaughters in college, and I'm surprised at some of the things that they're--that I'm not seeing the kind of teaching that they used to give us.
Speaker 1: Like what kinds of things are you surprised by?
Speaker 2: Well it seems like it's not as intense.  I don't know maybe I'm just seeing it wrong, maybe I--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you find that there are a lot of athletes--female athletes who are also involved in etiquette and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah they are coming in--the girls who come in want to be debutantes, and they have to sign up, and then they have certain requirements and they must attend certain things that are set up for them.  They've got to go to take the SATs when it's offered, because we have a--the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] sponsor that, and they have a person that comes in to help the kids learn how to take the standard test that they have to pass to get into college, or set the standards.  So, and I belong to that sorority, we watch them do them, so.
Story_ID: 228007
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about women's sports today, like the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] for example?  What did you think about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I like women's sports but I think I don't like the costumes that I see some of them wearing, especially at the Olympics it looked like they were getting ready to go swimming or something.  I didn't think that was sports--all those little shorts, with the butt--like the cheeks are showing, I didn't think that was--I didn't like that.
Speaker 1: But what did you think about the WNBA?  Did you think that that was a good thing?  Did you like the fact that now there was going to be professional sports for women?
Speaker 2: I like that.
Speaker 1: Professional basketball, and how did you feel as a teacher on the collegiate level, you know sometimes you'd see like these male athletes leave and go into that sport professionally, but that was not an option for women?
Speaker 2: Well my thought is that I think if you're going to go into it you ought to be equipped with your degrees and all that.  You need to make sure that you can handle it.
Speaker 1: But how could a woman, like for example you may have a male football player or basketball player where once upon a time the NFL [National Football League] was an option, so was the NBA [National Basketball Association] but that same thing--the equivalent didn't exist for women.  What were your thoughts about that?  Did you that there should be professional level sports for women?
Speaker 2: Well I still think there should be if you are going to do it on an equal basis, and make the guidelines so that they can do it, but I think they ought to have a good background something else other than just playing ball.
Speaker 1: Just women or athletes in general?
Speaker 2: Athletes in general.
Story_ID: 228008
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, I wanted to go back and ask you about something.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1968 you coached the first competitive girls' basketball team at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and what was that like?
Speaker 2: Kind of trying to figure out, 'cause I was not a basketball player per se.
Speaker 1: So how were you able to coach?
Speaker 2: Well I had a young man, one of my students, who thought he knew a lot about basketball, so I said come on out here and help me, and he did.  And he would help me, 'cause not having played the sport, I wasn't that comfortable with it, and so some of the girls knew more about it than I did, but it was my thing to bring in the best I could.  So I got this young man to come in and help me.
Speaker 1: How did you guys do in that game?
Speaker 2: Oh, we won some games and we lost some, but it was a learning experience for me.
Speaker 1: And what was it like for your family to have two coaches in the house?
Speaker 2: Well they didn't mind, because family always came first with us anyway, so we always made sure that they had--they were comfortable.
Speaker 1: Who was the head coach in the house?
Speaker 2: My husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] (laughter) at times, and then sometimes I would be the head coach depending on who had a game, 'cause he was in track, see, and I wasn't doing track.
Speaker 1: No, I mean in your house see, who was the head coach (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Me.  I was always the head coach (laughter).
Story_ID: 228009
Speaker 1: In 1989 you were inducted in the [Virginia] Sports Hall of Fame, was that a special honor for you as a woman?
Speaker 2: Yes it was. I think I was one of the first at Virginia State [University; Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia] to be honored, so.
Speaker 1: And what did it mean to you as a woman?
Speaker 2: Well, first thing was I got voted in at the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] first, before I was voted in I think at Virginia State, and CIAA voted me in after I came back out from Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] and I started with the Women's Athletic Association [WAA] doing some things for women.  I set up certain--I had developed certain basketball coaches and programs and the next thing I know they voted me in.  When they asked me to establish--set up after Title IX came in, they asked me if I would head it, because the coaches--the athletic directors at the schools didn't want to share their monies, and well, the director of the CIAA asked me to bring in the guidelines about it, and I did, and when I brought in the guidelines they were having a CIAA meeting, and the men were there, and when I got ready he called me in to make my report, and they got up and walked out, and I said, "I will not talk to them until they bring them back in," and he brought them back in there and I laid them out.  I said, "You were disrespectful and I would never think you would do this to me."  I said, "I've been knowing all of you for years, and yet you gonna walk out when you're trying to learn something."  I said, "You better stick with me, or we will take all your money from you," 'cause I had already gotten my guidelines, and I knew how much money each school--each woman was paying an athletic fee.  So the other girls at the other schools had also sent me their materials 'cause I told them what I had to do.  And I said that all the women in the women's athletic programs, I said, "Send me, get all the information you can, and send it to me on what your girls pay for athletic fees."
Story_ID: 228010
Speaker 1: And you know, when you look at where women's athletics--how far they've come, when you look at the sports day, when women on the collegiate level would have a weekend when they could play sports, to where we are now where there are actually scholarships offered to women.  What are some of your thoughts about that when you look at how far women have come?
Speaker 2: It was like, well somebody had to start it somewhere, so I said well, it's here now so let's don't worry about what we didn't have.  It was too bad that we didn't have it then but I guess we weren't ready for it maybe.
Speaker 1: And do you think people are ready for it now?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Well what do you think about--we talked briefly about the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association], but you know ticket sales for the WNBA aren't nearly what they are for the NBA [National Basketball Association].
Speaker 2: Well right now, they don't get the same kind of publicity that the NBA gets, but when the women are playing their tournaments, they get a lot of publicity but they have not made it that often.  I don't know what the women get 'cause I don't keep up with it; I'm not at that level.
Speaker 1: Do you think that society has the same respect and support for women's sports as they do men's?
Speaker 2: No, not yet.
Speaker 1: What do you think needs to happen in order for that to happen?
Speaker 2: It's just got to continue with the publicity, and give them equal publicity that they give the men and I think they are getting to that stage, because some of the women's teams, like I look at [University of] Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] and what's that other school in Durham [North Carolina]--Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], and they've got some good teams, and I follow them.  So they just have to give--but now I know with the black schools [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs], I don't see all that publicity when they have their tournaments.  You hardly know when the women are having their basketball tournaments.
Speaker 1: At the black schools?  Do you think that we'll see a change in the amount of media attention and publicity that's given to women's sports at predominantly black schools?
Speaker 2: If they can get the right people to deal with it, and public relations people, I think they could do it.
Speaker 1: Do you think that people sometimes, or the society or the media or general public, don't value African American women's sports the same way they do sports at predominantly white schools?
Speaker 2: Well I think a lot of it has to do because we're not getting the publicity.  You hardly hear about schools--women's basketball, unless you're going to that school.  You don't even know that they have a team hardly.  You never read about Virginia State's [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] women's basketball team except on a local level.  You never read about Norfolk State's [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] basketball team--girls' basketball but you do read about the men.  So we're not getting the publicity that we need to get.
Story_ID: 228011
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: They need to come together and stick together, and have more meetings, get with each other and be concerned about our youth.  I'm concerned about the youth.  I guess I know I'll get a lot of trouble.  I look at BET [Black Entertainment Television] and the girls on there seem like gyrating and the guys gyrating like they are trying to have sex on the screen and I don't like that, and I don't think we're doing ourselves a service with that kind of publicity and then you find other races are doing the same thing.  To me it's degrading to see all this.
Story_ID: 228012
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, you need to know where we came from.  Some people have forgotten, and like I tell my students when I was teaching, you come out here with all these braids and everything looking--when I say my grandson (whispers) so I don't want to say that loud.  He was having all these braids on his head and all these tattoos and stuff, and I said, "I don't like it," but I can't say that in public (laughter).
Story_ID: 228013
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: The support of--community support was one thing that stood out, and I remember when I being baptized, everybody was calling me Katie, and I said to the minister when he got ready to baptize me, we had a thing in the church and it was the first one they had, and he got ready to baptize and he said, "I baptize you Katie," and I said, "My name is Katherine," but he still baptized me as Katie Howard (laughter).  So I lived with that.
Speaker 1: What's been most important to you in your life?
Speaker 2: Family relations, family and the support that I have gotten from my students.  I have gotten some real good support just like this young lady that is helping me now.  She is not a blood relative but you wouldn't know it, and it's only because my husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] and I have always tried to welcome the students who were here.  We've had many students to live with us and some of them come back here.  If you come around here at homecoming sometimes, you would wonder what we had here and just like this year, the students and Julie [ph.] could tell you, because she's one of those people.  She's not a blood relative but you wouldn't know it, but years ago when she graduated from high school, we were attending an affair at her father's house.  He was a guardsman and I guess you've heard of the guardsman, and she was getting ready to come--she had just graduated from high school, and so she wanted to come to college, and her father wanted her to work with him in his nightclub and so my husband said, she can come live with us, it doesn't cost anything, just come live with us.  I had one son then at that time, and so she came and lived with us and I said, it's time for you to at least stay in the dormitory one year.  So she went and stayed in the dormitory and then she became my head majorette, she had never been a majorette.  She became my head majorette and when Dr. [F. Nathaniel] Gatlin was the chairman of the music department [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and they used to invite our band to come up and play for certain games, and one time the band was playing in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a game between New York and somebody's team, I don't what team it was.  When she became my head majorette then, when she led that band in the stadium, her daddy jumped up out of the stands talking about, "That's my daughter," and his wife said she wanted to kick him in his butt (laughter).  He didn't want her to come to school but then all of a sudden he was so happy.  But we've tried to help many people.
Story_ID: 228014
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it special to you to work with the majorettes?
Speaker 2: It was.  I worked with them at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and I worked with them at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] under Dr. [F. Nathaniel] Gatlin.  I've got a picture upstairs showing--I can show you that picture, I can show it to you.  It was taken in 1992 just before I retired; it was the last year that I worked with them.  When we used to go down to--most of the girls were gyrating but we never allowed that in our band, you were a twirler, and you twirled and you were a part of the band, but you were not a dancer.  We didn't have any dancers like that.  We had three girls though that used to be twirlers, they would twirl and they had on silver outfits, but they didn't do any gyrating, Dr. Gatlin would not allow that, everything was strictly precision.  So when I see these girls out there now doing all the things that they're doing, and I get upset and say these are not majorettes.  A majorette to me is one who twirls that baton, and I remember once we were twirling the baton when I was in school [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and the governor [Joseph Melville Broughton] had invited us to participate in a Christmas parade, and the girls that were with me were twins [Inez Scott and Mable Scott], and they are in that big picture you see of us.  We were twirling, and all of a sudden when you pass the reviewing stand you had to salute, and you had to salute by twirling your baton, and flapping it under your shoulder until you passed the reviewing stand, and when we got ready to twirl it seemed like for some reason, I don't know whether it was God who stepped in or not, but my baton dropped and bounced right back in my hand and hers did too.  The twins on the side, the same thing happened and somebody said they thought we did it on purpose, and I said no mine got caught in something, and I said, "Oh Lord," when it did that.  I could see myself scrambling to pick up my baton before the band got on it because we all were just so close to the band members, 'cause each of us had--I had like the middle row was mine and the girls had the outside, that's how we were set up.
Story_ID: 228015
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett?
Speaker 2: I don't know, someone who tried to do the best they could.  I love my family and my husband [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] and I have had good relations and it's interesting that both of us were in the same field.
Speaker 1: Glad you went to that nightclub that night?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but we didn't meet in a nightclub we met at a friend's house.
Speaker 1: Right, no, but I meant just in New York [New York] when he called you.
Story_ID: 228016
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to add, [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Katherine] Bennett that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: No I can't think of anything, unless you got a question you didn't ask, unless the young man has a question he wants to ask.  We [Bennett and her husband, HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] just have loved our jobs and it has been interesting to know that we both have certain similar things, because I never knew who my father was, but it never bothered me because I had other people there.  Like I said, I had this uncle, you couldn't anything to hurt me.
Speaker 1: What was your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Clarence [ph.] and I had an uncle also who died in childbirth right after--I never knew him and his name was Edward [ph.], so they tell me.  But it's been--I have always tried to help people, we've had many students [at Virginia State University; Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia] who come out and if you would come by here at homecoming sometimes you would see that group.  When they came this year they set up--they did everything this year except we furnished the wine and the beer.  They got together and did all of it, 'cause they said you've been doing it for forty-some years which is almost been how long we've been living in this house.  It's been a pleasure, I've enjoyed my life, and I've enjoyed my work, I enjoy teaching so that's what has happened for me and I have tried to treat everybody well and do my share.  If I enjoy something I stay in it and if I get to a place where I don't enjoy it, I get out of it, and I've been a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] for sixty-one years.  I became a Delta when I went to college [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and because the girl that I admired was a Delta, and she was from my hometown [Elizabeth City, North Carolina], and I have one granddaughter who is a Delta, and the other one Nancy [ph.], she wants to be a Delta.  So I'll wait and see what she wants to do and find some money to help her, 'cause they are going up from when I went in the sorority.  Are you a sorority person?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What are you, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I thought so.  My roommate was an AKA, and she didn't have the same--I think she needed a white dress or black when she went down to the--what do you all use now when you go down there for your ceremony?
Speaker 1: Well it's changed so much now, but I wanted to thank you, Mrs. Bennett, for your time, and for sharing your story with us.
Speaker 2: Okay, let me tell you about my roommate though.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: She went AKA, and she didn't have the dress that I wore that she needed, and I didn't have the dress that I needed.  So she had the white dress, I think, and I needed a white dress and she needed a black dress.  So she borrowed my dress, and then I borrowed her white dress, and we went down separate rooms and came back and cried in each other's arms, shoulders.
Story_ID: 228017
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: This is a picture of [HistoryMaker] William [Maurice] Bennett and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Bennett in the late '40s [1940s] at an Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity] ball.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: In Hampton University [Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, this is a picture of William and Katherine Bennett on their wedding day in Portsmouth, Virginia in 1946, and this is a picture of Katherine Bennett in the middle and Inez [Scott] and what was the other--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Mable [Scott].
Speaker 1: Inez and Mable at North Carolina A&T [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and they are the marching majorettes, and this is approximately, well it's in the early '40s [1940s] between 1940 and 1944.
Speaker 2: So Inez and Mable Scott?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And this is a picture of Katherine Bennett on the extreme right and her mother [Annie Howard] and grandmother [Annie Howard].  Your mother is on the left and your grandmother is in the middle.
Speaker 1: Can you say their names?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 1: My grandmother's name is Annie Howard.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Annie Howard was your grandmother--
Speaker 1: My grandmother, and my mother was named at that time Annie Lewis.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay Annie Lewis on the left was her mother, and Annie Howard was the grandmother, and she's in the middle.
Speaker 1: And the baby was Maurice, the oldest grandson--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Oh I didn't see him down there (laughter) Maurice Bennett.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was that one taken Joee [Hoxter]?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Maurice was born in--that was 1952.  And this is a wonderful picture of--I'll leave out the editorial comments okay, this was taken at the sports banquet that the Virginia State Sports Banquet Hall of Fame [Virginia Sports Hall of Fame] in which William Bennett was honored from his many, many years of dedication in track in 2002.  And this is a picture of Katherine and William Bennett at an affair, an unknown affair.
Speaker 1: And about what year?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Around 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a picture of William and Katherine Bennett, approximately 1999.  This is a picture of William and Katherine Bennett, approximately 2001.
Speaker 1: Now are you in that Mrs. Bennett or are those just--
Speaker 2: I'm on the end right there.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah there you are okay.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, Katherine Bennett is the sponsor of the majorettes--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what year was that?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Well it says 1992, but that was taken a long time ago, but this was the alumni weekend in 1992.
Speaker 1: But about what year do you think the photograph was?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  You have to give it to me.  This was taken wait a minute Aunt Kath this was taken--that's Roxie [ph.], this was taken around 19--let's say '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is Katherine Bennett on the extreme right as the sponsor of the majorettes at Virginia State University [Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia] approximately 1958.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay Aunt Kathy, you're going to help me with these.  These are pictures from A&T, and you were at A&T from 1940 to 1944.
Speaker 1: So we'll just say early to mid '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The bottom one is the debating team.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Alright the debating team at North Carolina A&T, with Katherine Bennett as a member of that team.
Speaker 2: And where is Ms. Bennett?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes, on the extreme right.  This is the drama club of North Carolina A&T in the early '40s [1940s], and Katherine Bennett was a member of the drama club.
Speaker 2: Are you right here Ms. Bennett?
Speaker 1: Not the drama club, this is the drama club.
Speaker 2: Okay are you in this one Ms. Bennett?
Speaker 1: Wait a minute I think I am.
Speaker 2: Okay I think this is you.
Speaker 1: Yes, this was the hospitality room.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Hospitality room at North Carolina A&T in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, now we'll go up to the drama club.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a picture of the drama club at North Carolina A&T in the early '40s [1940s], Katherine Bennett is standing in the center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a gala at the university which was North Carolina A&T in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now who is in these Ms. Bennett?  Tell me if you or Mr. Bennett are in any of those?
Speaker 1: None of these.
Speaker 2: What about this one?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Not this one.
Speaker 2: Let me see this one.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Katherine Howard, I see her.  She's right here just on that second from the top.
Speaker 2: So the second from the top.
Speaker 1: The others are just some students.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay that one, that is a scene at North Carolina A&T in the early '40s [1940s] with Katherine Howard, and it looks like your group before they're going out for teacher--when you are going out for your, what do you call it?
Speaker 1: Yeah that's fine Joee, we just really need the date.  Now this one, I know you're in all the majorette ones so we'll just do the majorette ones. This one, this one and that one.
Speaker 2: This one is in 1940 I think.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  They are all in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, North Carolina A&T, Katherine Howard is stepping high in the middle on the majorettes.
Speaker 2: Inez and Mable Scott.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Inez and Mable Scott accompanying her.
Speaker 2: Let's do the other ones.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Katherine Howard, Inez and Mable Scott at rehearsal for majorettes in the early '40s [1940s] at North Carolina A&T.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right, Katherine Howard and Inez and Mable Scott at North Carolina A&T in the early '40s, majorette squad.
Speaker 2: Now in this one I see the pyramids, was that your line, Mrs. Bennett?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  She's at the top.
Speaker 2: This is a line of pyramids--Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] pyramids.  Are you in this group right here?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Katherine Howard at the top of the pyramid in a gymnastics class at North Carolina A&T between 1940 and 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 228018
Speaker 1: That's from Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], 1977.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: You're welcome.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Katherine Howard [HistoryMaker Katherine Bennett] getting her cap and gown from Virginia Tech when she received her Ph.D. in 1977--Ed.D., I do apologize.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Now who is that on the right Aunt Kat?
Speaker 1: I don't know, right now.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay it's Katherine Bennett and [HistoryMaker] William [Maurice] Bennett left and center in New York [New York] at an affair in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is Katherine Howard Bennett in 1977 at her graduation from Virginia Tech getting her Ed.D., doctor of education.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is William Bennett's parents, his mother and stepfather Grace [Welcher] Bennett and Arthur Bennett.
Speaker 1: About what year do you think that was taken, Joee [Hoxter]?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is tough, this was in the late '30s [1930s].  This was taken around 1937, 1938 somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Is that Jerry Benson [ph.] down there?  Okay, then this is William Bennett on the right and Eulon Willis [ph.] on the extreme left.  They were both--William Bennett was the track coach, Eulon Willis was the assistant track coach and this was approximately 1959.  Can I see that up close first?
Speaker 1: You sure can.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is the Olympic team.  This was the Pan Am team and I don't know what year this was.
Speaker 1: In '75 [1975] (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, this is Coach Bennett in the upper left hand corner, 1977 [sic. 1975], when he was the coach of the United States Pan American Games [sic. 1975 Pan American Games, Mexico City, Mexico].  And here is Coach Bennett third from left with the other track officials at the Seventh Pan American Games in 1977 [sic. 1975].  This is William Bennett and he's on the Virginia State--at that time Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I was going back, and this was taken approximately 1939.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay this is William Bennett, approximately 1936 at Virginia State College in Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  When was that taken Aunt Kat?
Speaker 1: That was taken when he was at the [Virginia Sports] Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  No, that's a different outfit.  All right, this is a picture where William Bennett is receiving one of many, many awards that he received in his career over his lifetime.
Speaker 1: So you could just say, what year do you think?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's approximately 2000.  And this is a picture of William Bennett, approximately 1994 when he was at a banquet at Virginia State University.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  This is a picture of Katherine Howard, 1944, her senior year at North Carolina A&T College [Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And why don't we do one of the group, is that good?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Katherine Howard Bennett's class--senior class in 1944 at North Carolina A&T in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Oh yeah, that's my favorite.  This is the one--can you believe I know half that team, that's because my father is on there too.  He and Uncle Pete [HistoryMaker William Maurice Bennett] were like brothers.  Okay, this was taken in, let me think now, I think it was 1939.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, now this is a picture of William Bennett as a coach in the early '60s [1960s].
