Story_ID: 486098
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Denise Gines is observing. And I'd like to start out by stat- having you state your name and spell it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Johnny Williams Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], B-A-R-F-I-E-L-D.
Speaker 1: And when you say Johnny, is that a, a nickname, Johnny? And it's a, John?
Speaker 2: No, my given name is Johnny with a Y (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so it's a Y? Okay, J-O-H-N-N-Y?
Speaker 2: J-O-H-N-N-Y. As I have gotten older, I use John because Johnny sounds childish to me now. But the, that was my given name.
Speaker 1: And I want to have you give us your date of birth and today's date and our location.
Speaker 2: I'm eighty-one years of age. I was born in, on February the 8th, 1927, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And the location we're at right now?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're in Michigan (laughter). I've forgot.
Speaker 1: Livonia.
Speaker 2: Livonia, Michigan (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and I also need to have your--today's date. I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I believe today is June 27th.
Speaker 1: It's the 28th--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The 28th.
Speaker 1: Twenty-eighth.
Speaker 2: June 28th, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the chairman emeritus of The Bartech Group [The Bartech Group, Inc.].
Speaker 1: So you're an entrepreneur.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Businessman.
Story_ID: 486099
Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking five People magazine-ish questions, just short responses. I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: If I had to have one last meal, it would be pinto beans (laughter) with cut up onions, a couple of jalapeno peppers, and cornbread. That would be my favorite food.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I love the spring of the year, and I love the fall. I, I love the spring because I love fishing. And I love the fall because I love to hunt. And so I would have to say those are my two favorite times of the year.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Hadn't thought about that, but I think it would be yellow. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: My wife [Betty Williams Barfield] and I have discovered a beautiful little fishing village in Punta De Mita, Mexico. It's an area that has not yet became spoiled by tourists. It's a fishing village where I can walk one block in the morning to the--where the fisherman bring in the fresh huachinango or, and red snapper and get a red snapper for my breakfast and my dinner and walk back. And that would be my favorite place. I also like to, I like Denmark, and, 'cause I hunt in Denmark, and I like to hunt in Argentina. I, I, I like Serbia and Croatia for traveling. And I just, I just enjoy so many places, it would be hard for me to specify just one.
Speaker 1: Now the place in Mexico, how would you spell that, Punta, Punta?
Speaker 2: P-U-N-T-A, D-E, capital D-E, capital M-I-T-A, Punta De Mita.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I also want to know your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying? It was a poem that I learned, learned when I was seventeen years old and in the [U.S.] Army in New Orleans, Louisiana. I heard a man recite that. And he said, "I'm glad to meet a fellow that's glad that he is black, who is conscious of his color and appreciates the fact; that I'm glad to meet a fellow that's glad that he is white because all of us have a color, and any color is all right. In fact, I'm, I'm glad to meet anyone that's strictly understand that it's their character that makes a person, and color makes no man." I never forgot that. He asked me to remember that the rest of my life, and I have (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who told you that poem, sir?
Speaker 2: It was a man. It was an old soldier that I met in 1945 in, in, in Ne-in, in, in an Army camp called Fort Plauche [sic. Camp Plauche; Camp Harahan] in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Was he black or white? I--
Speaker 2: He was, he was black.
Speaker 1: Was black. I just couldn't tell by the poem. That's a nice poe- had he, had he written that poem or he--
Speaker 2: He had wrote that poem, and he told it to me one night. And he said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], always remember this," and I've never forgotten it.
Story_ID: 486100
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back and you know, talk about your, your family. I want to start with your fa- I'm gonna start on your father's side. And I'd like you to give his name and what you know of his background.
Speaker 2: My father was a remarkable man who died at, at age eighty-four. My father could not read or write. He was born in Meridian, Mississippi. And he married my mother [Lena James Barfield] when he was about eighteen years of age. He was a sharecropper. When he was not working the fields, he sometimes was a, a, a lumberman. He'd cut down logs in the swamps of Alabama. And I cringe when I, when I remember the stories that he told me about rattlesnakes and coppermouths and black--and, and water moccasins that would, would be around and how occasionally someone would be bitten, or he'd walk seven miles one way to the swamps and cut down hardwood trees and hued them into logs that made railroad ties. And then I remember when he left that work and went to a little place in Alabama called Margaret, Alabama, where he became a coal miner. And what I remember about that is it was a time when unionism was rampant. And there was a group trying to unionize the mines, because in those days miners were paid in script. And they bought everything from the company store, and they lived in company houses, and they were poorly paid. And they worked under atrocious conditions. And, and my father was a coal miner there for a few years, until he hopped a freight train one night and came to Pennsylvania where we later came after he got a job there and was able to send for, send us our fare to come there. My father went to Pennsylvania. He--I remember I was about five years old when my father--we were in front yard of our house, and my father hugged my mother and my sister Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree] and I and walked across the field to the railroad track. And when the train came through, he ran along the side of the train and hopped the train and, and rode to Pennsylvania. And the stories that he told us were harrowing. In those days the, the railroad owners hired detectives to keep hoboes, what they called tramps, from riding the trains. And so they, if they would, you know, catch someone riding a train, they would beat them or maybe kill them or maim them. So the, the, the hoboes learned to get off of the train as it approached a town, to walk around the town and catch the train that was going, as it go on to the next town. And my father, by the grace of God, made it to, to Pennsylvania where he got a job at a coal mine there. My uncle and my father's sister had written to him and said, "Edgar [Edgar Barfield], if you can come to Pennsylvania, I can get you a good job," and that was working in the coal mines. So he went north, and he got a job working in the coal mine. And in those days, when we traveled, black people traveled in this country, they always lived with a relative that was established until they could get established. And when my father got established, he sent for my sister, Gladys, and my mother. And we lived with my uncle who had seven children and a wife. And I never forgot how my mother admired him so much because he was a, a kind man. And my mother used to say when Ernest [Ernest Naylor] bought Emma [Emma Barfield Naylor] a dress, he always bought, he always bought me one.
Story_ID: 486101
Speaker 1: And my father [Edgar Barfield] worked there in the coal mines, and it's, it's, it's amazing some of the stories that he told me. He said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], the, the mines are very dangerous, and we learned to survive by being careful." He said, "For example, when we saw the rats running, we ran after the rats because they would have detected a creaking timber, or they would have noticed that there was methane gas, and we always learned to run." He said, "Sometimes they took canaries into the mines to help them detect gas." And he said they mules in the mines that pulled the coal cars. And he said the mules never came out of the mines until they were, unless they were sick. And he (unclear), or had to--they were gonna--they were dead or not able to work. And when they came out of the mines they were blind because they had only been used to the darkness. And he talked about the conditions in the coal mines, the creaking timbers. And I remember him when we later went to Pennsylvania going to, to work in those cold Pennsylvania mornings. I remember sometimes the snow would be two stories high, where it would be blowing against the side of a house. And I can remember my father shoveling his way to the car and, and laying on those cold stones and putting chains on his car so he could go to work and cutting another tire and putting it inside of a tire which they called the boot (laughter), you know. And, and, and he'd go to work in clothes that were soaking wet with sweat from the day before and wear those same clothes home, hanging them befi- behind the coal stove to dry for the next day's work. I remember my mother [Lena James Barfield] having four or five buckets of water on that coal stove in the kitchen heating and a tin tub in the middle of the floor. She would pour the water in the tub, and my father would get into the tub and bathe, and she would scrub his back. And he would get up and put on his clothes and sit at the table for the (laughter) pinto beans and cornbread and salt pork. And I remember sometimes he was so tired he'd fall asleep. And then I remember when John L. Lewis came into town and brought the union [United Mine Workers of America] in. And, and they were able to--coal miners, one of the things they demanded was that coal miners have showers in the mines, where they could take a shower. And then I remember my father coming home, fresh, clean clothes and leaving his--they would leave their clothes in the coal mines. And they had to go, go to, to their job in clean clothes and come home in clean clothes, and that was something. Remember my mother making the soap that he bathed with out of lye and, and the grease. And those, those are things I remember.
Story_ID: 486102
Speaker 1: So let me go back to your father's [Edgar Barfield] growing up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you--did he share any stories with hi- you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Numerous stories, how poor they were, how they would sit in front of the fireplace and roast sweet potatoes and, and, and eat them in the evenings. He told me once about a time that it rained for days and days on end, and all they had to eat was parched corn, field corn that they, that they had gotten for the animals. And, and it just rained and rained, and he said one day my, my, my mother said--my [paternal] grandmother [Mary Clark Barfield] said, "Barfield [John Barfield]," which is what she called her husband, "I don't want any more corn." So my father and two or three of the children loaded the wagon and the mule, and he said the, the wheels sank up to the, the, the hub of the wheel. And they went to town, to Tuscaloosa [Alabama], and they bought food, and flour, and meal, and beans, and rice, and things back. And they came back, and, and my father said and Emma [Emma Barfield Naylor], his sister, got in the kitchen and made biscuits and cornbread and lots of good food, and they ate. And he said it was the best meal that, that, you know, they had ever, that ev- he had ever, he could ever remember having. He told us stories about how they would go to the fields and work and, and how they got only one pair of shoes a year. And they had to wear those shoes all year, so when they went to church on Sundays, they would go barefooted until they got to the church. And they'd wash their feet in the creek and then put on their shoes and go in church in their new shoes. And he talked about, you know, how, how conditions were for black people in the South, how they had to be careful for nothing, just to survive, and how mean they were treated at sometimes, and yeah. In those days, we--before there were radios and televisions, the way we entertained ourselves was by going to each other's houses and sitting down. There'd be a good meal and fried chicken, wonderful fried chicken and beans and other good foods to eat. And, and we would regale each other with stories. And I can still see my father lying on the floor saying, "Charlie [Charlie Barfield]," my uncle who was good at storytelling, "don't say another word; I can't stand it." And he's rolling, and they're rolling around holding their side, and we're all laughing. And that was a wonderful time because families were closer. And we got together, and we knew each other, and it was just a, a wonderful time to, to be a child.
Story_ID: 486103
Speaker 1: Now did he talk at all about his grandparents at all? Do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I, I don't know much about them. My, my father [Edgar Barfield] told me about his grandfather, who they called the African. And he was, he was very mean and always angry. And my father told me that he always carried an axe on his shoulder. Wherever he went he always had an axe and had very little, few words because he was just really bitter. And he remembers one time that, that the man that they worked for had a sow, a female pig, and she had piglets. And they had gotten into his garden, which had been fenced off. And he looked out the window and saw them, and he got his axe, and he went outside and he walked up to the, the hog and struck it across the neck and killed it, and killed every pig, and told the kids to drag them down and throw them in the river. He was just very angry. And I remember--that's, that's maybe the only story that I can remember about my [paternal] grandfather's [John Barfield] father. And I always remember that they called him the African. And I assumed from that, that he had been maybe a slave that, that came to this country from, from Africa. I never knew that, but that--I don't know any reason why they would have called him the African. And all I remember about him was that he was very bitter and very bitter all the time and very angry. So I imagine that was from the mistreatment and from the experiences that he had had.
Story_ID: 486104
Speaker 1: Now, you said your father [Edgar Barfield] was one of seven children. Is that right or said- was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. My father was one of thirteen--
Speaker 1: Thirteen.
Speaker 2: --children.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Your (unclear).
Speaker 2: My grandmother, Mary [Mary Clark Barfield], married when she was thirteen years old and had thirteen children and lived to be a hundred and seven years of age. And so she was a remarkable woman.
Speaker 1: So where, where did you father fit in that birth order in the thirteen? Do you know?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure in what order he was, probably in the middle of it. I, I knew all of my, my father's brothers and sisters, except two. One was named Johnson, Jonsie [Jonsie Barfield], and she had fits, probably epilep- epileptic fits. And she drowned. One day she was fishing and, by herself at the river, and she toppled into the river and drowned. And I, I just remember her funeral. In those days, they had what they called cooling boards (laughter), and they laid their dead out in the, in the cool of the yard, just on a board until they were buried, you know. I remember her, and I, but I didn't--I just remember her vaguely. And there was another sister named Brooksie [sic. Brookie Barfield] that was burned. The house caught on fire, and she burned up. But I got to know the other brothers and sisters very well. And the last brother just died three years ago in Cincinnati, Ohio. His name was Robert [Robert Barfield]. So I knew them; fortunately, I knew all of them. And of course I knew my grandfather [John Barfield] and my grandmother, who later moved to Washington, Pennsylvania, where we lived, so I got to know them very, very well.
Speaker 1: Now the cooling board, was that, was the person dressed up, you know, when they were laid out in the sun for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, they were dressed up and everything and--
Speaker 2: Ready to be buried.
Speaker 1: Okay, but then later put in casket or not?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, a box (laughter), you know--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: A box to be buried. But it was one way to sort of preserve the corpse for a little longer, you know, and then they would be put in a box and, and buried. And some of the songs you used to hear, you know, what the old folks talked about when they lay on their cooling boards. You know, that's when they were dead and going on, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those songs?
Speaker 2: No, I don't (laughter), I don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but they--okay. Now, let's talk about--
Speaker 2: But I, but I do remember hearing people pray, you know, in church, you know, when I'm on my cooling bed, Lord, remember me and things like that. But I remember that expression, you know, from, from those times.
Story_ID: 486105
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Edgar Barfield], and you know, what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: My father was, was maybe one of the most remarkable men I've ever known. And I'll tell you why that was. My mother contracted cancer when she was thirty-two years old. And she suffered with rectal cancer for seven years. And for almost all of that time she was not able--she was bedridden. And I call my father remarkable because he had to be the, the mother and father to my sister Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree] and I. And what I remember about him was how he never complained about how much he had to do. He was very, very special, and he's very old-fashioned. He came up in a time when kids were second class in the home, you know. When the preacher came to the dinner, the kids had to wait 'til the old folks and the preacher ate. Then they got what was left. My father laughed about a friend he knew that was looking around the corner at the, at the old folks eating, and he said, "They're gonna eat it all (laughter)." My father was, my father was, was very different. And he said, "My children will never eat at any second table," so Gladys and I ate with the, with the adults when they were there. We never waited until anyone got through eating. And my father used to--he was very enterprising. He was a coal miner, and he worked in a coal mine until a man where he worked got killed in the coal mines. And my father came out of the coal mines and said, "I'm not gonna work in the coal mines anymore," and he went to work for a store in, in, downtown in, in Washington, Pennsylvania, called McCann's [ph.]. And he started in the kitchen and became the head chef. He learned to cook and became the head chef there. And during the Depression [Great Depression], when a lot of people didn't have food to eat--this was a very high-class restaurant, and every day they gave all of the old food to the employees. And my father brought home all kinds of rolls and croquettes and fancy foods, and he fed all the people in our neighborhood with fancy food. I ate food like the richest people in town when I was a kid during the Depression because my father brought the food home, and, and we shared it with, with our neighbors. He, he later became a, a--worked there for a while. He became a, an, an expert gardener also. And when the war [World War II, WWII] broke out in 1940 he moved to Ypsilanti, Michigan, because they were building the bomber plant [Willow Run, Michigan], the B-24, B-24 bomber [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] here. And a lot of people converged upon this city, and my father was one of them, and he got a job in the plant. And his spare time, he became an expert mason. So he was a, a gourmet cook; he was a mason; he was a gardener; he was a coal miner. He, he, he would, he could--there was nothing he could not do. I used to take my, my three sons [John W. Barfield, Jr., Aaron Barfield and David Barfield], and my father, and our minister, and a cousin, and a friend, and every year we would drive seven or eight hundred miles up into Northern Ontario [Canada]. And we'd rent a private plane, and we'd fly back to the lakes, and we would fish, you know. For a whole week we'd not see anyone at all. And, and, and my father, delighted in, in cooking 'cause he was a professional cook, so he made all of the wonderful meals that we had. And my sons still talk about how innovative he was. He took a newspaper one day and he made a pair of house shoes that lasted a whole week. And they couldn't get over grandpa's house shoes, you know. When I used to hunt with him, he told me how to keep my feet warm. He said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], take your--put your socks on. Put your feet in a plastic bag, and put them into your boots, and your feet will never get cold." He, he was a remarkable man. He, he loved to hunt. He taught me how to hunt when I was twelve years old, and he competed with me to see who was the best shot, who could, who could get the rabbit. And when my--we'd come home after our hunts, and we'd take a bath. And my father would get in bed on one side of my mother, who was ill, and I'd get in bed on the other side, and we would regale her with stories of how we hunted and how Johnny--my dad would say, "Ah, this rabbit--Lena [Lena James Barfield], this rabbit was running so fast he was almost even with the ground, and Johnny took two shots and missed, and I brought him down." Or I'd brag about my shots, and you know, we talked about, about that.
Story_ID: 486106
Speaker 1: He was re- he was a remarkable, remarkable man. And when I later became an entrepreneur and, and we did a few things. One time I owned a factory. I made about 50 million parts every month, screw wash assemblies for Ford [Ford Motor Company], GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], Volkswagen [Volkswagen Group]. And my father [Edgar Barfield] would come down to my factory, and he'd sit there with such a proud look on his face and say to the kids, "I always knew Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.] was gonna do something." (Laughter) He just, he was just, just a per- perfect father; I mean, you know, he, he was just great; he was great. He was--I, I don't know anyone that ever worked any harder than, than my father. And when my fortunes improved--because my father had never had much; our family never, never even owned a home and don't know anyone that had worked harder, but we just never had anything, you know. My mother [Lena James Barfield] died wanting a home. And I was telling someone today how wonderful it would have been, as our, as our fortunes improved, how nice it would have been to have spoiled her and given her so many things that I was able to give to my father but not my mother because she was gone. But he just, he was, he was a joy. He'd, he'd come over to my house early in the morning on a Saturday when we were gonna go hunting, and my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] would cook a nice breakfast, and we'd be eating it. And I remember one morning he came over, and I had bought a very special shotgun from Belgium. And he, he--I'd bought it for him, and he didn't know it. And I said, "Dad, how do you like my new gun?" And he said, "Oh, my God, Johnny, this is--I'm gonna get me one of these. Boy," (gesture) and he did all that, and he handed it back, and I said, "No, daddy, that's yours." He said, "No, it ain't." I said, "Yeah, that's yours," and tears, he just started wiping tears. He loved to fish, and one day he came over and I had a beautiful van. And I said, "Dad, take my car around the block and see what you think of it." And he, "Oh, Johnny, I'm gonna get me one of those," and handed me the keys. And I said, "No, daddy, that's yours." He said, "No, it ain't," and the tears were--he was just a very special man; just he was very special. Even when I worked at the factory, I would get up late. And my ride would come to pick me up, and daddy would have got downstairs and made pancakes. And he had made his own syrup out of sugar, and had bacon, and always had a big hot meal, and it was, it was special. He was a very special man, very special man, and a very kind man. My mother was sick for seven years. And we belonged to a little church, and the people after church would all come to our house and play the piano. And the boys would court their girls, and they would sing songs. It was like having a church, because mother couldn't go to church, so the church came to her. And my father would always have a feast, just a magnificent feast. And the, the people would come in and eat, and he'd just stand back and hold his hands and enjoy the people eating. It was a--we--I had a very special childhood, very sharing childhood. He was a remarkable man.
Story_ID: 486117
Speaker 1: So I was asking about, you know, making syrup out of sugar (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I hadn't--and then you were talking also about sorghum so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you were asking me how to make syrup from sugar. My father [Edgar Barfield], my father, I remember seeing him do this. He'd take couple of cups of sugar, you know, and put it in a, in a, an iron skillet and turn the heat on under it, and it would melt. And the longer that it cooked, you know, it became liquid. And then he would, then he would pour water into this and stir it, constantly stir it, and it would take on the consistency of, of a maple syrup and the color of a maple syrup. And we'd pour this over our pancakes, and, and this is, you know, what we would eat. You know, but things were different then. They would take the cheapest cuts of, of salt pork, 'cause they used to salt their meat, and they'd boil the salt out of it. And they would fry it, and it would be as good as bacon to us, you know. And then, then my [paternal] grandfather [John Barfield] used to make sorghum out of sugarcane. He'd have a horse that would be a mule that would be walking in a circle, and they would put sugarcane inside of--he walked around a wheel, and this would grind the soap. And the juice would run out of it, and they would boil that, and they would make molasses out of that. And that's one of the things that was a delicacy in our family.
Speaker 1: Molasses was sorghum? No.
Speaker 2: Sorghum was, sorghum was like the cane, sugar--they would take sugarcane, and they would squeeze the juice out of it. The, the mule would be walking around a turnstile. And they, they would feed sugar and cane into that, and it would squeeze the juice out and would run out. Then they would cook the juice, and that became molasses syrup, you know, and they would eat that with biscuits and butter, wonderful. It was--and very healthy. You know, sorghum is a--molasses is a very healthy food, you know, for us. But they done all of those things, you know, on the farm.
Speaker 1: You, you don't hear about molasses as much anymore. You know, you see the thick--in the health food store they have it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a very healthy food, full of iron and very, very healthy for, for, for people to eat.
Story_ID: 486118
Speaker 1: Now let's go to your mother. Can you give her name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what you know about her background and you know, growing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's name was, my mother was named Lena James [Lena James Barfield]. And, and I never knew my mother's folks. My mother's--one of my grandfathers was a man named Harvey James, and he, well, Harvey James was, was my mother's father. And I, I only saw him one time. When he was about eighty-five years old, he came to Michigan, Ypsilanti, Michigan, for a family reunion. And someone said that's your grandfather. That's the only time I'd ever seen him, but I heard lots about this man. He was a very, very successful farmer in Alabama. My father [Edgar Barfield] said if people saw a cow that was fat or they saw a dog that was healthy and beautiful, they would say it looked like one of Harvey's cows, or that looks like it might be Harvey's dog. I remember my father saying that he, his wife [Minnie James] cooked for his dogs. She would make cornmeal and make it into bread, and, and she would cook for his dogs. He always had the best hunting dogs and the best--he was someone that people looked up to because he, he, he was--I wouldn't say certainly not wealthy but better off. But he took care of his things, and he, like I said, my father would say people say that, that's a good looking cow; it must belong to Harvey. That's a good looking dog; it must be one of Harvey's dogs. That was the reputation that he had. And he was a beautiful man. I met him when he came to Ypsilanti, and I spent some very fine moments with him. That was the first time and the last time I ever saw him. My mother was raised by another man who married my mother's mother. My mother had one sister that was killed. Her name was Minnie [ph.]. She was killed when a train ran over her. She was picking up coal on the, on the railroad tracks. Coal would fall off of the freight trains as it came through the village, or somebody would get up on a train and throw coal off. And she was picking up coal and didn't hear the train, and the train ran over her and killed her. I remember my mother said they took her home in a sheet. And I remember them saying that and one of her last requests was she wanted a Coca-Cola. But they had to bring her in a sheet to keep her from coming apart, and I remember that. My mother and my father were, as I said, you know, in, in, in Pennsylvania--I mean in Alabama, worked at various jobs. And then when we came to Pennsylvania, shortly after we were there, my father had came to Pennsylvania as a hobo. And, and he had worked all of his life and had not saved up enough money to buy a ticket, so he went as a hobo, caught the train and road and somehow got to Pennsylvania. My mother, we got to Pennsylvania she never worked. She was a housewife, you know, and, and she did day work sometimes for, for people. I remember once my mother worked for a very wealthy white gentleman on the other side of town, and she'd walk to work and work for him. And I was, I was kind of a reckless kid. I loved to swim, and I'd, I'd go swimming. And I'd go to Canonsburg [Pennsylvania] with my friends, and we'd swim in mine shafts. And that was very dangerous because a mine shaft, it was it run a thousand feet deep, you know. And we would just--we, we couldn't swim in the parks with the white kids, so we'd either dam up a creek, or we would go to--and swim in a mine shaft. And, and I'd walk about six miles to this (unclear) and we'd get a big rock and jump in the water and see how deep we could go before we let the rock go and come back up. And, and I remember my mother used to worry about me getting drowned, and, and she said, she said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], don't, don't go swimming." And I said, "No, ma'am," you know. So this day I went swimming, and I came--she came home from work, and she said, "Johnny, have you been swimming?" And I said, "No, ma'am," and she said, "Take off your tennis shoes." And I took them off, and my feet were white and crinkly and clean. She said, "Johnny, you've been swimming." And then she said, "Johnny, do you think it's fair to mother when I go out and I work all day so that you and Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree] can have nice things, and I have to worry all day about whether you're gonna get, be drowned when I come home?" And it, it just broke my heart 'cause, you know, I know how hard she worked. And I said, "Mother, I, I won't ever do--." And I never went swimming again; I never did, 'cause she just had a way of saying things to me, you know. And she said, "Johnny, do you think it's fair to mother for, for me to have to worry all day about whether you're gonna be dead when I come home, drowned when I come home?" And so I just never did that again because I, I didn't want to break her heart. And so I didn't go swimming anymore; you know, I didn't, I didn't go swimming anymore.
Story_ID: 486119
Speaker 1: She was really a dear- she was a remarkable woman. We were raised in a Pentecostal church that was very strict. I was telling the story this morning. And my mother [Lena James Barfield] became ill, and our church taught that you didn't need to have doctors if you trusted in God. Your faith would be sufficient to heal you. Well, a lot of people that espoused and taught that way got a revelation when they got ill (laughter). God suddenly spoke to them and said, "It's okay now." But my mother never went to the doctor. And my sister [Gladys Barfield Tyree] was a manager at the University of Michigan hospital [University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and we just said, "Oh, mother, you got to go to the doctor." "No, I'm gonna trust God. I'd, I'd rather trust God." And she did trust God, and she never went to the doctor, and she just got smaller and smaller and sicker and sicker. And I was telling this story this morning. One day my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] and I, sixty years ago now, we're over to her house, and I just saw her shriveling away, you know. And I got, just got very angry with God, you know, and I said here, you know, this woman has served you all of her life. And she's a wonderful Christian, and she just loves you, and she lives for you, and look at her. And people on the other side of the street were drunk and having a good time, respectful, but just not thinking about God; and here, this woman who was devoted to God. So I couldn't understand that, and I said, "Mother, why is it that good people suffer?" And she tried to explain this to me. And the more she tried to explain it, the angrier I got at God, you know. But I didn't show it. I just, didn't make sense. And my wife and I had just got married, the first year we had gotten married. And we were going home, and we were walking across the street to her, my wife's grandmother's place, where we rented a room upstairs. And in the middle of the street--I could go there now sixty years later and put my feet almost in the spot where this happened. And this is the first and only time that I can irrefutably say that God spoke to me, and, and it was so profound it was him. And it was in a verse in a scripture, and I could hardly wait to get home to see what it was. So I ran upstairs, and I opened the Bible. And I came to this place, and it said this, it said, "Oh, ye of little faith, why reason you among yourselves, for you've brought no bread," [Matthew 16:8].  Now I didn't know what that meant, but I knew it was strange 'cause I never picked up a Bible, and this was sort of a message to me. So I went back to mother, and I said, "Mother, you know, what does this mean?" And my mother was remarkable, you know. Even when she was sick she had a sense of humor. And she said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], what God is trying to tell you is what's going on between him and me is none of your business (laughter)." So I never questioned it anymore because, you know, I was there, you know, upset, as, as I felt I had a right to be, and judging her for her faith. And she was saying that if she chose to trust God even if she died, then that was prerogative, and so she did. And she died, you know. But before she died she sent me to the store to buy a diary. And she wrote in that diary her, her, her instructions for her funeral. She named the minister that she wanted to preach her funeral and apologized to the pastor for not asking her to do that, and--him to do that--the song she wanted to be sung, what she wanted me to have, and what she wanted my sister to have. Everything was programmed out, you know. It was, it was, it was--she was re- a remarkable woman. She was the kind of a person that everybody wanted to be around, and she was the kind of person that people came to for encouragement. Even though she was sick enough to die, they came to her for encouragement, and just beautiful. She'd sit in the sun and embroider beautiful, or crochet, beautiful blankets and I mean bedspreads, and, and tablecloths, and made argyle socks for me. And she was just a remarkable, remarkable woman. I, I, I, I--no one could ever have had better parents than Gladys and I had. They were just perfect parents.
Story_ID: 486120
Speaker 1: Now, did she [Barfield's mother, Lena James Barfield] talk about growing up? Did she share any things of growing up? And do you know that, you know, her, her--you talked about her, about her father [Harvey James] and mother [Minnie James], but did she share any other stories like your father [Edgar Barfield] did?
Speaker 2: No. My mother was very secretive. She didn't--I always had the feeling I shouldn't ask too much (laughter), you know. She never told me a lot about that, and, and I, and I, I was afraid to ask because I didn't know what she didn't want me to know. So I didn't, I didn't ask a lot. But I didn't, I didn't know a lot. I did know her stepfather, Mr. Floyd [ph.], he was a big, beautiful, strong man and with an easy laugh. And, and we all called him Mr. Floyd, and he was a very special man. He's someone I used to hunt and fish with and always enjoyed. My wife [Betty Williams Barfield] is a, is a very beautiful woman, and I, I think maybe the most beautiful woman I have ever seen, honestly. And I'm not saying that from a prejudice standpoint. When she was young she was absolutely, absolutely gorgeous and today is a very beautiful lady, you know. She, she, she's stopped on the street and people say, "You're, you're a good looking lady." And she's just a very nice, but even more beautiful in here (gesture) than there. And my gr- my grandfather, Mr. Floyd, my mother's father, would see us walking on the street, and he'd say, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], that's a good looking girl. I wonder if she would give me a date (laughter)," you know, and knowing he had a, a, a girlfriend. And I'd say, "I don't know, Mr. Floyd. Maybe if you'd let me take Miss Rosie [ph.] out." You know, he'd, "Get out of here, you rascal." And he was just fun. I, I, you know, I had the most loving family, and it just, you know, it taught by example. You know, I can still hear my mother and father say when I leave, "Johnny, when you go out, you don't have to be the one that do something. But if you're with someone that does, you're gonna be blamed just as much as they are, so be careful who you run with," and, "Johnny, always remember that one of the things you never do, is you never bring a reproach on your family, and you never bring a reproach on the church." "Johnny, the best way to have a job and keep a job is to become so important to the people that you work for, they can't do without you." "Johnny, remember that a, a good name is better, it's better to have a good name than it is to be rich." You know, these were principles that we were taught. And you know, these were, these were things that sustained me, and these were things that made me much of what I am today. I, and I've, I've, I've been to the school of hard knocks. I, I quit school at tenth grade, so I didn't have a lot of formal education. But what I learned from my parents, I, I--it, it made--you know, whatever success I've enjoyed, most of the, the formula for that success really came from my, my mother and my father and my family, you know, simple people but honest and hardworking and gave us good directions, and more, more excitingly than that, gave us a good example to follow. And one of the things, when I worked for Kaiser-Frazer [Kaiser-Frazer Corporation], just after my wife--before I got married, I made about seventy-five dollars a week. And I'd give my folks half of that for my staying home. And I remember one day a young man I work with said, "Johnny, how much rent do you pay?" And I said, "Oh, I give my folks, I give my folks forty dollars a week." He said, "Oh, man, they're cheating you. You can get a room down there (laughter)--." He didn't realize that it was out of love. You know, my folks didn't have anything, and I, I had money. And I wanted to say thank you for all the sacrifices that you made, and that's how I looked at it. He looked at it as, you can stay where we stay, and it would cost you only ten dollars a week, you know. So I didn't--that was, that was the way it was with me, you know.
Story_ID: 486121
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents [Lena James Barfield and Edgar Barfield] meet?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they met in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, when, when they were very young, lived in the same place; both came from Meridian, Mississippi, and just met and, and got married, you know.
Speaker 1: Now the one other question, do you know the name Barfield, where it came from? Do you know was there any--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay, just the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't. I know that there are white Barfields, and there are black Barfields (laughter). And I just always sort of thought maybe we were people that, that took our name from them. Certainly, it wasn't Barfield when we--wherever we left from in Africa. I remember laughingly, once I knew that I had an uncle in Cincinnati [Ohio], the one that I told you that died not, not too long ago. And I, I--we were on our way to Cincinnati to look at a new house, a model for a new house. And I looked in the phone book and I saw some Barfields. And I, and I called the first Barfield, and it was like someone from Kentucky. And (laughter), and I said this couldn't be my folks, because my folks don't talk like that. And finally, I did call several Barfields, and I got Bob Barfield [Robert Barfield]. And you know, it was really funny. He said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], where are you at?" And I told him. He said, "Well," he said, "I'm gonna be driving a blue car, and I'll meet you." And that's the best reception, when people are so glad to see you that they meet you on the highway and they're waving their hand, you know, and you get out. And that was, that was my uncle. But I said all that to say that there were white, I know there're white and black Barfields, and as I've traveled, I've seen the names in other places. So I can only assume that, that that's where, you know, the relationship is.
Story_ID: 486122
Speaker 1: I was wondering if you could tell me your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. My childhood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, earliest memory.
Speaker 2: The earliest memory that I have in growing up was, I can go back to when I was about four years old. I can remember 'til back to then. We lived in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. We lived in a, an area, a black area called Calls Quarters [ph.]. We lived in what my folks called a shotgun house, so called be so--because you could stand on the front porch and look through the house; all the doors were in line. I remember the house. It had a front porch and that you walked up four or five steps to get to the porch and into the house. There was a living room, a bedroom, and a kitchen, then the backyard. I remember once a mad dog came through the town twirling and twirling and up on our porch. And my mother [Lena James Barfield] put us on the bed. I was on the bed. The dog twirled through the house, and somehow I got out of the house. I remember that--frothing at the mouth. I remember cutting my hand here (gesture), playing with a girl named Nell Parker [ph.]. We were playing outside, and I was crawling on the fence. And put my hand on a can and, and cut my hand. I remember that, and I still have the scar to this day. We lived in this little house. This place was, it was a dirt street, of course no lights, and the toilet was in the backyard. And I remember when we went there, my Aunt Bessie [ph.] and my Uncle Ross [ph.] took my sister and Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree]--Gladys and I there. We were in a wagon that was pulled by a mule. And I remember my, my Uncle Ross shot a bird. He had a rifle, and he was evidently a good shot, and he shot a bird out of a tree. I remember that. My Aunt Bessie used to drink, and they used to all sort of look down on her for drinking. But she was the grand--she was the, she was the, the person in our family that did things her own way and didn't care too much about anyone said. I remember my father [Edgar Barfield] telling me a story, and, and, and this was a very precious story to me. My father said that when I was about four or five years old I came down with a, with a, a terrible fever. And they had used poultices and medicines that they, they used, and, and nothing they did seemed to help me. And the more they, and they more they tried to help, the, the sicker I became. The fever became more intense. And, and finally, this one day they were all there at the house praying and crying and waiting my father say for my last breath. And he said out of nowhere two white ladies walked up on our porch and walked into the house. And he said they both had on long white dresses. And they walked over to the bed, and they looked at me and said to my mother and father, "You, you have a very sick baby here." And one of the ladies wrote a note and gave it to my father and said, "Run as fast as you can, and take this note to this man." And my father, of course, didn't have a car, so he ran through this area to the white side of town. And he found a man sitting at a table, you know, just inside the house, and he gave the man this note. And my father said the man got up and got a little black bag and filled it with some things and got on his motorcycle and came down to the colored section where we lived. And my father, whenever he told this story laughingly, said, "And Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], I ran and I got there almost the same time he got there (laughter)." And he said, he said the man walked in the house and he looked at me, and he said to my mother and, and grandmother, said, "Go and make me a pot of strong black coffee." And they went into the kitchen and of course made the coffee. And dad said this man sat by my bed all night long. He said in the morning my fever was broken. This man was a doctor. And, and, and I said to my--and my father said, "And in a day or so you were out in the backyard playing like with the other children like nothing had ever happened." And I said, "Well, daddy, who was those two women?" And he said, "Johnny, I don't know." He said nobody had ever seen those two women before or since. They came into the house that day. He said, "We all said they must have been angels that God had sent to deliver you." And you know, now, as I tell you that story, I, I can feel those people here, and it's a strangest feeling. 'Cause I've related that story a lot of times, and every time I tell that, I can feel the presence of these angels. And over the years, the fifty years that I have--we've operated our family, family businesses, I can't tell you how many times they were there when I didn't know how I was gonna make the payroll, or when I wanted a contract, or, or when, when something that came up that was disturbing, or when I had a problem. I always felt the presence. And even how, as I talk to you, I feel the, their presence. And so, God's--dad said I--, "So we said that God had sent these two angels to, to deliver you." And that was a story that I, I remember about my childhood.
Story_ID: 486123
Speaker 1: When I was about, before I was six years old, we moved from Tuscaloosa, Alabama, to a coal mining town called Margaret, Alabama. And I remember the night we went there. We went in a big old car, you know, the old cars, big, great big old cars. And we got there, and we were met at the, someplace, and there was a white gentleman. He was the sheriff, and he had rode a horse, a big red horse. His name was Mr. Carmichael [ph.], I later learned, and he was one of the people that met us. And my father [Edgar Barfield] was there with my Uncle Charlie [Charlie Barfield]. And we lived in this house, and my father worked in the coal mines. He went there to work in the coal mines, and he worked in the coal mines. And I remember the commissary stores where the, the--on the, on the Saturdays the, the miners would sit on the steps and eat sardines, and crackers, and potted meat, and drink Coca-Cola. And you know, they got paid in script. I remember once my sister Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree] and I caught the woods on fire when--a pine woods. It's a wonder we survived. The wood were raging, burning behind us, and we were running out of the woods, playing with matches, never told anybody (laughter) about that, you know. And then, I remember, you know, sitting in church looking out the window. I remember a scene when we were going somewhere, and we saw people being baptized with white sheets on and being baptized in the river. Then I remember when I was--before I was, before I was five, five or six, they, they came--the, the mine owners were gonna give the miners guns because the union made people coming in to start a union, and they didn't want the union people in the town. And it was around that time that my father left and, and came north, and, and we came north. I remember coming through Cincinnati [Ohio] and the train station. I can still smell the hamburgers. I never spelled a hamburger, and it's funny how some smells linger with you. But I can still remember how that hamburger smelled, how good it smelled. And my mother [Lena James Barfield] gave us one. And we got to Pennsylvania, got off the train and, and there we were. That's where I had my childhood from the time I was about six years old 'til I was fifteen.
Story_ID: 486124
Speaker 1: And you know, I'm a coal miner's kid. You know, we did whatever we could. We would find rags and iron to sell, and sometimes we'd go up to the market and we'd shell peas, and we'd get maybe fifty cents for a hamper of peas. And, and then I would sell newspaper, you know, to make my living. And that's when I decided to be--that's when I was first exposed to entrepreneurism. My uncle was--we were laughing about that last night. And he said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], you remember you worked for old Bert Lutton?" Well, Bert Lutton was, was one of the finest white people I had ever met at that time, the finest, 'cause he was kind. And he was a man that had owned a roller coaster in a, a town about eight miles from where we lived. And he had been fairly well off, but a man--a child fell out of the roller coaster, and there were lawsuits. And then another person was killed, and eventually he lost the business. And when I met him, he was a man of maybe sixty years old. And I was delivering pape- newspapers, and I stopped and, and looked in, and there was this man, you know, loading soap into little boxes. And I was fascinated, and I stopped by and asked what was he doing, and, and why are you doing that. And he said he was, he sold soap. So I'd go by every day to watch him and talk to him 'cause he was so friendly to me, you know. And one day I said, "Mr. Lutton, can I help?" And he said, "Do you think you could do this?" And I said, "Yes, sir." So he hired me to come in, and, and Mark [ph.] was telling me last night, "He gave you seventy-five cent a week." And I'd go into his store, and I would make up the little pint boxes. And I'd dip the soap out of a fifty-gallon fiber can and, and put it into that, and I'd seal it and would put it up on the shelf. And then he sold these for fifteen cents a box. It was called Clean-o-lean. And I got--I just loved it. And after a while, I said to Mr. Lutton, "Can I sell these too?" And he said, "Johnny, you think you could?" And I said, "Yes, sir." So I'd load up my bag with Clean-o-lean and my, my newspaper bag, and I'd go out and I'd sell them for fifteen cents a piece. And he said, "And, and, and Johnny, I'll give you a nickel commission." So it was the first time I ever heard the word commission. So I would sell these. I'd knock on doors, and I'd say, "My name is Johnny Barfield, and I'm selling Clean-o-lean. Would you buy one?" And they would say yes, they would buy one. And sometimes they'd say come on in, and then give me a cookie or, or something, you know. And, and so I was learning how to sell. So through Mr. Lutton, who I, I saw, and, and what I think excited me more about him than anything is that he wore a white shirt and a tie. Now it wasn't a, a, a, a clean shirt, and it wasn't a clean tie. It was one of these that you zip down and zip back. And his shirt was dingy, but it was a white shirt, and he made his living by that. He was not a coal miner, which had all I--was all I had seen up until that time. And I said someday I'm gonna be like Mr. Lutton. I'm gonna have, I'm gonna have a business of my own. So this man taught me how to make up his inventory. He told me how to maintain his store. He told me--he showed me how to sell this. He taught everything. And, in a little while, I could run his business as well as he could, and I was only about nine years old. But I could clean the store. I could keep his inventory. I could fill his inventory. I could do all of that, and I could sell it. And so I worked for this man, and that's where I first decided that someday, by the grace of God, I'm gonna be a businessman like Mr. Lutton. I'm not gonna be a coal miner. I'm not gonna go in those dirty coal, coal mines. And I'm gonna have my own business, and I'm gonna wear a shirt and a tie one of these days. And that was the beginning. And from that time on, I, I knew that I had to, to have--run my own business.
Story_ID: 486125
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about--as I said you have done a marvelous job on your own of covering sights. But you know, besides the hamburger. What other smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, one is when we lived in this little town of Margaret, Alabama. It was, it was an interesting--it's just, you wouldn't even call it a village. It was just a little small community of coal miners, black coal miners. And there were white coal miners in other parts, but I remember this little group. I remember the house we lived in. There was a spot on the floor, and someone said someone had been killed there, and I remember that. I remember sounds. We lived near a, what they call a beer garden, where the people used to go. And I remember that the streets, the--you know, in those days people used to sweep their yards, you know, sweep their yards and you know, just sweep the yards like they sweep the floors. And they would just get slick. And I remember there was a tree, not many leaves on it, little old narrow tree. And people walked up the stairs to go to his little room, and I can still hear the song that they used to sing. I was telling my uncle last night as we talked, "Lost in the fog like a ship in the sea. I'm going crazy. What can it be? Lost in the fog like a ship in the sea without you." And I remember, you know, them playing that and people singing that there. I remember one night that my father [Edgar Barfield] just go- took us to a--it was like an Easter--it was at the movie house. It was like an Easter show, and I remember that it was about the devil. And he was dressed in a long red suit with a tail, and he was running up and down the aisle as part of the act, you know, holding his tail and flipping his tail (unclear) up and, and down the aisle. And I remember going to the show seeing that. I told you about the red horse and Mr. Carmichael [ph.], the sheriff who came to see us. Those, those are things I remember, the sounds and the, the sights, watching the, the people at the commissary. We had to walk up, I bet you there were fifteen or twenty steps, long steps, that we'd walk up to get into the store. And, and in the store people would buy what they needed. My folks got paid by script. They, the mines, even had their own money. They didn't give you greenbacks. They just gave you scripts, you know, that people spent in their store. I remember that. Those were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: --the sounds.
Speaker 1: Any more smells?
Speaker 2: No. But I can imagine the, the--my folks, the, the smell of chicken, chicken cooking in the kitchen, you know. Once I, I worked with my Uncle Bob [Robert Barfield], who died just three years now ago. He was, he worked in a dairy, and he would take me up to work with him. And one of the things, that the cows would be lined up when they were milked, and I could, I can smell the cows. They would be lined up when they would be milked, and they would defecate into a trench. And we would take a shovel and push it out. And there was an opening, and we'd push it out to the side of the house, and there was a big manure pile there. I can remember that. I remember him giving me a piece of money for helping him. And the next morning I couldn't find it, and I looked everywhere for it. I think it was a half a dollar or a silver dollar, and I couldn't find it, and it troubled me for years. And, and I--so this time I went to Cincinnati [Ohio] to see this model house, and, and we were sitting there talking to him. And now I'm grown, and I realize what happened. He took it back (laughter). So, we were sitting there, and I said, "Uncle Bob, do you remember when you used to work at Baker's Dairy, and you used to take me up there to shovel that manure out, and I was only maybe five years old?" He said, "Boy, do you remember that?" And I said, "Yeah, and," and I said, "and that one day," I said, "I worked, and you gave me a silver dollar." And he said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], yes. You remember that too?" And I said, "Yeah," and then I said, "And I--the next day I couldn't find it." And I said, "And I wondered over the years if you took it back (laughter)." And he busted out and started laughing. He said he had taken it back. He didn't know that I would remember. So we laughed about that. And I said, I said I wondered for years where that went, you know, 'cause I could never find it. I, I can smell--I can probably remember my mother [Lena James Barfield] used to make salmon croquettes when she, we lived in, in there. And I can remember that, and of course you can remember the smell of food. I remember once my sister, Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree], my mother made some salmon croquettes, and they were just beautiful, and they were crusty around the ends. And my sister, Gladys, went into the kitchen before it was time to eat, and she took every one of them and she nibbled the (laughter), the crispiness off around them and put them back on the table. And my mother came in and said, "Gladys, did you do this?" And of course Gladys said she didn't, and my mother knew she did. So I remember she made her eat every one, said, "You sit right there, Gladys, and eat every one of those." And Gladys sat there (laughter), and she ate every- a whole can of salmon, you know. But I don't think she ever did that anymore. But, no, those are probably the only sounds I can--smells and sounds that I can really to--know.
Story_ID: 486126
Speaker 1: In Margaret [Alabama], do you remember some of the neighbors? And do you remember also names about who was in charge of the, the, the ma- you know, the coal, coal mine?
Speaker 2: I don't remember who was in charge of the coal mines, but the sheriff was named Mr. Carmichael [ph.]. He was the man that rode the horse. His, his job was to keep order in the town. He--I remember what happened to him too, was he broke up a fight between two black fellows in a movie theater, and, and he, he pushed one of the men or something. But this man struck him, you know, slapped him, and, and you didn't do that. In the South, you know, you didn't strike a white person. And my father [Edgar Barfield] told the story, this man became very ill. He just, he died. He, he--my father said he died from the embarrassment, because he was no longer feared in the neighborhood. You know, he, he, he had realized that people realized that he, he had been struck and beaten by this man, and, and he, he lost his authority. And my father said he, he just, he eventually died. And my father always said he, he died from embarrassment. But the man that did that, they, but they secreted him out of town because he would have been killed for, for an offense like that. I, I remember that. And I told you about my sister [Gladys Barfield Tyree] and I set the woods on fire playing with matches. That could have, and that could have been the end of us. But we never told anyone, and we were very small. We, we were smart enough not to let anyone know we had done that. Those, those were the things that I remember.
Speaker 1: Now you were what ages, from what year do you, do you remember what years you might have lived in Margaret?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was between five and six years old. We lived there only for a short period of time. When my father left Margaret for Pennsylvania and after he--when my father left Margaret for Pennsylvania, we left Margaret after him and lived with my Uncle Johnny [John Barfield] in Birmingham, Alabama, until--'cause he--we wouldn't--he wouldn't have left us there. And, and we lived there until my father earned enough money to send for us. And when he sent for us we left from there, and when I got to Pennsylvania I was about six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's like 1937, right?
Speaker 2: No. I was born in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or '30 [1930].
Speaker 2: --nineteen twenty-seven [1927], so it'd have been--
Speaker 1: Twe- I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --nineteen--
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty--
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-three [1933] or 1934.
Speaker 1: Right. And now are you named after that Uncle Johnny?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was named after my Uncle Johnny, who was a Pullman porter-cook. He worked on a train called the Santa Fe [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway]. And he would be gone for days at a time, you know, as a Pullman porter. That was the job that African American men really sought after because they got to travel, and it was a very fine job. And that's what my Uncle Johnny did.
Speaker 1: But your--it was another one of your uncles that was already in, in Pennsylvania, right, that you, you spoke of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --his name was Ernest Naylor, and he was an uncle by marriage. He married my father's sister, Emma [Emma Barfield Naylor], who was the oldest girl. And they had gone to Pennsylvania, and it was, that's how we got there eventually, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. And this was Wash- what, what part? Was it Washington [Pennsylvania] then?
Speaker 2: It was twent- it was about twenty-two miles south of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was so named because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Washington.
Speaker 2: --of Washington, D.C., so we called this place little Washington. And that's, that's where I lived from the time that I was about six 'til the time I was about fifteen years old.
Story_ID: 486127
Speaker 1: So what was the community like there [Washington, Pennsylvania]? You know, who were your neighbors? What, you know--
Speaker 2: Our neighbors were, was, it was--I think I told you earlier that we belonged to a little Sanctified church, Pentecostal church. And, and we all lived in this little community. Many of the church members lived in this community. We lived at this time with my uncle and Emma, and my Uncle Ernest [Ernest Naylor] and, and my Aunt Emma Naylor [Emma Barfield Naylor]. And the, the people directly next to us was a family by the name of Patrick [ph.]. I remember that because they had a, a big German shepherd dog named Pal that was very mean. And we would have to go to the back of the house just to get to the other houses, and this dog would be laying there. And when we would get in front of him, he, he was so strong and vicious that he would almost turn this doghouse over trying to bite us, you know. And, and, and the way--we'd run past, and sometimes we teased him, you know, and that made him just more mean, you know. Thirty-five years later, I was talking to my cousin, who, who lived there. And he said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], remember Pal, the old dog?" And I said, "Yeah." He said, "Do you remember one day we went out, and he was laying on his side all swollen up?" And I said, "Yeah (laughter)." And he started laughing, and he said, "You know what happened to him?" I said, "No." He said, "I gave--I took a biscuit, and I put some red poison on it, and I threw it to him." And, and, and, and (laughter), and he never told anyone all his life, because if he had told anyone he would have been severely whipped, you know. And he said, "I just got sick of him trying to bite me (laughter)," you know. And here it was twenty-five years later he was telling me this, and we sat down and we laughed about this dog, and we related how mean he was and so forth. And sister Patrick came out, and I can remember her saying, "Poor Pal, poor Pal (laughter)." So we had a big laugh about that, you know. But we lived in this little community and all close together. My father [Edgar Barfield] by now was a chef at McCann's restaurant [McCann and Company]. And it was during the Depression [Great Depression], and he used to bring home wonderful foods that couldn't be sold the day before and he would share it with the community. And that's what life was like, yeah.
Speaker 1: So your father only worked in the mill a couple of years. Is, is that it, when he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the coal mines?
Speaker 1: In the coal mine. I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked in the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) that--
Speaker 2: --coal mines for two or three years up north, and he worked a year or so before he came up north in the South. But when this man was killed in this coal mine, my father decided that I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna stay in the mines any longer, and he came out of the mines. Fortunately, he never got sick. He never had consumption or what we commonly called black lung. But I saw many people that did have that disease, and they got it from--it was a form of silicosis from breathing in the dirt and the dust in the--and catching colds in the winters. And it was not uncommon to see people spitting blood and you know, and, and being very sick. That, that was what that disease did to you. My father never--was not in the mines long enough to be affected by that.
Story_ID: 486128
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you, earlier when you were talking about the mines and you know, growing up in Margaret [Alabama], you mentioned a man named John Lewis, who had come. You know, and you were talking about, specifically about, you know, how people then, you know, miners could, you know, take a shower and things like that. Who was John?
Speaker 2: His name was John L. Lewis. And your not knowing him tells me how young you are (laughter). He was the, he was--you know Roth- Walter Reuther, Reuther? Well, he was, he was a, a union mine- man that we know in this generation. But John L. Lewis was, was, he was a man that was very concerned about the conditions under which coal miners worked. And his mission in life was to improve the condition, working conditions for these people, because management in those days took advantage in terms of forcing people to work in, under unsafe conditions, and it was, it was very bad on the health, and, and, and many lives were lost. So John L. Lewis came, and he unionized the, the miners. And one of the first things that they did was, instead of miners having to come and go from work in, in, in clothes that were soaked with, with what, with sweat, they, they put showers in the mines so that people could take a bath. And, and then they could put their clothes in, in baskets and pull them up and lock them up. And at the end of the day, they could take a bath and put on clean clothes and come home. Before that time, people used to come home in those harsh winters wet with sweat, come in and there would be a tub in the middle of the kitchen floor. The women would have heated water on the coal stove. And the men would sit down and bathe, and the women would scrub their backs, and they would put on their night clothes. And I, I've seen my father [Edgar Barfield] many times fall asleep, so tired he couldn't eat his dinner. A, another thing that they--another practice that they did was, the men were paid by the number of tons of coal that they loaded. And they would put the coals in coal cars, which were pulled by mules out of the mines. And the, the mine, the coal was inspected by the mine supervisors, and the mine supervisors were employees of the management. And if the mine supervisors did not tag a, a load of coal, or if they tagged a load of coal and said that we're not gonna pay you for this load of coal 'cause it has too much slate in it, the people wouldn't get paid for that load of coal. And I remember my father saying one time he only made eight, about eighteen cent an hour, you know, working in the coal mines. So John L. Lewis came and began to organize the, the mine workers, and then the miners had more favorable conditions under which to work. So that's who he was. He, he was a great, he was a great person in this time.
Speaker 1: Now, what--so your father, you said that he left the mine because something, you said something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a man was killed--
Speaker 1: Killed.
Speaker 2: --in the mine that he worked in. And my father was afraid to work in the mines anymore. He says, "I'm not gonna work in these mines anymore."
Speaker 1: Now was your uncle by marriage working in the mines too at that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, he worked--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the mines all of his life--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --Ernest [Ernest Naylor].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of his life.
Speaker 1: So, you are--then, so by the time that your father is, is, you know, takes the, the job as a, as a chef, he--you're then about what, eight, nine, nine years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have been about nine years old. And it would have been about the time I started to deliver newspapers and I, about the time I met Bert Lutton I told you about. And that's, that's when that was about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 486129
Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit, just in terms of Pentecostal church.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the minister? Do you remember also what other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --church, black churches were in town?
Speaker 2: The minister's name was Sister Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And her husband name was Brother Johnson [ph.]. And she was a little short, fat woman, you know, very authoritative, you know. She was, felt she was totally in the will of God, and, and it really was in God's place in that time, and very strict but a very nice lady. She lived in a big white house on the corner of Highland Avenue [Washington, Pennsylvania] and some other street. And her husband--she built the church, you know, and, and she ran the church. You know, it was her church. And, and her husband had a little store that was built onto the, the side of the church. And he looked like a rat (laughter), I mean really thought he looked like a rat. He, he wore his mustache stuck out like this, and he was a, he was cripple, and he kind of walloped. And he had a reputation for fondling little girls, so we were not allowed in the store, you know. And, and it was, it was really kind of funny. I remember my mother [Lena James Barfield] saying to Gladys [Gladys Barfield Tyree], "Don't ever go into that store." And to me, "Don't ever go into that store." So we didn't go into his store because he really had a very terrible reputation. And, and they lived right there on the corner. He was very, very mean. He sold penny candy and popsicles and stuff like that, but he had a, had a very bad name. And, and so, here she was a lady of God, and he was a (laughter), a terrible man. But she was a, a very fine lady. I'm not demeaning her in any way like that at all, just very, very strict and, and so forth. When she got ill, you know, I think she did resort to medical attention. But in those days, you know, she got a revelation, so it was (laughter), it was finally okay, you know. But that was, that was--and I, and I remember there was a, a lady named Sister Randolph [ph.]. She was a, a single old lady that lived there. She looked like an Indian [Native American]. She was very devout, and she lived there. And I remember two old people. They must have been in their eighty- or long eighties or nineties. Their names were--names escape me right now, but they used to--I used to go to their house, and they use to smoke--they had asthma, and they would smoke a cigarette for the asthma. I remember that, and I remember how, what a strange smell it was. They lived in this great big old house, and we'd go up there 'cause they, you know--there was one white brother that went to the church. His name was Brother Raymond [ph.], and he'd beat a tambourine. And I remember he used to spit on his thumb and, and run his thumb across the skin of the tambourine and make the timbres go, you know. And I remember him, and, and I remember a lady named Sister Birch [ph.] that had a number of children. She was an interesting lady. Her husband Neff- was named Nelson [ph.], and he--she was a very, a religious woman, but he was totally out of the church. You know, he'd done his own thing, and he was, he was a very interesting man. And I always remembered them having more than anyone else. I mean, you know, they all worked in the coal mines, but they always had more. They had a better house; they had, everything was better, and she was a very interesting lady, a beautiful lady. She had a lot of children. And she would cook a cake and stick a toothpick, I remember, in once, one in the cake. And whoever got the tooth--slice with the toothpick got another slice of cake. They just done things differently, very successful coal mining family. I remember my father [Edgar Barfield] telling me how, what a marksman he was. He would put three shells between his fingers and take gun, and he could load--he could shoot and cock it and load a shell and shoot it. And you know, he was--it was a very interesting--they had a son named H.D. [ph.], and he became the funeral director in our town. That was an interesting family, you know.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that, that was a, it was a very interesting family. My cousin, my cousin, who is still living and, and very ill, joined the church very early, and he became a minister, and lived a very strict life. And you know and, and that, that was a little community that we lived, very close community, you know.
Story_ID: 486130
Speaker 1: Now were there other churches? Was there a Baptist church or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was a Baptist church [Nazareth Baptist Church, Washington, Pennsylvania] on Lincoln Street that was the largest black church in town.
Speaker 1: What was the name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But it was--I think the minister was named Reverend Rutger [ph.]. And then down the street there was a store on the corner, belonged to a very heavyset man. His name was Hog Allen [ph.]. I remember him very, very well because one day my cousin, Clarence [ph.], who, who had spells--he, he would just start running; I don't know what his problem was--we were playing on the campus of W and- Washington and Jefferson College [Washington, Pennsylvania]. And a, a ten dollar bill just, he found a ten dollar bill. And this was more money than we had ever imagined that any of us would ever have, 'cause a coal miner only made thirteen or fourteen, fifteen dollars a week, and here we were with ten dollars, and a bunch of kids. So we decided that we would, we would split this up and not tell the, the old folks 'cause we knew they'd take it from us. So we went to--they--I wanted to, to divide it, but I was little, and so they didn't trust me, you know. So they went and got my cousin, who was not very bright, because he, he, he became the--he, he was selected because he was bigger. I say he wasn't bright because they should have made me vice chairman because (laughter) I, I wanted to divide the money. But anyway, he got it, and we went up to this store, Hog Allen's store, and, and we, we, we got--he got pennies and quarters and nickels. And, and he brought us all back in a secret place, and he sit us in a circle, and, and he sit there, and he gave Clarence a dime, and someone else a nickel, and someone else five pennies, and someone else this. And every time he would make this dispensation, he would say now, "Clarence found this, so I'm giving him more, okay, you guys?" And they'd say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah." And so when he got through dividing up the money, you know, here, you know, he had all of the big money, and all of us had, you know, had, you know, chicken feed. So I just got up, and they said, "Where are you going, Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.]?" I said, "I don't want any." And they said, "Why? Come on Johnny; it's yours." I said, "No, I don't want it." So I started back home. "Come on, Johnny, you can have--I'll give you some more." And I said, "I don't want it." So I went home and told my uncle. I said, "You know, Clarence found ten dollars." And my uncle got very excited, and he said, "You go tell them to bring it here, and they'd better not spend a penny." So I went and told them. So they brought the, the money, and they gave it to Uncle Ernest [Ernest Naylor], and he took it all. And we didn't, none of us had anything. And the moral of that is if I couldn't have, even at that age, if I couldn't have my market share, I didn't want anything. So I, I, I, I just felt that he was chosen not because he was smarter, but because he was bigger. And I said he should have made me vice chair because I, I would have been happy (laughter) 'cause we had--I'd insist on the same amount he had. But he was greedy, and so as a result, we, none of us had anything. So he stood up on the sideline, and he put his fist all over his face, which meant when I get you I'm gonna beat you. And I told my uncle, and he said, "If he touches you, you just tell me." And that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 486131
Speaker 1: Now what tradition was there around the church, the Pentecostal church? What do you think of? You, you, did you--did your mother [Lena James Barfield] speak in tongues?
Speaker 2: Yes, they spoke in tongues, and they tarried for the Holy Spirit. And an indication of your salvation was that you spoke in tongues. Yeah, they did that. They fasted, sometimes three and four days without food during which time they would pray for guidance and, and for whatever else they, they, you know, they, they wanted God to do for them. Yeah, it was a very strict church, you know, very strict. And that's the church that I was raised under. And when I got to be about sixteen years old, you can imagine I had, had so much church rammed down my neck that I said boy, I'm not gonna go to church. And so I didn't go to church, you know, for a long time. And after, you know, my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] and were married, then we joined a church.
Story_ID: 486132
Speaker 1: I want to ask, so where did you go to elementary school and then to--was there a junior high, or you went from elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I went to elementary school in Washington, Pennsylvania. And, and then when we moved to Michigan when I was about fifteen years old, I went to Ypsilanti High School [Ypsilanti Community High School, Ypsilanti, Michigan], and I went to the tenth grade, and then I quit school. I, in my generation, there were no opportunities for African American kids, and there was no real incentive to go to school. About all we could aspire to was a job at the generator plant for Ford [Ford Motor Company] or General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], and we could do that after we were in the, we were six- seventeen years old. So I quit school and, and went to work in the factories. And after I worked there for about two or three months, I realized that was not something I wanted to do. So--
Speaker 1: Now what prompted the move, you, your, your parents' [Lena James Barfield and Edgar Barfield] move to, to Ypsilanti [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: The bomber plant [Willow Run, Michigan]. In 1940, those years they were building B-24 bombers [Consolidated B-24 Liberator], and there was just an awful lot of work in Ypsilanti. And, and everyone from all over the country confer- converged upon that location to work in, in, in that, in the, in the factories, building homes, and building airplanes, and doing other things; that's why we were there.
Speaker 1: Now how did Ypsilanti differ from, from Washington? What (unclear), what was it--
Speaker 2: A, a very interesting comment and question. When I moved to Ypsilanti in 1940 it was a hotbed of Africa American entrepreneurialism. There was, everything that we wanted to do was in our community, and that was because we were not welcome in the other community. We developed our own infrastructure and our own--and, and everything; we had everything that you could imagine. We had a supermarket; we had a pharmacy; we had entertainment; we had fine restaurants; we had clothing stores. Everything was there because we were not welcome in other places. And the mom- moment almost that segregation was struck down in this country, those businesses began to die, 'cause there was no longer a need for them. And so s- the end of segregation was a blessing and a curse, because we lost a lot of the entrepreneurialism that we would have grown and developed, and there would, there would have been more black businesses in this country. As a result of that, black businesses really didn't start in this country until the middle '70s [1970s]. And as I think back about it now, we were pioneers in that movement. And we were one of the first black businesses in this country. And the way that happened was I had went to work--I don't know that I'm getting ahead of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --my story.
Speaker 1: Let's just hold on. I just wanna ask--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One minute on the tape.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. In Ypsilanti, how, where was the black community located?
Speaker 2: It was on the south side of Ypsilanti, south of Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Was it ever across the tracks? No.
Speaker 2: No. The tracks, our tracks was Michigan Avenue, and the blacks lived on the south side of Michigan Avenue. And I remember once when a white family moved too close to Michigan Avenue there was almost a riot in that town, 'cause it was just known that we didn't live on the other side of town, you know.
Story_ID: 486133
Speaker 1: You know, at age fifteen, what are you like at that point? What are you thinking, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was different. I was honestly different. I-- then, then the kids that I was raised with, I always, remember I had met this Mr. Lutton [Bert Lutton] when I was eight. And somewhere festering in my breaths- in my breast, was this desire to be like him, to have my own business. So even from them, from the time that--we, we mentioned Mr. Allen [ph.] earlier in his place in Georgia. He, he, he realizes that once these children taste, they're exposed to another kind of life, they'll never be the same. And because what it does is it creates a discontent. And I always wanted to be like this man. I always knew someday--I had learned that I didn't want to be a coal miner certainly, and I'd learned I didn't want to work in a factory. And I had learned from this man that someday I wanted to have my own business. So, I was different. You know, guys used to laugh at me. And I'd dream; I was a dreamer, always a dreamer, always talking about what I wanted to do. And they'd say, "Ah, you ain't gonna do nothing," you know. And I was talking to a minister. He were--we were children together. And (laughter) he--I would always be talking about what I wanted to do. It's, it's hard. "Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], you, you," he started to say, "Barfield, you, you, you ain't gonna do shit. You ain't gonna do shit," (laughter) he'd say. But, no, I, but I know what I wanted. I wanted a better life. And, and I used to work for some people that were well off on the other side of town, white people. And I saw beautiful homes, and beautiful lawns, and beautiful cars, and beautiful clothes, and I always said, like I was when my cousin found the ten dollars, why, why, why can't I have, why can't I have some of these wonderful things to enjoy? And so I was never satisfied with just the life that we had in Ypsilanti [Michigan]. I always wanted this, to live as well as anyone lived. So I was different. And I was always a dreamer. And I always secretly thought that I was gonna someday, by the grace of God, have a, have a, have a better life. I expected that. I, I did--I was not willing to settle for the life, as I saw it in the community, where I lived.
Story_ID: 486134
Speaker 1: You worked, and then you enlisted in the [U.S.] Army--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know. Is, was, were you draft--you enlisted. You weren't draft (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was only seventeen when--
Speaker 1: You were too young. They--
Speaker 2: --I, when I went to the Army.
Speaker 1: Did--you didn't have to lie about--did they take people--I thought it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I, I, I went to the Army when I was seventeen. And I, I, I had had rheumatic fever as a child, and I really didn't have to go then. But my friends were leaving, and I thought it would be exciting. So I went down to the draft board, and I said, "If someone don't want to go, can I go in their place?" You know, and, and that was, that was (laughter) easy to find someone that didn't want to go. But I wanted to go, so I went when I was seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: And you, you did your tour of Europe. You were in Germany and France.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I went to Le Havre, France, when I was just, I turned eighteen I think on board the ship going to Le Havre, France. And I was there until I was located in Nuremberg, Germany. And I went to Nuremberg, Germany, you know, and I stayed there for a while, and then I went to Munich [Germany], where I became a military policeman. And I was dis- discharged from Munich in 1947. But you know, the war [World War II, WWII] was over in 1945, so it was, it was safe, more safe than it had been. But it was a wonderful opportunity for children, for young people like me to get into trouble because there was a convergence of, of young soldiers and old soldiers, young soldiers like me that didn't know anything and old soldiers that knew everything. And that was a, a wonderful time to pick up bad habits and so forth. Fortunately, because of the upbringing that, that I had had at my home, I, I didn't gravitate toward that. I didn't want to smoke reefers. And, and in those days, the government gave every soldier two-fifths of whiskey and a carton of cigarettes every month, if you can imagine. Well, I didn't smoke, and I didn't drink. And I would trade my stuff for candy bars and--but, the upbringing that I had gotten as a child, you know, it kept me from getting involved in some of the things that, that I could have gotten involved in.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you learn anything from your time in the service you think? Or, I mean, you had wanted to go.
Speaker 2: Oh, there were many lessons to be learned, that one was that this was not a fair country to all of its citizens. We were certainly second-class citizens. I couldn't sleep in the same barracks as white soldiers. I couldn't eat in the same mess halls as white soldiers. I knew there was a difference, and that was one of the things that we experienced. There were, there were, there were other things that, that, that, that we experienced that, you know, let us know that we were second-class citizens. But I never liked the Army, 'cause I don't, I never liked for people to tell me what to do. I didn't want someone telling me when to go bed, when to get up, when to take a bath, when to scrub the floors. I didn't that regimentation. So I was in the Army just short of two years, and I was discharged, and that was, that was fine for me.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't what you had originally thought when you went off with your, your buddies, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was, I just thought it was an adventure. And after I got into the Army and this, I saw what it was. It was more regimentation than anything. I was very disenchanted. I was a good soldier but only for as long as I needed to be. And I was very glad to get out of the service.
Story_ID: 486135
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet--how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met my wife, Betty [Betty Williams Barfield], when she was twelve, and I was sixteen. And I thought she had to be the most absolute gorgeous woman I'd ever seen. She really was. She's, she's still very beautiful. And, and I, I saw this girl, and, and I (laughter), my life was never the same. So I, I, you know, I began to, to seek her favors. And I joined the football team just so I could put on a uniform. I didn't like football. I didn't like the idea of being roughed up and tackled. But I thought it was kind of appealing to, to her. She laughs about it now. She said, "You put on a uniform, and all I ever see you do is stand up against the pole (laughter)," you know. But anyway, and I met her when she was twelve. My wife was raised by her mother [Helen Williams]. Her father deserted her and her sister [Doris Williams] and two brothers [John Williams and Lawrence Williams] when they were very, very small. And had it not been for their grandparents, they may not have done well at all, but she had very supporting grandparents and a very fine mother. And she raised her, the girls, and, and, and, and the boys, and they became outstanding people. And, but I met her and when she was twelve. We got married when she was seventeen, and we've been married sixty years. And I, and I love the ground she walks on. She's a tremendous woman. We have six wonderful children and eleven grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. And it's just been a, you know, it's been a, a great, it's been a great relationship, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when you--so you--do you remember where you guys got, where did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in Ypsilanti, Michigan. We got married in the living room of her house, which was about ten by eleven [feet], and it was, it was full of people. And we had our reception in the backyard under the clothesline. We, our, our honeymoon was one day at the Ebony Hotel in Detroit [Michigan]. And I was so ashamed to eat. I had never eaten in a restaurant. I was so ashamed that I didn't, I couldn't eat my dinner. And she said, "Aren't you hungry?" And I said, "I'm not hungry." But the truth was I had never been to a restaurant, and I was very--I, I, I, I was ashamed, you know. But that's, that's how it was, you know.
Story_ID: 486136
Speaker 1: Your mother [Lena James Barfield], when she passes away, was that traumatic for you, or was it--you were, you know, sort of young newlyweds and had been expecting maybe her, her death (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Expecting it but very tragic because, and, and, and maybe even relieved. It was a blessing for my mother to die because I saw her suffer day in and day out. And it was, it was not sad that she died, but it was sad that, that she, that she died. And that was the night I decided to become a Christian, because I said you know, I, I believe my mother will certainly be in heaven, and I, I, I want to see her again. So that was what convinced me to join the church. But yeah, that, that was, that was my motive for joining the church, joining the church. And, and she was, she was just so special. And it's like when you see someone that they die and you say it's a blessing that they're gone because they're not, no longer gonna suffer and everything like--but you, you never get over the loss of those, those special people in your life. And so I still remember her. But strange enough, I never had a desire to go to her grave. And I used to criticize myself for that. And then I came to the conclusion that if you--if in your--if in the life of a person, you're everything to them that you could possibly be, there's no need for any other closure. So I never, I never went, you know, to her grave or, or, or anything like that.
Story_ID: 486137
Speaker 1: Now you, you and Betty [Betty Williams Barfield], you're young newlyweds, and describe how you got into cleaning homes. Like, where are you working at that point?
Speaker 2: I got out the [U.S.] Army in 1947. There was no work. And I saw an ad at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], or I heard that University of Michigan was hiring people to wash walls. And I went over and applied for job, and I was hired. And we went to work on State Street in Angell Hall [James Burrill Angell Hall, Ann Arbor, Michigan] washing walls, and we were paid ten cent a square foot. And we, we'd wash the walls, and they would measure, you know, then we got paid. At the end of the summer, they took the better workers, which I was one, and they offered us a job as a custodian. And I went to work in nineteen- in 1949 at the University of Michigan Chemistry Building [Chemistry and Dow Willard H. Laboratory, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. And I worked there for six years as a janitor on the second floor of that building. And how I started the business, did you ask?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I worked there for six years, and I, I kept the second floor clean. And to supplement my income, I would go to the professors and say, "I have a car cleaning business. Would you be interested in having me wash and polish your car over the weekend?" And they would say yes. And I would pick their car up on Friday and take it back the next day. And so I started that to supplement my income. In those days, we used a wax called Simoniz, and it was a funny wax because it would--you could only wax a space about this big. And you had to polish it before it dried, because if it dried you couldn't get it off. So I could only do one car a day in the morning or one car in the evening, and I got about fifteen dollars a car. So I had to find a way to do more cars. So I had this ingenious idea of, of taking cornstarch and sprinkling it on a car. So I would, would wax a large--wax the whole car, and then I'd sprinkle powdered cornstarch on it, and then I would buff it. And that cornstarch would cut the friction. It would make the rags s- slide. It would cut the friction, but it also gave the cars a higher gloss, a noticeably higher gloss. So now I could wash and polish cars all day long because I didn't have to worry about the problem of the, of the Simoniz being buffed while it was, while it was dry--while it was still wet. So, I not only I could now do instead of one car, I could do five or six cars. So instead of making fifteen dollars a week now with the one car, I could six and maybe make ninety dollars a day. And then I also went back to my customers when I found out that the gloss was higher, and I said, "I now have two kinds of finishes. I have the regular finish and the cornstarch finish." And they'd say, "What's the difference?" And I said, "The cornstarch finish is much brighter, and it lasts longer." "And so give me that. How much is it?" And I'd say, "It's five dollars more." So also, now I can make as much as ninety dollars a day, but I also got another five dollars for every car I did. So I could make a hundred dollars a day, where before I was making only fifteen dollars. So I learned through that experience that if you can think when you're in business, if you can find a way to, to, to maximize your earnings, as I did with the cornstarch finish, you know, and, and so that's, that's what I did. And so I washed cars, my wife and I both together. We washed and polished cars. We'd clean homes. We did work in the homes of these professors and businesspeople. We furnished other people because we did a good job. And after a while, we had so much work, we didn't know what to do with it. And finally, I discovered that I was making more money on my part-time work than I was working on my full-time work as a janitor, and I said you know what? If I quit this job, I can work, make even more. So I left my job at the university after six years, and I started what we call J and B Cleaning Company [Barfield Cleaning Company], which was Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.] and Betty. And we started J and B Cleaning Company, and we started cleaning houses. And one day I noticed something that was very unusual. There were a lot of houses being built in those days by contractors, and they were cleaning the houses themselves, they were. And they were having the houses cleaned by carpenters and plumbers and people who didn't know what they were doing, and they were scratching the windows and making a mess. So I went to the contractors and said let me clean your house. I can do it better than you can, and I can do it cheaper than you can, and, and that your customers will be happier. And so that was our house cleaning business. And before long, I had the largest house cleaning business in the State of Michigan. And I left the University of Michigan and started my own business, and that was in 1954.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--I want to ask a couple of question. I wanna go back to that cornstarch though.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you know that was gonna work?
Speaker 2: I didn't know it was gonna work. I just thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you happen upon cornstarch?
Speaker 2: I, I just thought that the reason that the rag does not slide is because it's too much friction. I mean you can't buff it 'cause it, it's too much friction. So I thought I, I could have used talcum powder and done the same thing probably, any powder. But I just sprinkled the cornstarch on it, and it made the rag slide over the, the wax. And it, and it was a, it, you know, I could have used any powder that wouldn't scratch the car, anything that broke the friction. And that's, I just figured it out myself.
Story_ID: 486138
Speaker 1: Now in this, in this early part, now do you have any children at this point in, in the years that we're talking about here now? I mean how many of your--
Speaker 2: We had two children. You know, we--
Speaker 1: Names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When, well, when my wife [Betty Williams Barfield], when my wife and I were married, she was seventeen, and she still had one more year of high school. And after she finished high school, we had our first child. His name was Jon [Jon Barfield], and our second was Angela [Angela Barfield]. And we bought our first house. We bought our first house. We paid five hundred dollars for it. It was a house that a man had bought on a tax sale. His name was Will Nemke [William Nemke]. He was a very successful contractor, and he bought houses on tax sales. And he held them, fixed them up, and sold them. And it was a little tar paper shack on a dirt road in Ypsilanti [Michigan] on 2nd Avenue. And I saw this house one day. And I was kind of a visionary. I could see things for what they could become. I mean a lot of people see things that they can't see a diamond in the rough. I could always, I always sort of could see that. And I saw this little black tar paper shack and that he had paid five hundred dollars for. And a lady had gotten sick and had had to go to the hospital, and they had just locked the house, so it was all furnished. So I went to him and found--I saw the shack, and I want to him. It had been sitting there for many years, and weeds were this high. And I said, "Mr. Nemke, I'd like to buy that from you." And he said, "It's not for sale." And so the next week I'd go back, "Mr. Nemke, I don't want to bother you, but I could sure use that house." "Well, I told you, boy, it's not for sale." So next week and I said, "Mr. Nemke, listen to me. You have so much, and I don't have anything. Please, sell me the house." And he said, "Well, I--it's, it's not for sale. It's not for sale." And, and I'd be back next week, and you know, I said, "Mr. Nemke, I just got married. I've gotta have a house." And he said, "Okay," and he sold me the house. And I said, "How much do you want for it?" And he said, "You give me what I paid for it." So I gave him five hundred dollars, and he gave me the house. And it's really funny: we became good friends after that. He'd see me on the streets, and he'd wag his fingers, "You little bugger, you wouldn't let me say no, would you?" And he'd hug me. And, and that's was our first house. And when I took my wife there, she said, "I'm not gonna live in that shack." And I said, "Well, it's as nice as what you live in now, and that's all we can afford." So we moved in, and we put on overalls, and we rebuilt the house. And our friends said, "Your house was the first one we ever saw with a two by fours went this way (gesture)," 'cause we got scraps, and we built the house. And we lived there seven years, and we sold it seven years later for ten thousand five hundred dollars, and then we went on from there.
Story_ID: 486139
Speaker 1: Now she [Barfield's wife, Betty Williams Barfield] was working with you in the business [J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company], right, alongside you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was her role? Were you getting the accounts and doing the work, and was she doing the books, or were you--
Speaker 2: Yes and--
Speaker 1: --both doing--
Speaker 2: --and she was doing the books. And sometimes I would--she would go if, and we'd have her mother [Helen Williams] watch the children, and she'd help me if I got behind. And we would clean houses together and work together. She was every step of the way we worked together. And she always took care of the books and the babies. And you know, I never had to worry about our children or what was going on at home. And, and you know, it was an exciting time because we were building this business together, and we were looking--and our whole goal in life was to, to make, to make, to, to make enough money to invest it so we would have a thousand dollars a month. And that was all we needed to be happy in our little house. But the more we were exposed to nicer things, and, and the more I learned about business and, and, and, and the more our business grew, because our work was impeccably done. We were--our name was, oh, has always been synonymous with quality. In fact, when I retired from the company, my employees asked, "Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], what advice can you give us to make sure that this company continues as it has?" And I said, "I want you to always remem- remember that this company was, was built on three foundations; quality of our services, being honest and fair to our employees and customers, and being good and caring corporate citizens. And if you continue to build on those foundations, this company will always grow." And that's what we always did, and so our companies have grown over the years. But she was very integ- very instrumental, and everything that we built, we built, you know, together.
Story_ID: 486140
Speaker 1: Now in those early years, so you're mainly taking care of people's homes--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wh- how did you graduate to office--how did the office gradu- you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I started cleaning houses, and, and, and our work was impeccable. It really was, and word got around. And before long, we had the largest house cleaning, you know, when I worked the university for the, for the people. Then I got into new, new, new home construction.
Speaker 1: Now it's one--I want to go, I want to go back to that though a little bit because were you having--at that point, were you doing most of the cleaning, or when did you start growing your staff [of J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yes. In those days, I did everything, you know, and Betty [Barfield's wife, Betty Williams Barfield] would help me occasionally, and sometimes a friend would help me. I'd clean houses all by myself or--
Speaker 1: So what was the, what was your day like?
Speaker 2: I'd get up as early as I could in the morning, depending on how much work I had. And I would probab- after I left the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I'd probably clean two, maybe two and half or three houses a day by myself. I'd scrape the paint off of the windows; I'd wash the windows; I'd clean the toilets; I'd clean the floors. And when I left, the people could move into their house. It was clean and disinfected, and the house was finished and locked up. When they moved in the house was sparkling, you know. Before that, when they moved in the house that had been cleaned by people that didn't know how to clean, the windows were scratched; the, they had used the toilets; they had not cleaned the toilets; they had ate inside when it was raining, sitting against the wall. They didn't get a new house. They got a house that someone else had lived in for the last six months that it was being built. When I went in it and when left, that house was absolutely perfect because I knew how to clean. And then the people that were cleaning didn't know how, and didn't want to learn, and weren't interested in that kind of work 'cause it was considered to be menial work. And so I got to cleaning houses, and pretty soon I had the largest--one of the largest new house cleaning businesses in the state. And then one day a banker called me. His name was Michelson Cooley [ph.]. And he said, "Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], I understand you do good work." And I said, "Yes, sir, I do." And he said, "How would you like to clean my bank [Ypsilanti Savings Bank, Ypsilanti, Michigan]?" And I said, "I'd love to." And that was the first contract, and that was fifty years ago. And I went into contract cleaning, and we parlayed that into a company that was exciting enough to attract the attention of five national and international corporations in fourteen years. And we sold it in 1969 to International Telephone and Telegraph [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation].
Story_ID: 486141
Speaker 1: How did you transition from you doing the work to having other people do that work? And at what point was that the case? Was, that was the case before you, I mean when you--that was also the case before you start working for the bank [Ypsilanti Savings Bank, Ypsilanti, Michigan] or doing contract work. Was that, or was that not?
Speaker 2: How did I transition--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at, you know--
Speaker 1: --different doing things yourself and you know, then having other people--
Speaker 2: I did, I worked, I worked for many years myself with my crew, because I realized how important it was to setting an example for the people that work for you. And when I was there, I could, I could make more money because the--I'd found that people work the way the boss works. If the boss is, is, is out fishing, the employees are gonna be out fishing. So, I would set the pace, and, and we would work. We would clean newly-built houses first. Then we got into commercial cleaning, and then we got into what they call contract cleaning.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me the difference between those three?
Speaker 2: Yes. In the house cleaning, new house cleaning, we would go in and, and, and, and clean new houses and new commercial buildings and get them ready for the tenants. They had just been finished. They were dirty. They, the people could move in, and we'd go in and clean those units for the tenants. And then in contract cleaning, it's where you have a crew of people every night that goes into a large building, and they clean that building so the next morning when the staff comes into work, everything is clean. The toilets have been cleaned; the ashtrays are emptied; the desks are dusted; the carpets are vacuumed. And we did that, that's called contract cleaning. And that's, that's when I pretty much transition out of doing the work myself [for J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company]. But I would do it if I went to a job, and it had not done--been done to my standards. Then I would, I would do that. But that's when I transitioned out, and that's when I began to build a staff. And then I would hire people. I would get a contract, and I'd hire so many people to maintain that property, you know. And that would be their responsibility, and then mine became more of a supervisor and, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now did, this, this is still in the '50s [1950s] though, right, that you're doing, you know, when you transition from and go to a contract?
Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or (unclear) well, yeah.
Story_ID: 486142
Speaker 1: Were there some important lessons in that, you know, early period about what employees to--you know, how were you sourcing your, you know, staff, who to go after, you know? Any, any lessons along those lines, 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. First of all, you have to have a contract. And the secret to making money in that business and in--now is you, you had to know what kind of a contract to go after. For example, I, I did not do medical facilities because the quality of cleaning was, was much higher, and the, the things that you did were much different. And so I didn't do that. I went after jobs that were not so difficult to do. And so once you find out the kind of work that you want to do, and there's an art to that, then the, the second thing is deciding how to apportion that work. And I was very methodical about that. I thought I had a, an architect to draw a floor plan. If there wasn't a floor plan, I'd have them to draw a floor plan and reduce that floor plan to a, a sheet of paper, a legal size sheet of paper and, and without lines. And then I would, I would write schedules. I would decide how many square feet I wanted people to clean every night, which would determine how many people that I would need for that job. And I'd find out where the janitor closet--I'd color-code it to show what times certain things were to be done. It was very, very systematic. I developed my own timetables that told people how long it would take to do certain aspects of a job. And I also made very sure that, that the, the people are lo- their homes are located near to the positions where they worked. I made sure that they worked the hours that were convenient for them, you know. And I was very, very careful. I made sure that the people that they worked with were compatible with them. All of that goes in, that goes into the chemistry of, of, of a successful job. I also made a point to hire people that were referred to me by people that worked for me, you know. And so these were little tricks that I learned about how to keep a staff in place and, and how to, to keep the quality up. I said--had a simple philosophy, if you buy the--if you hire the best people that you can find, pay them twice as much as your competitors are paying their people, train them to be twice as efficient as your people are, you can eliminate employee turnover; you can e- increase quality; and you, you can--your name can become synonymous with quality. And this is what we did [at J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company]. You see, it doesn't cost anymore to pay a person twice as much as a competitor pays his person if they're twice as efficient. You're paying them the same thing. And so this is what we learned, little tricks like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, so were your employees all black--
Speaker 2: No my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at that time?
Speaker 2: --employees were, were not all black, maybe more black than white. But no, we never, we just, we just looked for good, good employees. And so we, our employees were white and black. You know, so never--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was never a black company, you know.
Story_ID: 486143
Speaker 1: So tell me about your, you know, your, you, you, we were talking about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I mean I mentioned the NAACP. Was it--you know, I'm just trying to understand Ypsilanti [Michigan] at that period of time in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: What it was like? Well, it was, it was a very prejudiced town. And as I mentioned, that's why we had everything on the south side of town where we lived if we need it because we weren't welcome. We weren't welcome in churches or restaurants or hotels. So the only way you could enjoy those things, you have to have those things yourself. So, we had everything that we needed on the south side of town. We had wonderful restaurants, and, and a large, wonderful supermarket, and a first-class pharmacy, and clothing stores. It was amazing. And you know what's even more amazing, when you go there now, all you see is a couple of barbershops and a couple of fledging stores. So all of that spirit died, you know, when, when there was no need for them anymore, you know. And so then, what you got was service industries, which is what we, what we are, what we do, you know.
Story_ID: 486144
Speaker 1: So is your growth--I mean are you pretty much nose to the grindstone during these years, really building things, you and Betty [Barfield's wife, Betty Williams Barfield]?
Speaker 2: When we were building?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were building. So your, I mean you don't have really a lot of time to do much of anything else except work and you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, your--how are the--is it apparent to people who know you that you're accumulating a lot of money at this point? I mean, I'm just (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, we, I don't know that we were accumulating a lot of money at that point either. But we always were, we always were humble and quiet. And you know, you know, we never, we never were people that were, tried to attract a lot of attention. We always have tried to be everything that we can be to the community and to our children and, and, and so forth without raising a lot of--you know, once when I was chairman of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], we asked a very prominent person to come here and give a speech one year. And this lady called me back and said, "Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], I just want you to know that I travel first class, and there's a lady that comes with me. She can travel coach, but for me, I travel first class." And we didn't ask her to come because I always was taught to defer, you know, and I, I do now. I, and I don't want to be a person that is, is out there waving a flag and talking about how rich or how successful I am because there's always somebody that's better off. And so I just sort of--a man told me once, he said--this is the strangest lecture I ever had. This man was standing at the urinal. He was a man named Walter Neers [ph.], when I was at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], as a janitor. He walked into the bathroom when I was mopping, and he walked up and he steps up on a little platform to the urinal. And he turns around and he says, "Johnny, remember that you always be careful with the--remember the little man on your way up because he's the first one you see when you start back down." And I thought, I was about the littlest man in the chemistry building [Chemistry and Dow Willard H. Laboratory, Ann Arbor, Michigan], mopping a toilet, and he was an executive there. And I thought, first of all, this is the strangest subject I had, and, and this podium was the most unusual I've ever heard anyone speak from (laughter), you know. But, but I, I never--I always, I like to defer, and I like to be quiet and, and make a--not make a noise because it, it, it never serves you well.
Story_ID: 486145
Speaker 1: How did the, you get acquired? I mean that, you know, it's, it seemed like, okay, all of you are doing this, and then you're acquired by like a major company. How does that, how is that--
Speaker 2: Well, I put myself in a position to be seen, first by, by building a, a company that was as good as, as most in the country. I did things differently. I wrote a book called the 'Barfield Method of Building Maintenance' [John W. Barfield, Sr.]. I developed my own time standards. And when I went to the first meeting of the National Association of Building Service Contractors [Building Service Contractors Association International], a group of contractors that were trying to start an association, I recognized that there were people there that had been in business generations, sometimes two and three generations. And so I went there with the un- idea that there's a lot you can teach me, not that I can teach you something. And I think that, that, that meth- that message gained many friends for Betty [Barfield's wife, Betty Williams Barfield] and I. And, and so, before the convention was over, they asked me if I'd consider serving on the--as a member of the board of directors, the first board of directors, which I served on for five years. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is of the nat--
Speaker 2: The National Association of Building Service Contractors. It was an association that was formed in 1965 for cleaning company, the cleaning company. And I said, "I, I'm honored that you've asked me to serve, but then I don't know very much about this, and you'll have to teach me." And they were willing to do that because I was humble. But it was not long before I realized that I knew about, more about cleaning than most of them, because most of them had, had gained their companies because, some of them because their folks had started their companies, and they had learned it from an administrative and from an executive standpoint, where I had learned mine from the floor up. So I knew as much and most of, of them, if not more. And so I, that's how I started. And, and it, it was not long before, before the meeting was over, they asked me to serve, which I served for five years, and I learned a lot during that time. And I noticed that in, in 1968, 1967, this industry was so profitable that a lot of companies wanted, bigger companies wanted to buy it. So in 1968, I was approached by International Telephone [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation], Consolidated Foods [Consolidated Foods Corporation; Sara Lee Corporation], the Mackie corporation [ph.], the Senators corporation [ph.], and others. And, and we sold our business [Barfield Cleaning Company] to International Telephone and Telegraph for thirteen times earnings. And I was--we were well-off enough so that if we were not foolish with our newfound fortune, we were set for life, and that was when I was thirty-nine years old.
Story_ID: 486146
Speaker 1: What are you learning f- first when you joined this, you know, association when they asked you? And who, who are the, who are like the leading members of this group that--and really, by the time you got in, the group had only been formed two years, I think you said you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I was one of the founders of it.
Speaker 1: You were one of the founders of the group?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, so--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to the first convention of that association when they were interested in starting their own association. I was one of the founding members of the association.
Speaker 1: I see. I didn't understand that, okay. So they--so who is, who is, who is part of this group, and, and is it primarily--I'm just trying to understand the cleaning industry at that point too, 'cause you--the thing that you're not talking about and, and this sort of--is that you said you know, Ypsilanti [Michigan] was, you know, very racially divided, you know, dah, dah, dah. And then you're primarily dealing, you know--I mean you have, you know a mixed, mixed group of employees. You don't talk about any problems with getting contracts. I mean you, you don't--unless you're just glossing over that.
Speaker 2: No, it was not hard to get the contracts when I first went into business because cleaning was considered to be very menial, and a lot of people didn't want to do it. I was just fortunate enough to recognize an opportunity. Remember I told you that I sort of had--maybe it's a gift of seeing what things could become, rather than what they were. You know, when I bought the little house for five hundred dollars, I didn't see a little tarpaper shack. I saw a beautiful little house with green shutters. My wife [Betty Williams Barfield] saw a shack. I saw this house with green shutters. Well, I could always sort of see an opportunity. And when I, you know, and when I was cleaning, a lot of people wouldn't, didn't want to, white or black, didn't want to do what I was doing. I mean, you know, they were working in construction. They were working on--they were working in factories, you know, and they didn't see what I saw. But I saw that this could become a great business, and it was very, very lucrative and profitable. And, and when I went to the, the first meeting of the National Association of, of Building Service Contractors [National Association of Building Service Contractors; Building Service Contractors Association International], there was another black contractor in town that had a cleaning company. He went also. And the next year he didn't go because they said it's too expensive. Well, he didn't see what it could become. He's still doing today what he was doing fifty years ago. I saw that by aligning myself with this organization and putting myself in a position to learn and to, and to grow with these people, that, that, that I would move faster forward. And so this is what I did. And so when these corporations began to inquire, I had made many friends in the industry. And they came to me and said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], we're gonna do this. Why don't you consider this?" And when we thought about it and we thought it was wise, and that's how we moved, moved ahead.
Story_ID: 486147
Speaker 1: I want to go just back to the 'Barfield Method of Building Maintenance' [John W. Barfield, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you come about doing that, you know, developing that?
Speaker 2: I always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was it--
Speaker 2: --wanted to, I always wanted to do--be different and better. I didn't want to just have a janitor service. I had, I established one of the first schools for training janitors in the United States. It was a facility in my office building where people could come in and they could be trained to clean every surface that we dealt with when we went out to a contract. I developed my own time standards that said how long it took to do different aspects of cleaning. I didn't want to just have a truck and a mop. I wanted to have a prof- I wanted to have a--when I told you--I may have told you earlier about the art, and I hired Paul Collins to go to New York [New York]. I wanted to--when I bought this place downtown, I, I hired the best architect in town to come in and remodel it. And when people walked into this, it was the finest office in all of downtown Ypsilanti [Michigan]. It was absolutely magnificent. And it won an award for, for, for the design. And then I wanted art on the walls, so I sent this man to Harlem [New York, New York] to, to paint ghetto life in Harlem. So I had ghetto paintings of, of drawings that I had that I told you attracted very important people to my office to see it. I just wanted people to walk in and say, boy, this is a black business, but come and let me show you how they're operating this. I had flowers in my place when my employees came in, because I realized that it's more important. You know, my employees were coming there, and I wanted them to be impressed, that we were professional, that we were first class in, in every possible way, and I wanted them to appreciate that. They took that message to the job, and they were proud to, to work for the company [J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company]. And I just wanted to do things differently.
Speaker 1: Now, so, what are some of the time, you know, time-task things that you're coming up with? Like what--give an example. What were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how long would it take to mop and wax a thousand square feet of corridors?
Speaker 1: How long?
Speaker 2: I, I, I would have to look at the chart--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --that I have to use. But I, I had a chart that told them that, how long it would take to clean a toilet, how to clean a toilet. One day I went to this--I used to--I, I got very well-known, and one day the univer- the saint, the St. Joseph Hospital [St. Joseph Mercy Ann Arbor] in Ann Arbor [sic. Ypsilanti, Michigan] asked me to come over and train their supervisor on how to clean and to train their janitors because they didn't know how to clean. In those days, people really didn't know how to clean. They swished, you know, scarring--but we went over, and I gave a class on cleaning toilets. And there was a man; he was an old janitor that had worked there for years. And he was standing aside, you know, looking out the window because he--I mean you don't have to show me how to clean a toilet. I know how to clean a toilet. That was the attitude. And I saw him doing it, and I said, "Mister, would you come over? Do you know how to clean this toilet?" He said, "Yeah, I know how to clean a toilet." I said, "Would you come over and clean this toilet, and show them?" And he came over, and he rolled his sleeves up. And he took a sponge, and he stuck it down in the toilet water. He sprinkled some Ajax on it, and he went and scrubbed the toilet, and he scrubbed the toilet, and he flushed it. And he said, "There," and he stood back. And I said, I said--he said, "How's that?" I said, "Fine." And then he stood back, proud of himself. And I said, "But you got enough germs on your hands to wipe out your family when you go home this evening." And no one had ever told him that he shouldn't do this. And he looked at his hands, and he ran to the sink, and he started scrubbing his hands, saying, "Why didn't you tell me that?" No one had ever told him how to clean a toilet. Another time I went to a toilet--I was a good salesman too I think. I went to the Masco Corporation once, and I told them that I'd like to give them a bid on cleaning their build- business and he said--building. And they said, "Well, we, we have a janitor service." And I said, "But we're better." And he said, "What makes you think you're better?" And I just told him, and I said--and I talked with him. And he was putting his feet down. He was gonna--I said, "Let me show you something." And we went in, and he showed me a toilet. And I said, "Is that clean?" And he said, "Yeah." So I took a mirror, and I held it underneath the lip of the toilet. And underneath there was green stuff growing and, and I said, "That's not clean. Your toilet is not clean. It looks clean, but it's not clean, and there's enough germs in here to contaminate half of your staff." I left with the job. So I was a good salesman. But I learned all of this when I worked for Bert Lutton when I was eight years old. I learned how to approach people. I learned how to sell to people. I, I learned. That man taught me many, many things and things that I even practice today. So I, I was just different.
Story_ID: 486148
Speaker 1: I didn't want to just have a janitor service. I wanted something that was special. And it was so special that it attracted international attent- nat- well, international attention, and we sold it [Barfield Cleaning Company] to an international conglomerate in 1969 after fourteen years.
Speaker 2: Now how did they, how did that deal happen? I mean how--was it through this association [National Association of Building Service Contractors; Building Service Contractors Association International]?
Speaker 1: You, you, you make deals happen. You, you put yourself--you present yourself in a, in a way that you present yourself to a, a, a, a potential buyer. So, how do you position yourself, you know? Joining the association, being involved in the association, learning what's going on, learning how other people are approat- approaching the people that are prospective buyers, and emulating the, those, those, those things that, that are making these people successful. But you, you have to put yourself in a position to be noticed. You have to be different, and you have to better, and you have to be noticed. And so that was, that's, that, that's how we, we--it happened.
Speaker 2: So it's ITT [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation], right, ITT (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: How did--what were they want- they were wanting to get into the, the janit--
Speaker 1: Yes, because it was very, very, it was very profitable in those days.
Speaker 2: When you say profitable, what were, what was, you know, your profit margins? Were the--
Speaker 1: Sometimes 100 percent. Because in--remember I told you that if I'd gone to college, I may not have been as successful as, as--I may have been more successful? I, if, if I could be what I wanted to be, it would be a cross between a, a street fighter, which is what I was, and a, and a college trainee. If I could put those together with balance it would have been better. But I didn't know that you shouldn't charge 100 percent. I, I just knew how long it would take and what it would cost, and I'd just mark it up maybe 100 percent, maybe 60 percent, or maybe 40 percent, and maybe 20 percent, and I'd usually get the job. But I'd done ja- I was more efficient. I knew the cleaning business. I knew how to do it quicker, and maybe I didn't charge them a whole lot more than someone else would have charged them. But because I was better and more efficient, and my employees were better trained, but I sometimes got marks up of--markup of 60, 70, 80 percent and up to 100 percent, sometimes twice as much as the job would cost. And sometimes I got burned. Like once the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] hired me to vacuum their power plant where they had burned coal for a hundred years. And I bought equipment that the first time it sucked up the dust it wouldn't work anymore. So I, you know, you learned. But I was different. I was better. I listened to people that knew more than I knew, and I learned. And one of the reasons these companies wanted me is because they liked my management style, and they liked my approach to the industry.
Story_ID: 486149
Speaker 1: So how many employees did you have at the time that you were, you know, you were bought out?
Speaker 2: Our sales were a little less than a million dollars a year. And I probably had 85 to 100, 120 employees.
Speaker 1: And these were all contract labor?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, all contract labor and all--mostly part-time workers.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so you--how long did that deal take to consummate, you know, from the time that they start to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because our business [Barfield Cleaning Company] was very impressive. When they came to my office they saw a beautiful office; they saw a school for training people; they saw procedures; they saw a manual that I had written; they saw policy and procedures; they saw timetables that I had developed. And so everything was in place to make it go; plus I had interference from the people that I had met in the association [National Association of Building Service Contractors; Building Service Contractors Association International] that were, were doing this. And it, it, it was all ready to go. So probably less than six months I was on my way. My wife [Betty Williams Barfield] and I were on our way to New York [New York] to the, to the, the, the hotel there for a meeting with the International Telephone [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation]. And we left to--with, with a check for a million dollars. And I was thirty, I was thirty- I was thirty-nine years old, and I was able to retire, provided I was not--we were not foolish and wasteful. But we had done that in fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Well, a million dollars was an awful lot of money in 1969 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, it was.
Speaker 1: That's a lot.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: So, what--and their--they were wanting to get into the cleaning business?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They saw the profit. Did they stay? I mean what is, is ITT a, the--because it was--that's, that's an interesting thing 'cause it's a telephone company, and it, they--
Speaker 2: It was a conglomerate.
Speaker 1: Con--
Speaker 2: So they did--they had, they had an international stable of businesses, so it was more than just a telephone company.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so you stayed on though, as typical, you know, as consultants, right?
Speaker 2: No--yeah, I stayed on. I stay--I managed it for--I, I, I, I stayed on for a short while, and then I, I, I left with the understanding that I could not go back into the business for three years. At the end of the three years I did go back in the business, and ITT sued me because they said my name had became a trademark in the cleaning industry, and I should not be allowed to use it. So they took me to court. Two lawyers from New York came down representing International Telephone and Telegraph, and they went to court in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. And Judge Conlin [John W. Conlin] listened to it for two days, and he stood up and he said, "It's apparent to me that Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.] sold you his business, not his birthright. Mr. Barfield, you are free to use your name." And then we started another cleaning company [Barfield Building Maintenance Company], which we sold later to Universal Building Services [sic. Unified Building Maintenance Services, Inc.] in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 486150
Speaker 1: Now when you, during that three-year period of time, where your--'cause a lot of times that's hard for people, you know, when you found a company, to have other people sort of, you know, running it. Were you run- I mean how were you sort of merging those cultures, or were you, you know, there? 'Cause I've heard lot--I've known lots of people, and they're like they're a prisoner, or they disagree with the decisions, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Who--so I was asking about how it was once you sold [Barfield Cleaning Company], because I've heard people say, you know, that they were ready to get out of dodge, or they did agree. You know, 'cause you had, look, you had perfectly crafted everything. And while it's nice to have money in your pocket, you know, it's something you began.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I didn't have, I didn't have--I had trouble with changes that they made, only because I knew some of them were not smart. The big corporations sometimes think that they can run a business from New York [New York] or like it's in New York, and that was a mistake. This was a business that was built around me as a personality. I had friends, and they knew me. I had references. And when these people came in, one of the first things they did was to lay off some of the, the, the better managers that I had and put others in their place because they saw that there would be an advantage to increase the bottom line. I knew things like that were--not that, thos- those things bothered me. One time the man that I reported to from Cleveland [Ohio] came, and, and my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] was working, and he tapped her on the shoulder. He says, "How's my girl?" And I didn't like that sort of personal im- you know, the, that sort of thing. And, and so that was the last time my wife worked there, 'cause I didn't want any--she wasn't his girl. She was my girl, and I didn't appreciate the disrespect. And then I went to a meeting once, and he took a lot of credit for some of the good things that were happening that he had no involvement with. I just found that, as a, as an entrepreneur working for myself, working for someone else, there was no way I could be happy with it. And then I didn't want to. I always knew that at the end of the relationship, I'd start, so I quit working for them [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation]. And I stayed out of business for three years, and then I went back into the business. But no, I, I was, I was not disenchanted with anything other than the way they managed what we had built. But it didn't grieve me. I was glad to get out of the business, you know.
Speaker 2: So now, why were you glad? Because you had a, a huge pot of money? Or why, why were you glad to get out of the business?
Speaker 1: Well, first of all, I didn't have a huge pot of money. As I said earlier, I, I probably had enough to feel comfortable, provided I was not wasteful. And we weren't ever wasteful, and we never were people that had, you know, always showed off. We were very, very quiet. But we did--
Story_ID: 486151
Speaker 1: I was asking--you said you were glad to get out of the business (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I was saying, why were you glad to get out of the business at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a tough business. I had good systems and good employees, and, and, and everything was good, but it was a tough business. I mean I would--if I went to work and someone had not done a good job, I would do their work. I'd go in early in the morning because I always wanted my customers, when they came in the morning, I wanted everything to look as good as it--my name was on this business [Barfield Cleaning Company], and I wanted it to be perfect. And so it was, it was hard work. I mean it was, it was hard work.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I, I, I--it was not an easy business. It was not an easy business, not to do it well. And, and I was very hands-on. 'Cause I, you know, with my customers and my employees, if I had an employee that said, "Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], I was not paid as much as I was entitled to," and my employee said, "Mr. Barfield, he, he was; see, here's his hours." I said, "Pay him anyway," because I never wanted anyone to leave my office feeling that--I'd rather knowingly have been cheated than for someone to think that I had took, taken advantage of them. And when I worked for customers, I would never take a penny of compensation until they were absolutely thrilled with what I had done. And if they would say, "Well, it's okay, John." I said, "No, I'll do it again. And you tell me that you're thrilled with it, or I don't--I don't want you to pay me." And that's how I built my business. And honestly, I don't think anyone has a better reputation than this company. And we, we do have a good name, not only for doing good work and for being honest and fair with our employees, but being good and caring corporate citizens. You know, we support causes; we're involved in causes. I was twelve years chairman of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], raising funds to help these kids and so forth. Right now we have an initiative of providing clean water in, in Africa, Haiti, and other developing countries. You know, we are very much concerned. And so, I think you're rewarded in accordance to your concern for others. And that's what, that's something I learned from the old days and from church and so on.
Story_ID: 486152
Speaker 1: So how did you spend those three years? Were you getting, did you get more civically active at that point in time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because I've always been more civically active than, than--very civically actively. I got a real estate license, and I sold some real estate. I hunted, fished, swam, did things that I wanted to do. And then I, I got a job working for a man who had gotten a huge contract from the Bechtel Corporation, and I, I managed the facility for him. And then when the three years were over I went back into the business. And it was not long before I had built another business [Barfield Building Maintenance Company] that was big enough to be acquired by another company [Unified Building Maintenance Services, Inc.], and I sold that to a company in Washington, D.C. My motive have always been to build and sell businesses. I never wanted to--to go back to your question of do you, do you miss your businesses. I, I've always, my strategy is why, why would you hang on to something for five years if you can sell it in one year and make as much as you will in five? So I always had the idea of start a business--I, I just sold a business the other day. I, I invented--I co-invented a product that kept ceilings from getting dirty. The, the dark air, the dirty air that's blowing out of the fuses turns, it gets black around those, I co-developed something that irrefutably eliminated that. And I just sold it the other day 'cause I didn't want to do any--I didn't want to work on it anymore. And, and you, you make deals happen. In this case, I had a salesman that was very good, and I had had the distributor that was very good, and they were compatible. So I said to them, I'll sell you this business for quarter of a million dollars. I sold the man that worked for me 51 percent of it, and I sold the other man 49 percent of it. And they started the business, and, and I engineered myself out of it. And I be, became a member of the Ronald McDonald House Charities to enable them to get the contract for, with McDonald's because it'll be lucrative. And, and so I not only, not sold them, but gifted them the business. And I'm putting myself in a position to get them a major contract. I just like engineering, you know, making things happen, and I have sort of a knack for that, and I enjoy doing that.
Story_ID: 486153
Speaker 1: How did the first maintenance company [J and B Cleaning Company; Barfield Cleaning Company] differ from the second [Barfield Building Maintenance Company]?
Speaker 2: Well, in the first building maintenance company--
Speaker 1: And how did the industry change in that time period (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I didn't, when I started the first janitorial company, I really didn't know too much about what I was doing. I knew how to clean, but you know, by the time I got to the second business, I was much more astute and much more, much smarter in how to do it, and one of the changes, that the profit margins had shrunk because more people had discovered the industry. And whenever a lot of people, you know, go into an industry, it has the effect of driving the margins down. So it wasn't as lucrative as it was because I was one of the first people that got into it. So when we started this second business, it wasn't as profitable. And I had, I had been, become sufficiently well-off that I didn't wanna work too much with it. And again, my model was to build and sell businesses. So when I had a chance to sell this to Universal Building Services [sic. Unified Building Maintenance Services, Inc.], I sold this to them.
Speaker 1: Now how, how--what position was Universal in the marketplace, in the building services marketplace at the time that you sold it to them?
Speaker 2: I don't know how large they were, but it was a company that was owned by a colonel who was an African American named Jerry Davis [Jerry Davis, Jr.] in Washington, D.C. And Jerry Davis had, had built one of the, one of the very successful minority cleaning companies in the country, and I sold it, sold it to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you sold it to, first to a, a white conglomerate [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation] and then second, to a minority consol- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The second business to a minority company.
Speaker 1: To a minority concern.
Story_ID: 486154
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the ch- know, the, the (background noise) early '70s [1970s]. I just want, in context, what was sort of happening, you know. And did you see, like, and even in that three-year period that you took off, did you start seeing sort of changes? There's excitement, first of all, happen- right? There's a sense of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in that first, the first, when I went, first went into business, that was in 1954. In 1969 I sold that business [Barfield Cleaning Company]. And then I went back in the business in 1972.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I ran that business [Barfield Building Maintenance Company] until 1975, beyond 1975, and I sold that to Universal Building Services [sic. Unified Building Maintenance Services, Inc.]. And then in 1975 I got a surprise call one day from General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. Now the--we, as a race of people, had found a way to command respect in this country, and that was by withholding our spending power. And the name of that game was boycott, after the Montgomery Bus Boycott. So the captains of industry, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, and Ralph Abernathy, and some of the other people went around the country saying to the captains of industry in this country that look, we buy your refrigerators and your cars, and we spend a lot of money with your companies, but you don't give us a chance to sell you any goods and services from our community. And unless you change that unfair practices, we're gonna boycott your businesses. And that provoked General Motors, one of the things that provoked General Motors to call me in 1975. I had been doing the janitor work, so I was a known commodity. And I had sold this business in 1969 to International Telephone [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation], and that was huge because here was this black fellow, a young guy in Ypsilanti [Michigan] that had built a company. And everyone knew how I had done this, how we had done this, you know, from cleaning toilets. And, and all of the newspaper press and all, they called me out and they said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], could you help us find women and minorities that we could buy goods and services from?" And we looked for a year, and we found only one black business, and that was a man named Mr. Tousan [ph.]. And he made his living partly by breaking down cor- cor- cor- corrugating--
Speaker 1: Corrugating--
Speaker 2: --carpet news- cardboard and, and baling it up, and selling it. We didn't find any black businesses that General Motors could buy goods and services from. So they said to me, "Johnny, would you be interested I, in helping us to look for someone?" And for a year we looked, and we found no one. So one day I got a call, and they asked me if I'd come out to the plant, and they asked me would I be interested in starting a factory. And of course, I said I would be. That was very exciting, you know. So they put me on the back of a cart, and we rode down to the plant. And they took me up into the grafters, and they should me three of the biggest, dirtiest, oldest, loudest machines. And they said, "Do you think you could run those machines?" And I said I, I think I could. Because what I had learned by then was that you, you supplement your weaknesses with the strength of others. So I knew that I could find someone else that could help me. That was not the first business. The first business they had some engineering drawings they wanted to clean up. And they asked me if I'd be interested in doing that, and I said I would. So they said hire six people. We'll give you space in our enginem- engineering business, and you come and you do this. Now I made the jump from being a janitor to being an engineer. So, realizing that I had no knowledge in this field, I went to a man that, that, that I did named Charles Ford. And I said, "Charlie, I got this opportunity. Would you help me?" And he said that he would. And he was an engineer. And Charlie came over, and we hired six kids from the community college, and we started Bartech [The Bartech Group, Inc.], you know, we called it John Barfield and Associates, but it was really this company. And we worked six months cleaning up drawings. And they were so pleased at the end of the six months, they, they gave me a contract. And today we have three to four thousand employees that grew from that six. And this is what we're doing. This is, this was Bartech. And one year after that, they were so pleased they called me out and they said, "John, you did a great job. Would you be interested in making some parts?" And they consigned three old machines so they could put new equipment in its place, in their places. And I started Barfield Manufacturing Company. And we built before--we sold the company to the Masco Corporation about fifteen years later. We made about fifty thousand screw washer assemblies every month for Ford [Ford Motor Company], GM, Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], and Volkswagen [Volkswagen Group]. And that was how we went into the manufacturing business. But whenever I went into a business, and, and usually it was I didn't have a lot of money to start a business, I realized that the best way to start a business is to hire people that can do what you don't know how to do. And so that was what we did, and we ran that factory for thirteen years, and we sold that to the Masco Corporation. So we just, again, we wanted to build and sell, and, and that's what we tried to do over the years.
Story_ID: 486155
Speaker 1: Now who's advising you? Who's in your inner circle, or, during this period of time? Are, are they other businesspeople? Are they, you know, members of the community? I mean who is, who's in that sort of circle that you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in the engineering business it was Charles Ford, a black manager that worked for the Bendix Corporation. He was my mentor, and he was the one that worked with me to start this company [The Bartech Group, Inc.]. I had the good fortune of finding somebody that was interested. And he was also a fatherly man that was very interested in the people that we hired. And all of the people that were hired went on to greater things, some went to become engineers with the companies and so forth. It was six kids, three girls and three boys I guess. And so Charlie helped me with that. And then when we went to the manufacturing business, I hired a man named Richard Hurdley [ph.], who was a wonderful technician, and Richard became my partner in that. He invested twenty thousand dollars, and when Masco [Masco Corporation] bought the company [Barfield Manufacturing Company] a few years later, he sold his, his--his twenty thousand had grown to four hundred thousand dollars, and he was able to retire in those days.
Story_ID: 486156
Speaker 1: Now what were you manufacturing [at Barfield Manufacturing Company]?
Speaker 2: I can show you in the office. But it was a screw with a washer on it, and it's called a screw washer assembly. And what happens, in the old days, they would pick up a screw. They'd put a washer on it, and they would drive it into the hole. Well, we had some proprietary assembling machinery from the Illinois Tool Works [Illinois Tool Works Inc.] that we licensed. And we would make a blank out of a two thousand pound coil. We'd extrude the wire and make a blank, put a head on it, and then put a screw on it, and put a thread in it. And so now when you go to the assembly line, you don't have to pick up a screw and a thread. You pick up an assembly, and it saves an operation. And that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this whole movement to manufacturing, you had really excelled in the service industry. What did you find different about, you know, manufacturing?
Speaker 2: It was totally different, you know. We had, with cleaning, you've got cleaning solution; you've got a good custodian; and you've got a contract, and you just clean the building. In a factory, there were many more steps. We would get a two thousand pound coil of wire, you know, steel wire, that would come from Japan or someplace in this country. We would extrude it; we would cut it in the blanks, make a head on it, and, and put a thread on it, all very precise and very measured. And so that was, that was, you know, a different kind of work. It was, it was more intricate and, but it was entirely different from the cleaning business, so. Cleaning business was a simple business. From the time we got a coil of steel to the time we sold it to the, to the manufacturer, it took us six weeks. So our money was out six weeks, and you know, we, we were balancing currencies and doing things differently. And so it was totally different. I was able to gravitate from one to the other because I was wise enough to realize that there was a lot that I didn't know. And when you don't know something, the best way to succeed is to find someone that does, and that's what I was able to do.
Story_ID: 486157
Speaker 1: You have Bartech [John Barfield and Associates; The Bartech Group, Inc.] really at the same time that you have Barfield Manufacturing [Barfield Manufacturing Company].
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now, this is the time that I remember that your son, Jon [Jon Barfield] comes back, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are, are you recruiting him heavily?
Speaker 2: No, I did not. He worked for Sidley and Austin [Sidley Austin LLP] law firm in Chicago [Illinois], and he wanted to come and work for the family business. He saw that there was an opportunity here. And at that time, his wife, Norma [Norma C. Barfield], also worked for Continental Bank [Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company; Bank of America], as you will recall, and she wanted to come too. And I think they were a little fed up with the law profession, and, and they kind of wanted to do something, and this was exciting. You know, we were getting a lot of press, and our company was growing. And so they saw an opportunity here, and that's why they came here.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have other children at the time working for the business at that point in time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, two or three other children working for the business at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you, can you give me all your children's names?
Speaker 2: Yes. My oldest is Jon Eric, who you know; our second is Lena Angela [Angela Barfield], so named after my mother, Lena [Lena James Barfield]; the second [sic. third] is Aaron Lloyd [Aaron Barfield]; the third [sic. fourth] is Bonnie Lynn [Bonnie Barfield]; the fourth [sic. fifth] is Lisa Marie [Lisa Barfield]; and the fifth [sic. sixth] is David Williams Barfield [David Barfield]. So those are the six kids (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 486158
Speaker 1: You have these two, two entities primarily that you're running--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right? So you have the manufacturing concern [Barfield Manufacturing Company]. And then you're entering the service industry in a different way really with Bartech [John Barfield and Associates; The Bartech Group, Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: And I still, at that time, part of that time--it may be just before or just after I'd sold the cleaning business, second cleaning business [Barfield Building Maintenance Company].
Speaker 1: Right. In the sale of the second cleaning business, I just--so the margins had changed. There were more competitive. Was it just that, you know, the business had changed so much, and you had, you know, and you say, you know, you had someone who wanted to come and purchase it, and they took, you know, took it over, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, Bartech, the reason I'm focusing on that, that has really become, that's a temp service, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, staffing company.
Speaker 1: A staffing company. Now what did, what was attractive to you about the staffing business? It's a service business, but there were both--staffing is still relative. I mean it was new at this point, right, and the ways that it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was new; it was new. Of course, this was thirty years now ago. So the question is what?
Speaker 1: I'm just wanting to understand that business, the nature of the business and how it sort of developed.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it had started with the six people that General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] had given me the opportunity to hire. And they were pleased with our performance. It was a test. They said if you can demonstrate to us that you can be an asset, you know, we'll, we'll give you--they were looking for, you know, to start to help for me to make a success with this. Well, we exceeded their expectations. And at the end of the year, we now had grown to thirty people, and we were doing work for three or four divisions, and they were very pleased with this. And then, then the, the, they began to expand the opportunities. And with Charlie Ford's [Charles Ford] help, we were able to hire good managers, and we were able to place good people in their facilities. And this company just has continued to grow because of their plea- they were pleased with what we were doing.
Story_ID: 486159
Speaker 1: Now staffing, can you, you talk about the industry? What made staffing become an industry? Like you were saying, you know, when you got into the cleaning business, the, there was not a lot of people involved in it. But what made that--where did you see the business opportunity, and what was it at that time?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I understand--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, your, you're a tried and true businessperson. You see sort of opportunity. You know, and even though this opportunity sort of got, it sounds like got handed to you, you know, because--right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, by GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. But what did you--it's sort of similar to the janitorial business in that you're using contract people, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that was so more. But what did you like? What did you see, and what did attract- tract you about that? Was it because you could get major contracts, you know, and it was just sort of building the number of people--
Speaker 2: I saw an opportunity there that I was fortunate enough to get into the staffing business early on. And I saw an opportunity there. It was also exciting. And remember now, I had sold my business [Barfield Cleaning Company], and I had three years of rest, relative rest. And I was very anxious to, to get back into--in fact, my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] laughs, laughs at me now, you now. Six weeks--seven weeks after I sold my first business, we were fairly well-to-do, provided we were not wasteful or foolish. I used to look out the window six weeks later, and my neighbors' going to work in the wintertime in snow this deep and envy them. I was anxious to go back to work. And I got a real estate license, and then later on I did some work for Phil Spear [ph.], who owned a company in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. And when I got this opportunity to start Bartech [John Barfield and Associates; The Bartech Group, Inc.], which we call J and B Cleaning Company [sic.] at the moment, I was ecstatic. And always wanting to ex- exceed the expectations of my customers was something I had been taught, and we did that, and then having the good fortune to find Charles Ford. But juggling all of this and keeping it all together, and, and it was, it was, it was very exciting. I remember once when I had my factory, I had three employees. And one Christmas two of them came and said, "Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], we're gonna have to quit. We found a better job." We were in a ninety thousand square foot building. It was cold and damp, and, and we--I had these fellows working there. And they got a more attractive job, and they were gonna leave, which would have put me out of business. Then I said, "Oh, you can't leave. I said if you'll stay to Christmas, I'll give you each a thousand dollar bonus." And they stayed 'til Christmas, and I paid them, and they stayed, both stayed with me until they retired. But I got them over that. I saved it. And you know, so when, when you're, in those days, when you're a black business, and most of us didn't have any money, you know, we, we lived by the seat of work, by the seat of our pants and, and prayer. And, and, but somehow we kept it going. We were able to keep our businesses going, and in, in that case, offering them a thousand dollars. But it wasn't only the thousand dollars. I was a good employer. I mean I'd go down there. That--we had one--we operated twenty-four hours a day, if you can imagine, one man on each shift, in a big ninety thousand square foot drafty, cold building. So I'd go down and work with the man on, maybe on each shift, you know, or take him a pizza down and eat pizza with him, and you know, anything you have to do to keep your operation running, we learned to do. And I remember one time we had, in the factory, I had old machinery that was decrepit, and my competitors had--I, I look at it like I had machines that said, "Thump, thump, thump." And my, the competitors had machines that said (makes noise), and the making a--you know, it was, it was like a machine gun, and I couldn't compete. And I had a job, and so I--a man had befriended me, and I told him my dilemma. He was a Christian gentleman. And so he said, "John, I'd like for you to meet my boss." So my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] and I drove down to Pennsylvania I guess it was. And we met his boss, and I told him my plight. And he said, "Johnny, I'm gonna help." And he bought my equipment, and he bought my inventory. And he made the parts for me, and he sent them back in my boxes, and I was able to survive that winter. And I came back with about $160,000 that kept my factory open. But I had the good fortune of meeting people. And remember I told you about those two angels that, that I always felt their presence. I always felt that if I--many times I went to bed at night not knowing where the payroll was gonna come from the next morning, but always it seemed that when I woke up in the morning there would be a solution. And this now has been almost fifty years.
Story_ID: 486160
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about what Bartech [John Barfield and Associates; The Bartech Group, Inc.] became, you know, has become in many ways, you know, and how its growth has sort of mirrored the growth of staffing. Can I ask why the need for staffing, how that even--you know, why--what was sort of motivating companies? Were they--was it a bottom line, you know? They didn't--was it cheaper (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there are two kinds of employees: there are direct employees, and there are contract employees. And the, the, one of the reasons that contract employees are, are, like my companies is that sometimes a company will have short-time assignments, and they don't want to hire a full-time person for a short-time assignment. So they'll go to someone like us and said, "Could you provide us with sixteen engineers or twenty draftsmen or find forty technicians or whatever for us, a, a job that's gonna last nine months or a year?" So they, you know, they don't want to hire direct employees for short-term assignments, and that was one of the reasons for it. And there are some other economical reasons why. They pay us sometimes more than they would pay their employees, but if you hire a direct employee, you end up with pension and other. But if it's a--if you offload that to someone like me, it's, that becomes our responsibility. And they're still getting the same amount of work done with, with the same degree of professional. So there are a lot of advantages for companies to hire contract people.
Speaker 1: So how did you grow that business? You started with GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. And then who were you adding as time went on?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had GM, Ford [Ford Motor Company], Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], Volkswagen [Volkswagen Group], you know, Blue Cross [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association]. I mean all kinds of, of companies came to us after we were established. But you know what? It took a long time for us to be established for--it was a, it was a feeling many years ago that minority firms, or firms that were owned by women, could not handle important jobs, in that we got scraps, or we got something that was dead-end or something that was low profit. And it took us a long time to win the confidence of the buying community that we could do their work as well or better than the others, and we got major contracts. So now we get huge contracts. So one of the other things that we do is we manage budgets for other people. We manage contractors for contractors. For example, Blue Cross and Michigan--not Michigan Bell, but Blue Cross and Delphi [Delphi Automotive PLC] and other companies like that, part-time workers are not their core competence tech- you know, the, the kind of people that we hire. So we go to them and say let us manage that operation for you, so we will deal with the suppliers rather than you too. It's another service we're offering them. And that's a company that's, that, that's growing very fast here.
Speaker 1: And that's the, the--
Speaker 2: It's still Bartech but a division that we call workforce management. So we manage your workforce so you don't have to do it. 'Cause you don't want to do it anyway, and you don't know how to do it efficiently, and so we come in. And sometimes we're so much more efficient than you are, it doesn't cost you anything for our services because we can eliminate so much waste that you, you know, you don't know about. So that's another thing that we do.
Speaker 1: So didn't you get also involved in the high-tech business too or contracting? Was it the IT [information technology] compu- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we still are, only from the standpoint that we're providing people, you know, that, that have those skills--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for dom- companies.
Story_ID: 486161
Speaker 1: Was it always your thought that Jon [Jon Barfield] would take over and become--I mean not take over, but become president, CEO? When did you--
Speaker 2: No. Jon joined us, you know, when he, he left--joined us over twenty years ago. He just wanted to come into the company [The Bartech Group, Inc.]. We didn't encourage him to. He and Norma [Norma C. Barfield] just decided that they wanted to. And it was good for me because if Jon had not came into the building, I would have sold the business. I would have sold it. But fortunately for us, he wanted--they wanted to come into the business, and they did. But I didn't encourage them to do that. They came because they saw an opportunity here that I think was better than the one that they had.
Speaker 1: Now was it a learning curve for him? In many ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, because he went from becoming a lawyer to, you know, running a company that was totally different from what he had been trained to do. But he acclimated very quickly and it wasn't long before he had the reins. It's a simple business, as my other son says. It's not rocket science, as he likes to tell me. So it wasn't hard for him to transition from what he, what he had been doing to this.
Story_ID: 486162
Speaker 1: You know, you talk about the minority business, doing businesses and minority business. Now organizations like the National Minority Business--is it Development Council [sic. National Minority Supplier Development Council]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. What role did they play in, in, in, you know, in your grow and activity or even in the, you know, efforts to promote?
Speaker 2: They played a major role then and now. They, they, they go to the corporate community and keep them reminded of their responsibility to provide opportunities for qualified minority and women owned organizations. And so they, they do a lot to, to be a watchdog. They, they make an attempt to keep fronts out of the organizations. You know, a lot of people would say this is a black organization, but it's funded by others, and it's really not a black organization. That's their main function, to, one of their main functions, to prevent that from happening.
Speaker 1: Okay, hold up one second.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, you were talking about the Minority Business Development Council and its role now. Who was, who, who--that council, when did it development, or when did it get started? Wasn't it, was the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I remember it early as, as almost--I, I think it was in the very early '80s [1980s] that I became familiar with the Minority Business Development Council. When I--in the mid-'70s [1970s], when we were starting our business, I don't that, I don't know personally if it existed at that time. But it was endorsed by the corporations who were looking to provide opportunities for minority and women-owned businesses. And they were also anxious to ferret out, you know, businesses that were fronted by white organizations that were take- trying to take advantage of the, of the, of that, you know, designation. But I must say that the, the corporations many times got credit for things they should not have been credited for. They didn't do always as much as they got credit. I had people saying to me "John [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], I--it's, it's easy for minorities and women to, to do well because you guys get your money at a discount," and you, you know. And I said, "You know, being a minority or a woman-owned organization, all it does is it, is that it gets your foot in that door. But if you're not better--and I didn't, and I don't mean just as good--but if you're not better, in, in, in most cases you won't stay there. And also prepare yourself for a lot of unfairnesses because you're not gonna find the fairnesses you would find if you were, if you were, you know, some other than a minority or a woman-owned organization." But still the corporations got a lot of credit for it. That isn't to say that, the, that they didn't deserve some credit but not as much, many times as they received.
Speaker 2: Well, often it was, it was like forced into glory to begin with, right?
Speaker 1: It was, very much like that, and with that always comes a resentment. You know, when you force people to do something they don't want to do, it's, it's bad. And then the other thing I found, that we turned down a lot of, of what people call opportunities because they were opportunities that couldn't be successful. You know, we may get an opportunity to work with a majority corporation, and they would give us work so far out in the boondocks that it would--they couldn't do it, and we couldn't do it. And then they could go back and said we gave them an opportunity, and they fell on their face. And there was a lot of that going around, when they know that no one could have been successful with that. So we learned to ferret out the bad jobs, and to take the better jobs, and let the, the, the junk go. That's, there was art to that, you know--
Speaker 2: Now when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and so that's what we did.
Story_ID: 486163
Speaker 1: Has it been the, the focus on excellence that has, you know, made you sustain yourself, or you know, or continue to excel? 'Cause--
Speaker 2: I think it was our focus on excellence. I think we were, we have been, we have constantly reminded the cuni- community by our actions that we're concerned corporate citizens; we support causes; we give back, encourage our employees to give back; we make major contributions to the community; we do good work. I said earlier that when I retired, my employees asked me what advice would you give to make sure that this company [The Bartech Group, Inc.] continues to flourish. And I said, "Mrs. Barfield [Betty Williams Barfield] and I built this corporation on the quality of our services, being honest and fair to our employees, and being good corporate citizens. And if you build on those foundations, this company will continue to move forward." And so that's, that's what--even now, fifty years later, I see people that I worked for, I cleaned their houses fifty years ago, and we still have a fa- a friendship. You know, I'll see--I saw a lady the other day I was going home, and she was on her porch. And I went over, and I said, "I know you don't remember me." She said, "I do, your name is John Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.]." And, and I had cleaned her house fifty years ago. And I remember her daughter had a, a boyfriend from New York [New York] who was a producer, and I was cleaning their house to make it very special for their visit. And so we had a nice long talk, and we were able to talk about the past. And, and she said, "I've followed you through the years. I've read articles. I'm very proud of you, Johnny." And I said, "Well, thank you." And so, you know, in a small town you, you're known for being good or for not being good, you know (laughter). So we, we just--and I said to Jon [Jon Barfield] the other day, you know, and David [David Barfield], I said you know, "I'm really proud that in all the years we've been in business there's been no scandals, and there's been no womanizing, and no red Cadillacs, and no gambling and other things that would be an embarrassment," you know.
Story_ID: 486164
Speaker 1: Because you have, you know, hunting has been a big part of your, you know, life in many ways. I mean it started when you were a child. I don't know how, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tw- thirteen, twelve--no, about fifteen--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I bought my first shotgun.
Speaker 1: And, and then you, you know, just talked about fox hunting. You know, so tell me what, what appeals to you about, you know, hunting and--I mean you've went from--I don't know what different aspects of hunting 'cause I'm not a hunter, but, I mean I know you were chasing rabbits (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I started--my father [Edgar Barfield] taught me to hunt, to shoot, and I started hunting rabbits and pheasants with him, and then I always hunted. And then when I was building my, my business, I didn't have too much time for that. But then later on, I, I took up hunting again. And I hunt in, in Denmark, in England, and Argentina, and Bolivia, and Mexico. I don't like to hunt big things. I just like to hunt birds. And I don't like, I wouldn't shoot a deer or the bear or anything like that. I'm not interested in that, but I do like bird hunting, and I like 'em because birds are, are very fast. And, and you have to be very accurate to shoot birds, so I like to hunt them. So, then, I always wanted to, to do things like exciting things. And so a friend of mine invited me out to their fox hunting club. And I went out to the fox hunting club, and I, I just loved the smell of the horses and the, and the, the, the, the, the, the sport, so I became a fox hunter. And I leased a horse, and I would ride with the horse, rides to the hound, ride to the hounds. And then two years I won my colors. And that means you're good enough to ride, keep up with the first class, and I rode. And then I wanted to perfect my jumping technique, so I went to Ireland, and I trained for two weeks to learn to be a more professional jumper. And so I jumped in, in Ireland, went to a training school and became a hunter there. And then I came back, and then my wife [Betty Williams Barfield] gave me this beautiful horse named Beauford [ph.]. And I hunted with this horse for the better part of seven years. Five years I hunted with this horse, and then I had knee surgery, and I decided that it was maybe time--and I was about seventy-five years old, and I figured it was time maybe to quit, because fox hunting can be dangerous. My friend just broke his back. He was riding. He had ga- gravitated--graduated into polo, and he--his horse fell on him the other day, and he broke his back, so it's very dangerous. But when you're riding to the hounds, you know, you're, you're galloping. When the, when the dogs are in full, the hounds are in full pursuit of the fox, you're, you're driving--you're running through--you're going where the hounds and the fox go. So if there's a fence there, you've gotta take that fence. And if there's a ditch, you gotta negotiate that ditch. And, and, and you might be in the woods, and you've gotta be very proficient. So if you are a good rider, after you're good enough to ride with the top of the, with the hunt, hunts, with the master of the hunt, you get your red coat. And I earned my red coat in two years. And so I hunted, you know, with them, you know, until I--for seven years I hunted with them. It was very exciting. And as I say, riding in Ireland was very exciting.
Story_ID: 486165
Speaker 1: And then, then when I quit that, I began to do more bird hunting, so I'd go to Bolivia and Argentina, and I, I hunt. I liked formal hunting like they hunt in Europe, where they have only two shells in their gun. And I was able to, to be invited to hunt with a, an elite group. One was a grandfather [sic.] of August Busch, the beer magnate. And, and so I was able to hunt with them, and we hunted in Denmark at a place called Falsled Kro [Millinge, Denmark]. And, and we, you know, you dress like a gentleman in the woods, and, and you hunt. And you know, you go to this hunting preserve, and, and the master, who could be a lord or a prince, comes out of his castle, and he makes you welcome. And he said, "Ladies and gentleman, we're pleased to have you. I think you will enjoy the hunting on our estate." And then he makes a speech, and then he--then someone from our group will stand up and says, "Well, thank you, my lord, it's a pleasure to be here. We love to hunt on your grounds because your birds fly high and very fast." And it's a lot of formal stuff. And then the huntman- huntsman comes out, and he gives you instructions. "No one is to shoot until the horn is blown, and you shoot at a forty-five degree angle. And then at the end of the hunt there's a parade of the birds on the--." It's very, very formal. They take it very seriously there. So I, I, I, I wanted to do that because these people had done that, and I wanted to do it. I wanted to have that experience, and so I hunted with those people there. And I hunted in England near Bath. And my friend there has a house that is seven hundred years old, that has been lived in and by only two people [sic.], six hundred and eighty years by one, and eighteen years by the other one. And so I had the opportunity to hunt on their grounds. And you know, it's just, it's exciting to see how these people live and to kind become a part of their community for a week or two (laughter). And so it was very exciting, you know.
Speaker 2: Now did you ride horses as a child?
Speaker 1: No, I, I couldn't, I couldn't afford to ride a horse as a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I mean just even ar- but how did you pick up riding? I mean hunting is one thing. Holding a gun is one thing, but--
Speaker 1: But riding (laughter). I don't know, I liked it, and--
Speaker 2: You took to it.
Speaker 1: I took to it, and, and some people said I was a natural. I don't think I was a natural, but I earned my colors in two years. And I could ride with, with the top of the, I could ride with the top of the, fast. There was no jump I was afraid to take. And I was a, I was not bad, you know.
Speaker 2: Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.], how old were you when you were doing that?
Speaker 1: When I started, I probably started when I was sixty, you know, years old. And I just, you know, I just wanted to, to, to enjoy some of the finer things of life. You know, I didn't--I just always wanted to be different, you know, and, and, and it was just my--I just, you know, you only go through this life once. And I just wanted to, to have a good life, to experience as many things as I, as I could and to travel and to see as much of the world as I could. And, because you don't know what things are like until you see them for yourself. I thought Siberia--I had heard that Siberia was a terrible place, frozen and full of Gulags and all of that. It, I found it to be one of those most beautiful places on earth. So, you know, I, I wanted to see that, and I did, you know.
Speaker 2: So this is all the things you've done probably what, age fifty up? Is that what you would say, or would it be sixty up? I mean that's--
Speaker 1: Well, the first few years was building the business and raising my family and making sure they got a good education. And then when we were pretty much assured that we had accomplished all those things, because that's an obligation you must not fail, and when we had done that, I just said to my wife [Betty Williams Barfield], you know, let's just see the world. And you know it's--and we've seen most of the world. And we've seen the way people live. And we've had the occasion to visit with people in many parts of the world. And I, I just found that to be exciting.
Story_ID: 486166
Speaker 1: Your story is really, you know, pretty amazing story. So when you look back on it, and you--and I ask this question of someone who has been a, a black businessperson, what are your thoughts about black people in business and you know, what the, the future holds, you know, going forward?
Speaker 2: Well, we got a late start. I told you that businesses, black businesses in this country started in the mid-'70s [1970s], you know. When you consider we've been here several hundred years, and we only got into the mainstream, and we're just getting into the mainstream of, of, of business in this country, the little things that we started in the '70s [1970s], we begged and, and pleaded for opportunities. And it was rare that, it was rare that we got a good one--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You were saying?
Speaker 2: You were saying that business, you know, it's change--that we got into the game late.
Speaker 1: Oh, we got into the game very late. And, and, but your question was--
Speaker 2: I was saying how do you--what, what are your thoughts about the future for blacks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 2: --in business.
Speaker 1: --yeah. I, I don't know that I see--I, I'm beginning to see large companies, and, and I think that we're getting opportunities now that we never got before. Sometimes, sometimes the opportunities that we got really weren't op- weren't good opportunities. They were dead-end opportunities. But now we're, we're really beginning to--and, and I can only speak for our company [The Bartech Group, Inc.] here. You know, the first twenty or twenty-five years or so that we were in business we got okay jobs. But now we're competing with some of the biggest corporations in the world that established corporation, and we're beating their pants off. We're winning contracts from them. And it's, we have built a reputation where our customers realize that we're dependable and, if given an opportunity, we will exceed or make every effort to exceed their expectations. In other words, I think we have arrived. We, we compete with the Adeccos [The Adecco Group] and the Kellys [Kelly Services, Inc.] and all of these people. And we hit our market share in, in many--and, and a number of instances we, we outperform them, and we win jobs that they have. I, I have friends that are in business that are not, that are not getting the kind of opportunities we get. So I think we may be a little unusual because, we maybe a little unusual because we've, we've, we've been in business, and people--we are a known entity, and, and people know that we can be relied on. It takes a long time to prove yourself, to get opportunities. I--there are a lot of black companies that are not black companies. You know, they're, you know, fronts, and I know that. But all and all, I think we're having better opportunities today then we had in the past. And what is very exciting to us is that we're, are, we are--I'm seeing more and more businesses going into second generation management, and that's exciting to me, you know. Like, you know, Jon [Jon Barfield] and Norma [Norma C. Barfield] are here, and, and this is something we never saw before so much. And I'm seeing more of that now, even reading now about some companies that are, that are billion dollar companies. These were things that we never even dreamed about before. So I think that we're ma- making progress today that--and I think that progress is continuing.
Speaker 2: So you feel pretty positive about everything and growth, as it relates to minority business it sounds like. I mean, outside of your, you know--now--
Speaker 1: I don't think there is, I don't think there is as much fairness as there needs to be. And I, I'd like to see that improve, you know. We still don't, we still don't get all the opportunities that we should get. And we're still sometimes not judged the same way as others. But all and all, I think there's been a tremendous improvement, because remember, in the '70s [1970s] there were no businesses, and look what we have today. You look at black enterprise you see how many businesses are out there today. So, there's, there's definitely been an improvement.
Story_ID: 486167
Speaker 1: So what do you think will be the key ingredient for things improving and for black businesses being able to, to compete, you know--what would take away the unfairness factor? Let's put it that way.
Speaker 2: I'm not wise enough to, to answer that. I, I, I don't know. I think it's inherent and, and prejudices and, and things. I think that--I go back again to what my folks taught me. The way to be successful in business or the way to be successful in keeping a job or anything is to always exceed the expectations of those that you work for. If you can do things better, you're gonna be fine. We're getting the opportunities that we have today because we do things really better than, than some people. My son said to me the other day, David [David Barfield], he said, "I would put our staff against anyone that I compete with in the workforce management area." So, we're, we're becoming--we're, we're getting better opportunities, and we're better off. But things are still not--the, the playing field still is not level, as they say (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is David the youngest?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No. So you have the oldest and the youngest then.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jon [Jon Barfield] and David.
Speaker 1: Right. And David is--what is, what is his role here [The Bartech Group, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: David is, is, is vice president of sales, and he also manage our workforce management division.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He probably manages $500 million--and I'm sorry. He probably manages 50, 50--about 35 to 40 percent of our entire sales, and he's also very much involved in sales.
Story_ID: 486168
Speaker 1: Now there are two, two other things I want to cover before we end.  And one is the Share products initiative because, you know, you've done a lot of things. In fact, you were showing me in there this photo invention, which I think is still pretty great. But I want you to talk about Share products, and then there's, there are two other things.
Speaker 2: In the mid-'60s [1960s], something happened in this country that we all should be embarrassed about. And the government, state and federal governments decided that people that were in institutions, mental and health institutions, that were state and federal wards, would be better served if they were served by the private community. And, and they, they turned these people out in droves to be, to be managed by private, private industry. And the influx was so great that the private industry could not absorb them. And that was the beginning of our homeless problem in this country. And I'd, I'd saw that as a, as a terrible mis-justice for these people because it was pathetic in those days, the people that we saw, and even today. So I, I, I started Share products as a reprisal. I, I--to, to bring awareness to the plight of these people. And I sold about seventeen privately labeled products that were things like baby oil, and oatmeal, and garbage bags, and popcorn under, under the private label of Share products. And the idea was to give 50 percent of the profits to charitable organizations to buy food and shelter for homeless people. And, and that's, that was Share products, and we ran this for a number of years. There was no way it could have been successful because we didn't have enough money to, to run it properly, and we had no knowledge of it. But it was, it was our way of, of trying to help. And, and, and our way of creating a greater awareness of the plight of these unfortunate people. That was Share products.
Speaker 1: When you've, making decisions about what to get involved with philanthropically, like this was an area that--you know, the homeless that you identified, what are the key factors for you in many ways, Mr. Barfield [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.]? Is it--and you mentioned the United, United Way [United Way Worldwide].
Speaker 2: Negro College Fund.
Speaker 1: United Negro College Fund [UNCF] is what I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it, the question, what is my motivation?
Speaker 1: No, not your motivation, but how do you decide what you're going to get involved with? I mean what--because philanthropic things really are change agents in many ways. So, I was just wondering, you know, because Share was a big, big initiative. It was a big push to make a change. UNCF, you know, is, is also, you know, that's the whole education piece. I was just wondering, I was just wondering your thoughts.
Speaker 2: How do, how am I drawn to these?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, with the United Negro College Fund, I was--Share products I was drawn because of the homeless situation. I was very, I was very much saddened by the, the conditions that I saw. The United Negro College Fund, there was a gentleman named Eugene Power, who was a developer of University Microfilm [University Microfilms International; ProQuest LLC]. He was a white man that for twenty-some years had been the voice of the United Negro College Fund in this community. He, he really, he loaned his name mostly to it. And every year we collected probably fifteen to twenty-five thousand dollars from the county to support black colleges in, in private schools. He came to me one year and said, "John, my wife is ill, and I'm well ill, and I can't carry this any longer. Would you take, would you take it over?" And I said that I would. And the first thing I realized--this was a white gentleman, and, and the first thing I realized, that it was--if, if I was gonna be successful with this, I had to incorporate both communities. So I went to a very prominent businessman, and I said, "Would you help me do this?" And he was white. And so now there's white and black, so it's not a black organization now; it's white and black. And he and I for twelve years, for the most, better part of twelve years, we raised funds for the United Negro College Fund. And the largest gift I got was a half a million dollars one year. And we would raise between three hundred and four hundred thousand dollars a year from our county for, for United Negro College Fund. But it was also unifying because it brought the black and the white community together for a single cause. And that was my motivation for that.
Story_ID: 486169
Speaker 1: Today, as I retired and I had more time, I began to think of the, the millions of people that are dying in Africa, Haiti, and other developing countries because they're forced to drink contaminated water. So we started a program to provide wells for, for, for people in Africa, Haiti, and other, other countries. And we provide, in some cases, wells and generators and storage tanks, you know, for villages. I just agreed to serve as the endowment chair for the Ronald McDonald House Charities of Detroit [Michigan] because I sold this invention that co-invented. And, and by serving in this capacity, I'll get the people that I sold it to an opportunity to win the McDonald contract I think. So that is, that was my motivation for that. And I had told them that I would like to be involved only in the development of endowments and that I would like to develop a model in Detroit that could be emulated throughout the United States, Ronald McDonald Houses. And I, I thought of that because there's a company in Detroit that offered them a million dollars if they would put their name on this and that and a whole lot of things, which McDonald's would not do. So we're gonna go to these people and say, you know, we will take your million dollars, and while we can do this, we will give you responsibility for being the, the catalyst for the development of an endowment program for all of the Ronald McDonald Charities. And if we can get that model to work, we'll emul- we'll seek to emulate it in other parts of the world. So I'd like to be recognized someday as being the, the founder of the endowment program for the McDonald corporation by giving them a war chest to help these children. So I just like causes like this, and I'm, I'm pretty good at it. And I like to get involved and, and see what I can do to parlay that into something that's beneficial to society. It's my way of giving back, you know. And, and I like to do that because I'm pretty good at it.
Story_ID: 486170
Speaker 1: Now, art, just one, you know, before we go. You, you know, you, you are a big art collector, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, of one--
Speaker 2: --you could say that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, okay. Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the first art collection was by a black artist named Paul Collins. And Paul Collins is one of the most prolific artist that I know. And in 1975 I started my janitor company and manufacturing company [Barfield Manufacturing Company]. And I bought a building downtown, town in Ypsilanti [Michigan] that had been a former hardware building. And I went into that building with a, with a very well-known architect, and we developed one of the most beautiful offices you will probably--you would have seen at that time. And we were right on the main street, and it was Barfield Building Maintenance Company. And I wanted to have a collection of art in it. So, I found out about this black artist from Grand Rapids [Michigan] named Paul Collins, who, whose work was just magnificent. And I engaged him to go to Harlem [New York, New York] for a month to, to draw and paint life in the slums of Harlem. And he came back with nineteen drawings that became the beginning of the collection for the Paul Collins collection. And then, I liked his work so well that I said, "Do you have other work?" And he said he did, because nobody was--he hadn't been discovered. So I said, "I'll buy everything you want to sell." So for years I bought all of the art that he had that, at that time. And then he came to me once and said, "Johnny [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, sr.], I'd like to go, and Betty [Barfield's wife, Betty Williams Barfield] I'd like to go to Kenya and Tanzania and paint the Maasai because it's a dying culture, and I'd like to preserve it." So we underwrote the trip, and he went there, and we have ten magnificent paintings in our home that he did. And that's how we got involved with Paul Collins. Then one day in Mexico City [Mexico] we're walking on the street, and we were stopped in our tracks by a, a painting that we saw. And it was by a man, a Mexican artist named Carlos, Carlos Lopez Cano [ph.]. And we went into the store and inquired. And we bought it on the spot 'cause we were was so impressed with it, and so we bought the piece of art. And I said to the, the, the art dealer, would it be possible to meet the artist? And he said that he just happens to be in Mexico City. So the next day we went over, and we met Mr. Cano. And we became very good friends, and we collected his art. And he was one of three Mexican artists that was invited to display a piece of art in the Louvre [Musee du Louvre] in Paris [France] for a month--for, for a summer. And we were able to buy that piece when it left the Louvre for our collection. So we have a collection from Carlos Lopez Cano, and we have about thirteen major pieces of his art that's bigger than one of those windows each. And he--his wife [sic.] called us a couple of years ago and said my husband--my father rather, has had a stroke, and he can't paint anymore. And he--they--he had to sell his art, private collection of art, because they needed the money. And they, they offered it to us, and we bought it. And so we have a collection of, of Carlos Lopez Cano. And then the art in my office is by Adam Grant, who was a Polish Jew, who lived only because he was an artist, because he was in the concentration camps in, in Poland. And he survived only because he could draw and paint the wives of the, the Nazi guards and their mothers. And so he survived and got out of the concentration camps and came to this country and became one of the foremost designers of the, of the paint by numbers program that was a rage years ago. And so I have a collection of his art as well. So, I don't understand art, but I love it. And the first piece of art that I bought was when my wife and I got married fifty-nine years ago. It was called 'An Imaginary Landscape' [ph.], and we paid two dollars and fifty cents for it, and we bought it off of the scrap pile at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. So we've just collected art, and you don't have to understand art to enjoy it. When we take our vacations, we always try to schedule it around places where there are internationally recognized museums, art museums, and we go to these places. And you know, this is, this is what we like to do.
Story_ID: 486171
Speaker 1: And I have one last question. What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I want to be known as a, as a, as a, as a, as a good father, a good husband, and somebody that has done all that I could possibly do to make my race proud of me, or, to, to say it another way, to ray- to make my race and my country proud of me. I, I, I want to, I want to be known as somebody that really cared to, and really cared for people, really loved people. I have a (laughter) interesting habit of hugging everyone I meet. My son said--and so I hug my employees. I, I hug everybody. I, I, I mean I really, honestly, I have just so much love for people. I just go around hugging--and it's a lot of work hugging people, because after a while, you know, everybody that you hugged before looks for that hug when you see them again. Like, I, I belong to this golf club. It's a club that formerly did not welcome blacks. And, and I joined it and you know, and, and so now I, you know, I, I see people, they say, "Hi, John [HistoryMaker John W. Barfield, Sr.]." And I'll say, "Hi," and you know, I, big hug, and so I got everybody at the club hugging each other now (laughter). And it, it's, it's nice, a, a lot of work. I, I hug my children, and I kiss both cheeks. And I hug my wife [Betty Williams Barfield], and I hug my friends. And I hug my employees, and my son David [David Barfield] said, "Dad, you can't do this. You can get in trouble hugging people." I said, "Well, David, I think people know the difference between a good hug and a bad hug," you know (laughter). But it, it's just I, I, so I, I like to be known. The other day one our young girls that work here came into my office in tears. And her ne- neph- her nephew had, had gone to a basketball game. And, and they had went out to get a hamburger, and he was in a wreck, and he'll be altered the rest of his life. He's slow and forgetful. And she came in just crushed, and I said, "Come on into the office." And we held hands over my desk, and we prayed together. You know, I, I, I just think that sometimes, you know, we get so caught up in being important and formal that we forget that people like to be touched. And, and I think people like to feel your concern for them. And I just like to--it's, it's important to me. And so we prayed, and, and I said to Funna [ph.], "Your son is, you know, he's gonna be fine." And she left a little more encouraged, you know. And when my youngest son, David, who lost his arm and shoulder to cancer, and he is probably the noblest person that I know who, when we were waiting for his surgery to take place at Sloan Kettering [Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York] and my whole family was there in tears and just shattered 'cause our baby was gonna be operated on, and he held the family up on just that one shoulder. And he came out, and he went to Zion and he said (makes noise), like that, had his surgery and was playing tennis a month later, you know.
Story_ID: 486172
Speaker 1: And one day he had done something that was particularly sweet and noble. And I wrote him a note, and I said David [Barfield's son, David Barfield], you're number six now, but when I leave this place, meaning this world, I want you to know I'm promoting you to number one because I don't know anyone that I would rather to leave in, my family in charge of than you. He's just that strong and that noble and just, just an absolutely jewel of a, jewel of a person. So, you know, but they're all great, but he is so special and so caring and you know, he's, I like to think he's a lot like me, you know.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I--when you were talking, I got images of you, you know, and the hugging part. I really got images of you and your father [Edgar Barfield] lying beside your mother [Lena James Barfield] with your mother in between. I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was--yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Just that's what came to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was--you know, life is, is, is really, really short, really short. And I have friends who could do anything that they want to do but don't do very much at all 'cause they're so anxious to be successful. But you know, they fail to remember that there are four things in life that are really in important: it's your family; it's your health; it's your faith; and family, faith, health, and friends. And I tell my children all the time, if you invest in those things, you're gonna have a balanced life. Remember your family, remember your faith, take care of your health, and remember your friends. And that's really all that there is. I mean, you know, well, you can only have so much wealth, and, and, but you can never have too much health, and you can never have too many friends. So that's what I teach them, I've tried to teach them to invest in, and that's what I've tried to invest in. So I want people to remember me as a, just a good person, that somebody that loved and cared and tried to be an example to my family and to my friends and to my community, and that's all you can wish for.
Story_ID: 486173
Speaker 1: This is my wife, Betty [Betty Williams Barfield]. This is our fourth child, Bonnie Lynn [Bonnie Barfield]. And my wife at that time would have been twenty-three or twenty-four years of age.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother. He name was Lena [Lena James Barfield]. And I'd have to say she was probably one of the most beautiful people I've, I've ever known.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us approximately when you think the photo was taken.
Speaker 2: Boy, I don't know. She (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) You were about to guess ranges, like say--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --fifties [1950s] to, you know, whatever--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --you think it is.
Speaker 2: Yes, this, this photo would have been taken in the--let's see; let me think--in the '40s [1940s], in the '40s [1940s], the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: That's (laughter), my wife's gonna be very upset when she sees that picture. That's my wife, Betty, my oldest daughter Angela [Angela Barfield], my son, Jon Eric [Jon Barfield], and my other son, Aaron Lloyd Barfield [Aaron Barfield].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. When was that taken, or is there a date on that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That was taken in the--let's see, when was that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen--
Speaker 1: That was taken--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: In '86 [1986], okay.
Speaker 2: That's the president of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Pete Estes, when he came to, to my factory in 1976. He had heard a lot about the company and wanted to come over.
Speaker 1: And there he is in, in looking at part of it--that, there's a funny story about that. He was supposed to stay for thirty minutes. He stayed for two hours, and we became fast friends after that. And he invited me to his retirement party.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Next.
Speaker 1: That's me, and that was taken some years ago, probably in 1968 or 1969.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's my wife Betty and I, probably taken around 1975.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is me again, and that was for a promotional piece that we used in, again, around 1975 or 1976.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, Mary Barfield [Mary Clark Barfield]; married at thirteen, had thirteen children, and lived to be a hundred and seven years of age.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my father, Edgar [Edgar Barfield], a few months before he died. He died at the age of eighty-four; and the, the man that taught me all I needed to know about hunting and shooting and fishing and all those things.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is one of the machinists that was working in our factory in Ypsilanti [Michigan], 1976.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's the thread rolling department in our factory, 1976.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: That's another one of our machines, production machines; machine was called a chucker (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It looks noisy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It is noisy. It was noisy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Again, this was taken around 1975 or 1976.
