Story_ID: 269869
Speaker 1: Good morning.  Going on record for The HistoryMakers, I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer, and David Rappaport [ph.] is the observer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Today, we are interviewing [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell at his home, so I will start just by having you state your name, spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: My name is Alvin Bernard Bell; I am from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that middle name for me--Bernard?
Speaker 2: B-E-R-N-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: What's that question again?
Speaker 1: You can give me there-abouts--my date of--or the month and day, and then the approximate decade.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born December the 27th, 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 12th.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: 17 West 20th.
Speaker 1: And your--I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: My apartment number?
Speaker 1: No, no, no; 17 West 20th--city is?
Speaker 2: New York, New York 10011.
Speaker 1: Today is September 13th?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Come on, David (laughter).
Speaker 2: September the 13th.
Speaker 1: Sorry, sorry.
Speaker 2: And your occupation.
Speaker 1: I am a--what you call a creative design director is my title, which means I studied art and then I became an illustrator, and then I became a designer.
Story_ID: 269870
Speaker 1: Okay we're going to start with five pop culture questions and short answers; your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food.
Speaker 2: Depends what country I'm in.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I would have to say any kind of fish, any kind of pasta, and any kind of French salad.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Oh, it has to be September (laughter); September is the best.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think one should always start in Milan [Italy] and work their way through Austria, then I think after Austria, they should come around to maybe London [England], and I think then there's Paris [France], and I think it's back to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying; do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do--get the job done (laughter).
Story_ID: 269871
Speaker 1: And we're going to start with your mother, if you can state your mother's name and spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: Do I have to spell everything?  I hate that, I really do, I'm just saying--do I have to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well, well, well if it--you know what?  We'll, we'll--
Speaker 2: Spelling is not my best thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if it's something that I'm not sure about, or if it's a name that I'm not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then--okay, then I--then I'll--then you'll write it down--I'll write it down for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Catherine Bell, and my mother's relationship is my more wonderful part of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go on from there, just do you know your mother's date of birth and where--and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I know she was born in Trenton, New Jersey; I told you before this interview I wasn't great at dates.  I said to you, You ask me about dates, I'm gonna say--I'm just gonna look at you like--like I'm looking around like now.  It's just that dates--even when I was younger, it escaped me--honestly.  I have a little bit of a disorder when it comes to writing and dates, and all that.  I'm very visual; I can draw like God, but when it comes to doing anything academic, forget about it, really, honestly--that's the truth.
Speaker 1: Your mother's place of birth is Trenton, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Trenton, New Jersey--I know she was born, I think, was 1923--I'm sorry, it was '23 [1923]--1923; she was born in Trenton, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: So, did she grow up in Trenton, New Jersey also?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about what her--did she ever talk to you about what her life was like as a child in Trenton, New Jersey (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: What was it like?
Speaker 2: I, I had the best conversations with my mother when I was around seven or eight; they moved me to the basement of my house because I used to draw all the time, and they bought me a big drawing table and they made a--like a, like a work room for me in the basement, and I was really young--I found this whole thing.  And my mother was very, very close to her sisters and brothers; matter of fact, in my childhood, the only thing I remember was that she had a big family, and every weekend--and all the holidays were spent with her sisters.  And I remember once I asked her why like they were like this; I mean they talked, seriously, three times a day on the phone--it was like unbelievable.  And she says, "Well, we grew up in the [Great] Depression," she said, "Deep Depression."  Sometimes my father [James Bell] would say, "Yeah, really deep."  It's--that's how poor they were.  I mean chickens in the yard--it was like this thing; I just remember it really vaguely at Trenton, New Jersey.  But they were deep down and dirty poor kind of.  And she said to me, "You know, we had to look after one another," and so whoever the oldest ones were took care of the younger ones, 'cause her, her mother didn't work and her father died rather early, so there were twelve kids, she said, "What do you do with twelve kids in the Deep Depression?"  So she said, "All of us had to--I had to work, Rose [ph.] had to work, and Flossie [ph.] had to work and--," 'cause she had three, you know, youngers.  "And the boys," she said, "wouldn't do anything."  So she said, "Here we were, we had to like--we--," she said, "we would, we would clean, we would sweep, we would do anything we had to do to make sure that there was food," and there was always food.  And she said, "That's the way it was."  So, she painted the picture of it being terribly hard for--I won't say--I have to say that my mother and father were not big on the race card; I mean I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Means that I never heard them--like if they said she had a hard time, she didn't say black people had a hard time, she always referred to I--like we, the family.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's makeup?  Was she fully black?  Was she mixed with something?
Speaker 2: She was--she looked a lot like Lena Horne, I thought, and Dorothy Dandridge; she's, you know--and I--the book that I'm writing I had to describe her, and I said, she was one of these sort of very fair-skinned girls with, with very long hair to her shoulders like here (gesture), so she had, as my uncles said, she had a bad attitude problem because she thought--she said--my uncles, when they talked about her, said, She always had her nose up in the air.  And she always worked cleaning houses for these--all these white ladies.
Speaker 1: So she was--worked--she was a light-skinned black woman.
Speaker 2: Well, she was--I would say she was light brown skinned; I wouldn't say she was in those term--black terms, high yellow, but she was very, very fair brown-skinned, and she had hazel eyes, and that was--she, she was a pretty, pretty, pretty attractive, as they call her, like a pretty hot chick.
Story_ID: 269872
Speaker 1: Do you know your mother's [Catherine Bell] mother?  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean my, my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All I know, I know she was very heavy with that whole sort of discipline, you know; this was like--you're talking about did I--want to recall my grandmother?  Not so much; I mean her and I didn't get along.  She thought that I was a--like--I remember she used to say to my mother all the time, That's one spoiled child, honey; he is one spoiled child, and the only way you control a child like that is with a belt.  So like she--you know, she wasn't like somebody who I liked--who loved me.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: I, I--you know, I--I--not that I wanna not forget my grandmother's name (laughter); it's a terrible thing, but I just did (laughter).  My, my brother warned me about this last night; he said, you know, when you don't like somebody, you'll forget their names, and I said, well, what can I tell you?  No, I don't remember the name.
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather--your mother's father?
Speaker 2: I don't remember him.  And I really don't, honestly--calling her Grandmom all the time, and her dying so early when I was young.  I don't remember me having that many meetings with her.
Speaker 1: What about your--so you--and you didn't know your grandfather on that side; you don't remember him--he died when you were young (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he died when I was too young.
Story_ID: 269873
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the way your mother [Catherine Bell] dressed?  You said it had--she had a big influence on you later in life becoming a designer.
Speaker 2: Oh, she dressed like a movie star; she was quite divine.
Speaker 1: So, describe it for me--and what style, what period--
Speaker 2: Let's, let's talk about the '50s [1950s] 'cause that's what I remember and that's what this is all about.  I mean I--my, my childhood starts around when I start remembering around, I don't know, late '50s [1950s], so you would say she dressed like--she wore a lot of--she used to go to Ohrbach's in New York [New York], and she would buy a lot of the copies of the, the couture from Paris [France], or she would wear these--I remember my father [James Bell], when she was getting dressed to go to church, he would stand at the steps (laughter), and he would say, "There's no church in the world that would allow women to be--dress as you are."  He said, "I never seen anything like it."  But she would wear, you know, the classic sort of Chanels of the day, and she would wear like copies of a--of, of, of Balenciaga, and she would--she, she wear--she loved Chanel, and she loved--I think she loved Bonnie Cashin; she loved all of those--and she would buy the--she would buy all the magazines, like she would buy the Vogues and [Harper's] Bazaars, and she would try, she would--and she was a movie buff; she loved the movies and she loved anything--she was like a clone of Dorothy Dandridge; she, she sort of thought she looked like her, she did, she--and she--all she talked about when I was young was Dorothy Dandridge, I mean that's all she--she like worshipped the ground she walked on (laughter) she did.  She wanted her hair to be like that, she wanted to look a lot like Lena Horne.
Speaker 1: How was Dorothy Dandridge's hair?
Speaker 2: It was sort of '50s [1950s], bouffant kind of--short, cropped, you know that little--the little curl hair?
Speaker 1: So she aspire--or she wanted to look like--or she wanted to be a movie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, because she--I mean what did people do in that era?  They looked, you know, very much what they do now, they look like movie star--they looked at TV, they looked at magazines, and that's what they wanted to look like.
Story_ID: 269874
Speaker 1: What did you say your mother [Catherine Bell] did for a living?
Speaker 2: She worked in a factory; she worked in a menswear factory doing piece work.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the factory?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the factory.  She worked for so many.  She was very much like me, she couldn't keep a job; she had a big mouth.  She was always reading somebody, and she would always come home and says, I don't like these people, I don't like those people, that's the end of that.  But I remember she said to me that all the time, when she would be washing clothes or something, that she had to work, and she would work overtime; in fact, as I remember, she wasn't very much of a cook, by the way.  She couldn't cook to save her life because she was always working all the time, and when she would come home, she would just open up cans of food and just dump them on a--you know, just dump 'em on our plate and say, eat it, (unclear).  And then my father [James Bell] would say, well, why can't you even cook for the kids?  She said, because I have a job; I work because--we always kept a really beautiful house, I thought.  I mean when other kids came in and looked at it, they would--said, wow!  Your house is like--my mother kept--because she wanted this whole thing, and she said she worked every day and she didn't care what kinda job she had.  She said, I don't care whether I work in a factory, I don't care what, but she said, I intend to work because I have a car.  My father had a car and she had a car, and she wanted to work, she said, because your father doesn't make enough money for me to buy clothes, dress the boys the way I have to dress them, and keep a beautiful house.  So she said, do I like working?  No.  I thought when I married him he would take me out of the, you know, the ghetto.  But she said, he didn't so, what do I have to do?  I have to work.  And she was very independent, very bossy--I can never remember when my father ever had his way--ever.
Story_ID: 269875
Speaker 1: His name was James Bell; that's where I'm--I got my name from--that character (laughter).
Speaker 2: And what was your father like?
Speaker 1: He was totally the opposite of my ambitious mother [Catherine Bell].  He did have--he came from a somewhat bougier [bourgeois] existence.  Matter-of-fact, my mother and his family never really clicked almost.  His mother was a music professor; she went to college, even back then.  She was one of the first black women, and I don't, don't remember what college.  I was talking to my family last night, and they were tellin' me about her education, that she was very brainy.  And he had a large family, too; all his sisters, I remember, were in college, and all of my aunts on his side became professors of universities.  So their closeness, I have to say, wasn't--I mean they would--they wouldn't visit so often; I can't remember them ever coming up; we always had to go down south to Georgia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) in Georgia?
Speaker 1: They always bragged about their degrees; my father only had one year of college.  His family didn't particularly like my mother because they said to my mother when they were about to get married that they wanted their son to finish his education, and my mother said, no, either marries me now, or never--I'm beautiful, I'm young, I'm not waiting around for him to do that; I wanna, I wanna move on.  And so they kept that kind of--not against her, but they thought that she should have waited because it was only two years it was, because they wanted him to be quote, a school teacher because they were all school teachers in his family; they were all--they all got their master's [degree], and all of their kids went on to, to law school.  So they said to my mother, you know, it's very good if he finishes his--he gets a degree; he can teach in a college and he, you know, James is very brainy.  She said, what can I tell you?
Speaker 2: Where were they in Georgia?  You said they were in--
Speaker 1: Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, did you ever visit them in Macon, Georgia?
Speaker 1: Once.
Speaker 2: Once.  Did--how did you find that blacks in the South differ from blacks in the North?
Speaker 1: Well, I just remember my mother--I remember looking at my grandfather the first time I went home, and he was lying in his coffin, and I remember looking at him, and I remember all these white people standing around, and I looked at my mother and I said, "Well, why is he so light?"  I remember my mother took her hand and she put it over my mouth and she took me outta the church and she said, "You keep your mouth shut; you don't say a word, you do not say a word."  Then, I remember all of these--
Speaker 2: But before we leave that story, he was so light--what do you mean?
Speaker 1: He was light, he almost looked like a white person lying in the coffin; I just remember--
Story_ID: 269876
Speaker 1: We're talking about your father's [James Bell] father.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was very--I didn't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we were talking about the fact that he was very light-skinned.
Speaker 2: He was very light-skinned, and the only thing I remember is my mother [Catherine Bell] put her hand over me and dragged me out of the church and told me to shut up (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did, did your father's entire side of the family resemble his father--very light-skinned?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  My father was basically my complexion, and his children looked, you know, a mixture, like Pat [ph.]--two of his sisters were very, very fair, two of them maybe been my color, but they were all fairish, but two of them were very fair, but none of them were really as light as this guy was; this guy looked like he could have been Irish or something, and with all of these white people flirting around in that funeral, I got the feeling, I said--I remember later in my life I said to my mother, "You know, all of those people who were there, they were calling him like cousin, and stuff like that, those white people."  My mother said, "You know one thing?  I don't remember anything you're talking about--nothing.  Why don't you just go and do something else because your, your idea of what you saw and what I saw were two different things."  Now, my brother totally agrees with me, and so did my older brother, but sometimes I think, during that time period, I don't think that a lot of blacks were so willing to talk about being--if they had any mixture of blood, and when this whole black awareness came, people weren't so willing to, to share their bedtime stories to their children, you know?
Story_ID: 269877
Speaker 1: My mother [Catherine Bell] was deeply religious, you know?  She became religious later, matter of fact.  And matter of fact--
Speaker 2: Did you attend, attend church a lot?
Speaker 1: Did I?  You had to attend church until you were fifteen, then you could--no longer had to attend church.  I had problems with my mother and church because in one year she was Catholic, then she became Baptist, then she became Presbyterian, and in one year--and then she became the Church of God in Christ, so she had more religions than you could shake a stick at (laughter), you know what I'm saying?  She couldn't really make up her mind about really what religion she wanted to be.
Story_ID: 269878
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], have you ever traced your ancestors, ancestors back?  Like how far back do you know your family's history?
Speaker 2: No, my family has.  I'm too caught up in my own, you know?  I'm like a really self-involved person, you know; I'm really like--I mean, I (laughter), I'm really, really self-indulgent.  I really don't care too much about too many people, but I think my roots are concerned--I just use my family for that, you know?  We--and they have get-togethers; my family's always reading me about not attending things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have--I had two brothers.
Speaker 1: They're both deceased?
Speaker 2: No, one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and one is--now, he's a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, just in what order?  Can you list them in, including yourself (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's Jimmy [Bell (ph.)].  Jimmy, Jimmy--
Speaker 1: Is the oldest?
Speaker 2: --is the oldest; Donald [Bell (ph.)] is next, and then it's me, and then I have a baby sister.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Tanya [Bell (ph.)].
Story_ID: 269879
Speaker 1: Do you remember growing up yourself in Trenton, New Jersey?  Did you grow up in Trenton (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  My family, my--James [Bell] and Catherine [Bell] moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I--so I was born in Philadelphia--so were all my brothers, by the way.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about how they met, James and Catherine?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course they did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did--
Speaker 2: My mother told me, when she was in the basement, how they met.  I think she could have done better, but--but she (laughter)--I, I thought she should have looked around some more, but--He was very cute, I have to say.  You know, he was kind of starry looking, and he was light-skinned, she was light-skinned, they all had hazel eyes, he had good hair, she had good hair, you know what I'm saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's good hair?
Speaker 2: Good hair is when black people had long wavy hair that looked like white people; that's what they said then.  You know, if you had--you know, when the, when the comb could through it nicely, and it waved--that's what I'm saying.  It's not my words, it's their words.
Speaker 1: No, but I'm interested in what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean when--you know, it's, it's interesting when we talk about that now because my mother would say to me when I asked her how she met him, she said, well, it was a depression, it was, it was--your father was stationed in--he was in World War II [WWII]; he was stationed in Trenton, New Jersey--and she had just graduated from high school, and she attended a dance one night with her sisters, after high school, and she said this gorgeous drop-dead handsome guy who looked like a black Clark Gable--he was really kind of attractive--looked--walked over to her and said, "Do you wanna dance?"  And she said, "That was it."  She said, "Every girl in the room wanted him, and I got him."  And she said they courted, I think, for two weeks, and he called his parents in Georgia and said he was gonna marry this Yankee, and they said, "No way!  No way will you marry a girl; is she in college?  Is she in school?"  And he said, "No, she's outta high--I mean, you know, outta high school."  They said, "Well, is she going to college?"  And he said, "No."  They said, "No, no, bring her home, bring her down south and, you know, let's check her out."  And she said, "No, I don't wanna meet them; you marry me or that's it."  She said, it's just--to me; there were just too many other guys who wanted to marry her.  It was him or somebody else, she said.  She said--but she thought that she had--he was gonna go to school--go back to school, that he was gonna like be somebody and, you know, put her up in these big, big houses, you know?  She didn't get her dream.  My only thing is she should have looked around; that's how they met anyway.
Speaker 1: So, when you--when they moved to Philadelphia, you were born--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the best one that was born, though, out of the three.
Story_ID: 269880
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: My memory is--I think--well, it was one day I was playing on a Saturday, and the mailman came and I had entered--I was in elementary school, and the teacher said it was going to be a sort of city-wide drawing contest, and they--we had to submit drawings, and I was the only kid to do a big vase of flowers; now remember (laughter), all the other guys and girls who were drawing, were drawing things like--I don't know, really silly, ridiculous things--and I just was--'cause I started drawing really early; my mother [Catherine Bell] started me drawing really--I mean when I was like seven, and so by time I was ten, I had, I had entered this thing and the teacher said, well, draw whatever you want.  And I know people were drawing people holding balloons, and I remember when I started drawing flowers in this vase, all the kids walked over to me and said, "How stupid is that?  I mean why would you wanna draw--," you know, a guy said, "You know, why aren't you drawing cars?"  I said, "Please, no."  So, my teacher looked at me--I remember--I was really young.  She said, "What made you do flowers in a vase?"  I said, "It came naturally to me to do that."  So, when I told my mother and father [James Bell]--my father was very kinda--really not into what I was doing really; he really wasn't because when he saw me drawing flowers, he just looked at my mother and said, "What is he doing?"  My mother said, "Leave him alone, leave him alone, he's fine."  Well, that, that Saturday when they--you know, when they put them all in for this contest, this city-wide drawing contest, it was like three weeks later and the postman said, "Is there an [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell here?"  And I was playing outside and I said, "That's me."  He said, "Well, there's a letter for you."  And I opened up this letter and it said, "You have won the second place of the city-wide drawing contest."  And I was like jumping up and down and screaming; I was screaming and hollering.  I go--run in the house and I was screaming, "Mom!  Mom!  Mom!"  So they came running downstairs; my father said, "What happened?"  I said, "I won!"  My mother grabbed it outta my hand, she snatched it, she read it, and she handed it to my father and she said, "See?  You didn't want flowers?  There it is; and now," she says, "he's gonna have something--some--something hanging in this house, and nobody else has done anything; maybe my children will make more money than my husband."  She was really, she was really--she was a tough broad, man, she was, she was--I liked her.
Story_ID: 269881
Speaker 1: And my other famous story is when I was seven, she [Bell's mother, Catherine Bell] took me shopping; she took me shopping a lot, and it was--she took me shopping and it was just sweaters in the window.  It was three sweaters in the window, and she said, "Which one do you want?"  And I said, "I want the brown one," and she said, "Why?"  I said, "Because I like brown, and it's cheaper."  She says, "I don't like the brown one, the yellow cardigan is really expensive."  And she said, "Remember this--always take the most expensive one because you'll want that all of your life and you'll never want anything cheap.  The expensive one will last longer, and you'll have it for the rest of your life."  So, I said, "Oh."  I never forgot that in my life; I went through life remembering that story, that I was only seven, and that's what she put in my head.  And she says, You're, you're--'cause my mother had to buy my clothes; my father [James Bell] had to buy the other oldest two kids [Jimmy Bell and Donald Bell (ph.)], so she said, "Your, your father is always gonna buy your brothers the cheapest thing he could possibly find, where you're my responsibility and I'm always gonna buy you the most expensive."  And she did, and so I (laughter)--I had this attitude, my father didn't like it at all; I would just like--I had a really fresh mouth; he hated it.  I mean he would smack me sometimes when I went too far, but my mother had sort of created a monster.
Story_ID: 269910
Speaker 1: What was life like when you started school?  Do you remember when you started the first grade?
Speaker 2: No.  I hated school; I hated everything about it.  I couldn't wait 'til I got out.  I, I was--
Speaker 1: Were there no teachers there that were (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I had mentors, but before I go--I don't mean to (unclear), but I wanna talk about--a little about my family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and growing up with them.  Church and family was basically everything.  I don't remember playing with a lot of kids until I got really older.  I was very close to my cousins because our family was huge, so every holiday and every Sunday, when we weren't in church--we would leave church and go visit them, and that's what my life was like until I was, I don't know, ten or eleven.  But everything was built around church, and family, was a very close family, so that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Who else--did your, did your family--did your mother [Catherine Bell] and father [James Bell] ever take on other people to live in the household with you?  Like did your fath- any brothers or sisters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother was too grand; are you kidding?  No way.  It was just her, my father--they were very much in love, by the way; they were almost like the Reagans; that's the only thing I--they really--that my brothers [Jimmy Bell and Donald Bell (ph.)] and I just--nobody liked it, but everybody in the neighborhood--I can't remember growing up with other--in a black family where I can actually say--you know, they took their vows three times before they both died; they were very much in love with one another.  Their children, I think--I don't wanna say they were secondary, but they, they were one of these really--I won't use the word, all these false words, like happily married; I can just say they were deeply in love from the time that they met when they were young--through their kids; I mean they were just very much like--and they never had an argument; she would just, she would just say where we were going and what we were doing, and he would just simply say "Yes" to everything that she asked for.
Story_ID: 269911
Speaker 1: Can you describe the block you lived on in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was one a those sort of--Philly cheesesteaks, hundreds and thousands of all those row houses that all looked the same, that little tiny narrow street with a car parked on one side, and barely enough room for a person to get by, let alone a car, you know?  It was like--and we lived in one a those row houses; we had an enclosed porch 'cause my mother [Catherine Bell] had a porch enclosed where everybody else's for miles around was open but ours; she didn't want anybody to anything so she enclosed ours, so there it is.
Speaker 1: What was the, the community like?  Was there a community outside the church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was; my mother really didn't like her children--I didn't play with a lotta kids, I really didn't.
Speaker 1: Just your brothers [Jimmy Bell and Donald Bell (ph.)] and sister [Tanya Bell (ph.)]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't play with them; we didn't get along.
Speaker 1: Who did you play with?
Speaker 2: I played with a girlfriend of mine name Roslyn [ph.], who lived across the street, who was an artist, you know?  I have to say my life as a child was a really crazy one, it really was.  I can't ever remember where I was really on this earth with everybody else.  I found my, my passion very early on.  I always thought I was like Oliver Twist, who had the wrong parents.  I always thought that my real parents were coming to get me any second. I mean I was a really screwed up little kid; I had an ambition when I was young, a driving ambition that had so much heat coming out of it because I really did find a pencil and pen maybe far too earlier than when I should have found it.
Story_ID: 269912
Speaker 1: Who influenced you in the pencil and pen and the drawing life?  Where did it come from?  Who were the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came from, I think, because I had a learning disorder, basically, and I wasn't very good at reading and writing, and I remember my father [James Bell] was being so academic and my older two brothers [Jimmy Bell and Donald Bell (ph.)] were really brilliant.  My father would pay three dollars to each one of his kids for every book you read, so if you would read a book and you would tell him everything that was inside the book, he would pay you three dollars; that was a lot of money then for young kids.  And my brothers were just like cleaning up, and ev- and the words would just run together, and I remember he always used to say, "You know, you're gonna be a dummy.  You can't even get a--if you can't read and spell, you can't get a job in a grocery store, and you can't work in the post office, and you can't do anything.  You can't be a teacher."  I don't know, I just didn't understand the words he was saying to me and I never--the only, the only words I understood was my mother [Catherine Bell] when she was talking to me.
Speaker 1: And what would your mother say to you that you understood?
Speaker 2: She was much more--she lived in a much more dream world.
Story_ID: 269913
Speaker 1: When did you discover--as a child--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you discover fashion?  Did you discover that you liked drawing clothing of all women's clothing?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't discover fashion until I was in high school [Edward W. Bok Technical High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I had a high school teacher who was like my mother [Catherine Bell], who was--
Speaker 1: What was that teacher's name?
Speaker 2: Miss Margaret Canavera [ph.]; I can't--
Speaker 1: That's fine, Canavera.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was, she was--she wore [Emilio] Pucci, and she wore, she wore Chanel and she owned [Norman] Norells and she owned Balenciagas, and I became her darling pet, and she would invite me to her house and she was the most important woman in my life besides my mother.  And I remember once when I went home--ran home and told my mother about her.
Speaker 1: What did you tell your mother?
Speaker 2: I said, "Mom!  Mom!  I, I met my teacher; she, she, she owns, she owns Pucci and she owns Norells and she owns Balenciaga."  My mother looked at me and she said, "So what?  How fabulous is she?  She works every day like me; she's not so fabulous," (laughter).  "How fabulous is she?"  You know, that's what my mother would say; like she didn't wanna give any other woman any other credit other than her.
Speaker 1: Well, how did--how, at that age, did you know who Pucci and [Coco] Chanel and those designers were?
Speaker 2: Because that was part of my career; that's where (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you mean, part of your career?  At this time, you were in high school--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember when I, when I finished high school I got these very high-powered jobs and--
Speaker 1: But you didn't know that she was wearing Pucci and Channel before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did because I was looking at magazines.
Speaker 1: You were looking at magazines?
Speaker 2: My mother--my father [James Bell] didn't allow me to have too much to do with fashion.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: Because he always--you know, you know, fashion to a military man was a sign of you could be--
Speaker 1: Gay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could be gay, you could be homosexual, and that was taboo in their mind.  So my mother would sneak me--when he went to work, she would buy all these Harper's Bazaars and Vogue, and she would sneak them down to the basement, and I just remember she supplied me with all of my Harper's Bazaars and Vogue and she, she was in charge of my--of my life; my--'cause my father just said--my father said, "But the boy cannot be walking around with Vogues and Bazaars, Catherine; I won't have it!  I will not have it in this house; he is too young.  The boy is eleven--ten years old; he can't--," you know, I wasn't, I wasn't ten, I was more like thirteen.
Story_ID: 269914
Speaker 1: I went to art school when I was thirteen, so--
Speaker 2: What art school did you go to?
Speaker 1: I went to--I can't remember; I think it was the Museum College of Art [sic. Philadelphia College of Art; The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and after I won that award, the teachers told my mother [Catherine Bell] they should put me into a--
Speaker 2: What award did you win?
Speaker 1: That award that I won--that city-wide award.
Speaker 2: The, oh, the drawing contest--
Speaker 1: The drawing contest.
Speaker 2: So, before you--so the drawing contest is when you were thirteen?
Speaker 1: No, I was around, I was around eight.
Speaker 2: Eight, okay.
Speaker 1: I was in elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was really young, and through that, when I got older, they put me in a, in a--sort of an advance school for, for drawing, so that's where I learned to draw--
Speaker 2: So can we get some of the names like--well, you don't have to go through school because it wasn't a great time for you--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but do you remember the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of the school that you went to after elementary--after you won the contest and they put you into (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went to, I went to, I went to Bok Vocational High School [Edward Bok Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I remember that, and then I went to the Museum College of Art on Pine Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, but let's just--the, the years in which you were draw--when you discovered that you were good at--
Speaker 1: --I discovered that around six; I was like six years--I know I was six--between six and seven--
Story_ID: 269915
Speaker 1: When your father's [James Bell] saying to your mother [Catherine Bell] that the, the kid can't run around the house with Vogue magazines or (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that wasn't until I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: So you were thirteen.  And then from that point, you were--where were you going to school at that point, when your father said--
Speaker 2: --I was going to--I was just about to go to [Edward] Bok [Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so by time I got to high school, I knew about fashion, but it was a closet fashion I knew, but I mean I couldn't tell anybody 'cause my father wouldn't allow me to.  So I didn't--couldn't tell anybody, so it was just me and my mother, so she--he, he would work at night, so what she would do, when he went to work at night--he left around 8:30, and at 8:30, she would come downstairs and she would say, I got these Vogues and [Harper's] Bazaars for you, and then she said, they are like too fabulous, too gorgeous, too gorgeous.  And then I learned to love Norell; it was my--it was my favorite.  And then--
Speaker 1: Why Norell?
Speaker 2: Because he [Norman Norell] was the, the designer of the day, and I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you know about him as a designer?
Speaker 2: You know, I knew about his little black dresses and I just--I couldn't read anything but I could read fashion really well.  I mean I know that sounds pretentious, but it's true; I could, because I would sit there--I mean I couldn't read it in my bed at night, and I had to read it with my mother and--like in the basement, because my father (laughter) just would go cra- he couldn't handle it.  I just--I--and it was fine, it was fine.  But then I would move on to Gallianos and the rest of them--
Story_ID: 269916
Speaker 1: When I got to high school [Edward Bok Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I showed my mentor--she turned out to be more than my mentor, though; she would be the one to cultivate my taste.
Speaker 2: What was her name again?
Speaker 1: Miss Margaret Canavera [ph.].
Speaker 2: Miss Canavera.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, Miss Canavera--
Speaker 1: Cultivated my--my mother [Catherine Bell] played a very strong role, but I know my mother would hate for me to say this now, but it was Mar- Miss Margaret Canavera who really said to me one day when I, when I told her I wanted to be a designer, she said, well, I don't think that you should because I think you are--your drawing ability is too great, and you can draw as well as [Pablo] Picasso, she said.  Or, she said, [Paul] Cezanne--you're really that great, and a pen and pencil and you can, you can draw anything like God.  She said, you know you're like a prodigy of this--of your art; it's just intense.  To be so young, you would had to have started drawing really early on to be this, to be this good.  And she said, but if you have to, I will steer you in that direction, but do I want to?  No.  And then one day I went to her and I said, Miss Canavera; she said, all right, all right, I'll do it.  She said--now, this is part of my book, too.  In my autobiography, I said she sat me down, and I'll never forget what she told me.  Like my mother had this sweater story?  She said, if you must be a designer, this is the deal, she said.  She wrote a pen, she said, and she got a piece a paper out and she said, there only five designers in this world that you ought to look at, and you are never to look at anybody else.  Do you understand what I'm saying to you?  And I said, not exactly, Miss Canavera.  She said--and she took a pencil and she said, now, there is [Cristobal] Balenciaga, and she went on to his history, told me about it.  She said, There was a young designer who works with him called [Hubert de] Givenchy; he is coming up, there's a young designer called Solo Wong [ph.]; you might wanna look at him, but his name is not going on that list--[Coco] Chanel and Balenciaga you will look at first.  Pucci, she says, I wear, and I tell you why I wear him [Emilio Pucci].  Pucci you must wear because you can travel in Pucci; I own two print dresses of his.  I wear, I wear his prints, I travel with him--no, she said, I buy him because you can travel in Pucci, and I own three black dresses.  She, she said, I own a lot of dresses of [Norman] Norell; I own only one dress of Balenciaga, she said, because it is very expensive for me.  I own two original Chanels, not the copies, and that's all, and I only wear them for very, very special things like the theater.
Story_ID: 269917
Speaker 1: She [Bell's teacher, Margaret Canavera (ph.)] lived with a very rich sister; they lived in Rittenhouse Square [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was the only place to live in--
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, she exposed me to a very rich world, you know, and I was really young and--I mean what she introduced me to--she would, she would invite me to lunch on Saturdays; my mother [Catherine Bell] would take me there, and I remember once my mother met her.  I don't know whether they got along so well or not, but they did meet, and my mother said, why would a white lady take such interest in you because--I said, mom, you know--
Speaker 2: What did you mother mean by that?
Speaker 1: Well, she--because I was her youngest; woman was older and she wasn't married and she lived alone, you know, with her sister.  So, you know, come on, a young, a young son, you know, you know?  And this woman decide to take me up and, you know, take me and, and give me all her--I mean she gave me a lot of culture.  And I remember once when they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yea, I know your mom said, why would this--
Speaker 1: Well, because--
Speaker 2: --your mom, your mom says to you, why would this white woman take in your respon- or what--
Speaker 1: --well, she didn't necessarily use that word I'm--but it was in her mind, and that she sort of cut us up short from saying that.  But she was very protective, and she thought, why would she do that?  And then she met Miss Canavera and Miss Canavera said to her--she was--Miss Canavera was a really tough lady.  My mother was tough, but Miss Canavera was even tougher, honey; she was really even tougher.  And she just looked at my mother and she said, well, the bottom line is your son is destined to be something, and someone great--that's it.  She said, he draws like God, and he has taste that I've never even seen a young boy to have at his age to have; he has very fine taste, and I could help him.  And she said, I'm going to help him whether anybody likes it or not.  She said, because one day I think I'll be reading about him.  And she said, he has a burning passion I've never seen anybody have of his age.  And my mother said, well, then you can take him.  And then Miss Canavera would take me to lunch and show me how to eat the French way, and how to dine and--it was a little too much for my parents I mean, because I became a little bit--I became a little snotty and they, they saw me--I know my mother would say, you know, she said, don't talk fresh to me, she said, you've got--you've been (laugher) hangin' around these people and you--I just got a little uppity and--but I did, so there it was.  But she was my mentor.  There it is.  Her and my mother they created this, this person; my mother would just--and then through Miss Canavera, my mother would say to me, "What is Miss Canavera wearing?"  I said, "Oh, Mom, with luncheon she wore Pucci and she, she wore real, real Cartier pearls, and she wore real Nandescent [ph.] pumps--," I'm sorry, but she wore really divine clothes, so she--and she was this little tiny woman.  She was Italian, she had severe makeup, big eyes, really teased, teased hair, and this--she wore the perfume [Jean] Patou.  So she (laughter)--she was, she was just too much (laughter).  And then there was another teacher--my English teacher in high school [Edward Bok Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] also wore Chanel, and so I was the only one who they would talk to about fashion; I mean that's why I hated school.  Actually, I really hated school.  I couldn't get outta there--I didn't really think it was quite glamorous enough; there was nobody wearing anything really wonderful but my teachers, and that's the only thing I had.  I mean fashion wasn't, wasn't my life; I really did--I wasn't so much into becoming a designer, I really have to tell you.  It wasn't like I liked clothes, I liked the idea of illustration because my first jobs were of an illustrator.
Story_ID: 269918
Speaker 1: When you graduated high school [Edward Bok Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where did you go from there?  What was your next--
Speaker 2: I was really funny--it's another great story.  I'm sorry to tell you so many, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: It's an oral history.
Speaker 2: It's, it's--they was great.  It was like--I was walking down the street with my portfolio, and I thought of going to department stores showing my portfolio, because I forgot to tell you I was an illustrator; took me a long time, by the way, to become a designer in my history, of my life, by the way.  I didn't really become a designer until I was, I was in my thirties.  I, I was an illustrator; I could draw when I--you know--I took classes as an artist, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you graduated high school--
Speaker 2: I was, I, I had an illustrator's portfolio because I was --
Speaker 1: From high school?
Speaker 2: Right, because I went to Bok Tech, and they taught you how to become a commercial artist, so I came out--
Speaker 1: As an illustrator.
Speaker 2: I came out as an illustrator, and fashion was something that I hid with my mother [Catherine Bell] and Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.].
Speaker 1: So, what were you illustrating?  What was in your book?
Speaker 2: Cigarette ads, car ads, architecture--I had a really serious drop dead professional portfolio; I could draw anything.  I was the best in my class when it came to--in my art class, not Miss Canavera classes, but my--the reason why I was--took Bok Tech was to become a commercial illustrator, so I had--my portfolio was made up of cars, architecture--I had to take--to learn how to do architecture, cars, all kind of advertisements, cereals, stuff like that, so I went around and I was looking for work, and I remember one day I was standing outside of a bridal store and this woman comes out--I'd only been out of high school nine days, and this woman comes out and we started talking and she said, "Oh, why don't you show me your portfolio?"  We started talking about fashion.  I said, "Well, no, I don't have my fashion portfolio with me, I have that at home."  And she said, "Why don't you carry it?"  I said, "Well, because my father [James Bell] doesn't want to look at it so I, I hide it."  And then I went back and showed it to her and she said, "There's no way that you could have done this."  And I looked at her and I remember saying to her, "Do you really like it?"  My--she said, "Where did you learn to have such taste?" and she said, "Where did you?"  And I said, "My mother," I said, but then my, my friend and my teacher became my friend, Miss Canavera, and she wrote down five designers and said, "You are to look like Norell, you are to look like Balenciaga, you are to look like Chanel, or there won't be any lessons.  You are to have, you are to have--you must have taste, you must have the best taste there is," so I said, oh, okay, so that's where I learned it all from.  And when this woman looked at it, she saw--
Story_ID: 269919
Speaker 1: --that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was the woman?  What was her name?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't--oh, her name was Mrs. Stein [ph.]; I won't forget her either, because Mrs. Stein knew Mrs. Angelo [Edythe Vincent Piccione], so I went to work for Alfred Angelo [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the biggest bridal company in the world.  And so Mrs. Stein said, "Are you looking for work?"  And I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Tomorrow morning I will call Mrs. Angelo."  The phone rung around three o'clock the next day; she says, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], this is Mrs. Stein, I've arranged for you to see Mrs. Angelo of Alfred Angelo."  She said, "Do you know who they are?"  And I said, "No."  She said, "That's good."  So, the next day, I had to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Now, Broad Street, that's where their office was, and I walked into this office and I remember I was, I was, I was, I was eighteen; I know that was 1964--I'll never forget it, and I remember going in to her office with her secretary taking me into this thing that looked like 'Funny Face,' like--you know that movie with Audrey Hepburn?  The office was big and, and there was another--this is--Mrs. Angelo was like really divine, and she was on the--had all these telephones, a big desk, secretaries, and all the whole thing, and I remember walking in like a kid, and I was like star-struck and I said--and she was really serious when I walked in.  She looked at me and she said, "Okay, open it up, let me see," like that, and I opened it up and she--I remember her looking at it, and she said, "My God, you could not have done this."  She said, "I have professional designers here; nobody draws like this."  And then I said, "Oh, do you like it?"  Well, she was to become my friend; of course she, she hired me.  Well, she kept me.  My appointment was at ten o'clock that morning and she kept me until five o'clock, and she gave me breakfast, lunch, dinner; she had her employees drive me home 'cause I didn't get home until 5:30, six o'clock in the evening.  My mother [Catherine Bell] was (unclear) was just like crazy, and they said, "What happened?"  I said, "They kept me."  And then I remember during lunch she pushed all these buttons on her desk; she had all these buttons--she pushed all these buttons.  She had everyone to come in, she said, "Look at this.  This, this, this child draws like he's like some prodigy of God."  She said, "I've never seen anything like it."  So afterwards--and all these designers came in and start looking and everything and I felt really good about it because I thought my mother and Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.] had did a number on me, I thought, and I was possessed by this whole thing, and finally I could show somebody my fashion work--stuff; I could show it to somebody without being in the closet (laughter) about it, you know?
Story_ID: 269920
Speaker 1: She [Edythe Vincent Piccione] sat down and she said, "Unfortunately, I can't give you a job as a designer," but she said, "but I can give you a job as an illustrator."  She said, "You know, you have to go to school and you must be trained to be a designer; you have dreams and you sketch like you have dreams.  You dream like, like you," she said, "you must have started dreaming when you were like two; you have these wild dreams and they, they come out of your illustrations, but you draw like a professional illustrator.  Your designing will have to come later in time because," she said, "you know, designers go to school, they take pattern making and all that."  She said, "But I would love to have you as an illustrator here, I would."  She said, "Would you like a job here?"  I said, "Oh, a job?"  I says, "Oh, I didn't know; I thought I was just coming to show you my work."  She said, "Would you like a job?"  I said, "Sure."  I said, "My father [James Bell] would be really surprised."  This is the best part of the story, I'm sorry.  When she asked me how much I wanted to make, I said, "Oh, I have no idea."  She said, "Well, we have to start you off not like a professional big illustrator, so we can only give you $450 a week."  I thought, that's more than my mother [Catherine Bell] makes; that's almost more than my father makes.  And I just remember sitting there, and I said, are you--I said, is that--she said, what?  I says, "Oh, Mrs. Angelo [Edythe Vincent Piccione], I don't really know."  I said, you know, I, I said, "I think that my mother would be really much in shock, you know?"  So, when I got home, and my mother and father said, "So, did they love your stuff?"  I said, "Yeah, they went crazy and they kept me all day; they wouldn't let me leave."  And she said, "You think she's going to offer you some--a, a job?"  And I said, "They hired me."  And my father said, "Hired you to do what?"  I say, "They hired me as a fashion illustrator."  He said, "Are they going to pay you for that, or do you just work until you work your way up?"  I said, "No, they're going to pay me like $500 a week."  And I remember my mother and father stopped, and they looked around, and my mother looked at my father and she said, "He couldn't get a job, huh?  He couldn't get a job, you said, and he makes more money than you and me--at eighteen years old."
Story_ID: 269893
Speaker 1: You were talking about your job with, at Ms. Stein's [ph.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was with, with, with the Angelos [Alfred Angelo and Edythe Vincent Piccione]; that's--
Speaker 1: With Ms. Stein?  Is that--what was the--
Speaker 2: Well, Mrs. Stein owned the bridal store.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the bridal store?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the bridal store, I really don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, where was it located?
Speaker 2: It was really in Center City in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; it's a very kind of--area there what they call Rittenhouse Square [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and they had all the fine stores, like (unclear), Saks [Fifth Avenue], all located in this area, and that's where I was walking around; that gives you a hand at where my mind was--very close to where Ms. [Margaret] Canavera [ph.] lived.
Speaker 1: So, at what point--
Speaker 2: --did I leave home.
Speaker 1: Not really, but during the time you were working at the bridal shop, were you still going to school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was--I--no, I wasn't, I wasn't working at a bridal shop; the bridal shop introduced me to Alfred Angelo [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: They were the largest bridal manufacturers in the world at the time, so they were like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you were looking for a--
Speaker 2: --for Alfred Angelo; it was a bridal firm selling women's bridal dresses and bridesmaids dresses, but they were the largest and the biggest and the most prestigious, so it was like goin' to work for the biggest, and they still are the biggest, by the way.
Speaker 1: As you worked for them, what were you doing as far as continuing to study as a designer?
Speaker 2: I wasn't--that's when I was really good friends with Willi Smith, by the way.
Story_ID: 269894
Speaker 1: Well, talk to me about Willi; that's--I was getting to Willi Smith, trying to get to Willi Smith (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we met when Ms. [Margaret] Canavera [ph.] suggested I take a night course at Museum College of Art [sic. Philadelphia College of Art; The University of the Arts] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on Pine Street, like an advance thing for it--when I was in high school [Edward Bok Vocational School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and when I got there, she introduced me to the dean and all these other people.  And then, the dean of the school said, there's another designer here; they didn't say black designer, he said designer.  I know you want me to say, black designer, but I'm not, because it's not what they said--we'll get to that part later.  And he--they said, there's another boy here who is--
Speaker 1: Boy?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did they say boy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they said boy, but they didn't mean it like that, you know; it was a design school, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --they said, another boy because, because we were kids, don't forget; we were like really young boys, we were, we were young boys, and--'cause we were only--when we met, we were only sixteen; that was another thing; my parents [Catherine Bell and James Bell] didn't think he was a little bit (gesturing) he was a little bit on the softer side of life, you know?  I was a little bit more butch, he was a little bit more soft--yeah (laughter)--he was.  But he was like--but they said, it's another guy here who is going to be great--he is great, they said.  He is great; he is really smart.  He is really, really smart, this guy, and you should know him because both of you are in this city together.  And one night they said--they arranged for us to meet, and when we met, it was--love--it was, it was--that would last 'til his death--it was, it was.  I was his biggest--I idolized him and he loved me, and he looked at my sketches and I looked at his and he said, we will be friends until death.  I am going to Parsons [School of Design], to New York [New York]; I am--I intend to be famous and great, and he, he was--he became all those things.  He became who he was, and he would visit me on--every time he was here from Parsons, and.
Story_ID: 269895
Speaker 1: Will you just state his name, and his designer name, just so that people that are watching the oral history will, will know who we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay.  His name was Willi Smith, and Willi Smith was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania like myself.  He was raised in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was raised in South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and he was, I think, the first famous black designer in history; I think he remains the most famous.  He was in the days of--before the CFDA [Council of Fashion Designers of America], and he won a Coty Award [Coty American Fashion Critics' Awards], he became a millionaire very early, he was on the cover of Women's Wear [Daily], I think; maybe he broke all history thirty-six times, or something like that--some unbelievable number.  He was the darling of the press, he was very, very smart; he was very academically brilliant.  I mean he could also speak French, you know?  And he took French classes and he was a little bit--I remember when he first came to New York [New York], and I remember he didn't change too much until his--almost his second year; he came home wearing Gucci shoes and Gucci shirt and a Pierre Cardin blazer and he had changed.
Speaker 1: So, he went to New York before you because he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was before me and he went to Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] while I was working at Alfred Angelo [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he, he was a star, and everybody knew he was gonna be a star.  I--he reminds me very much of Jane Austen, and--you know, Jane Austen, 'Emma' and Jane Austen?  (Laughter) He remind me of that (laughter).  He was--I, I worshipped him because he did something that I, I wasn't doing.  I thought he had a wonderful command of the English language; he, he was very tongue-in-cheek, he had a really snappy dialogue, I mean, that was really snappy and, and he was the darling of Philadelphia, you know?  He was a president of an all-white school.  He was with an all-white school and he was the president; I mean he became the president of his school, so they, they--everybody had high hopes for him; he--his grandmother was the nanny of some very wealthy family on Long Island [New York], and they cultivated him and he, and he became the darling of this--of the fashion world.  And he was my best friend and, and so there was--you know, like when I'm talking to people, they say, you know, it really was you and him.  And--but he went much further; I was a commercial success, but he went much further in terms of fame, and knowing everybody.  Like he was friends with Andy Warhol and friends with all the, the most famous, you know, Halston--all the most famous people of the day were his, his, his friends.  And when I would, I would go to his parties, all of his parties, they were always like--everybody who was famous of the day was always at his parties; he was a--huge celebrity.
Story_ID: 269896
Speaker 1: When did you come to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Sixty--'66 [1966]?  Sixty-six [1966] I came, and I didn't have a good time when I came here; I mean, I knew him [Willi Smith], and that was all I had to know.
Speaker 1: And you came to do what?
Speaker 2: I came to find out about my designing career, and I was an illustrator.  And then I had a real--a very tough time because I was an illustrator and I had no design training, so I would go look for a job, and people would look at, look at my portfolio and say, well, you should be a costume designer, you know; you should be a costume designer.  And like--and I couldn't get a job.  And then Willi [Smith] would recommend me to people because he knew--you know, he wasn't a--he wasn't that big then; I was only two years, two years behind him, so he was his first job when I got here, so he didn't--I mean now he would know the world, but--now--but we were both young and when he would turn me on to headhunters and stuff like that, and they would say--they would call him and say, the boy had a chip on his shoulder.  And then he would call me, I would say, "I don't think they like me."  He says, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], they--everybody thinks you have a chip on your shoulder."  He said, "But," he was very grand, he said, "but who cares, darling?  Who cares what anybody thinks?  It's only what we think.  And I know that you're great, you know that I'm great, and so it's only a matter of time; there's a lot of people here."  And I said to him, "But, you know, tell me something," I would say to him.  "You know, it has to be something wrong with my portfolio because other than that," then I would be working, like I was, you know?  And, and he just--you know, I don't know whether he was afraid to hurt my feelings; I don't know what he was afraid of, but he didn't tell me the truth.  The truth was I wasn't professionally trained as a designer, and I was basically an illustrator.  And it wasn't until later in life that I would know how to become a designer.  I mean I did, I did find design jobs.
Story_ID: 269897
Speaker 1: This brings me to Halston--he was the first one that I would see of the famous designers, and I just did away with headhunters; I just knew that wasn't working for me, I wasn't trained well enough, and I knew I had to be an assistant.  So, I called Halston, and it was some very pretentious guy who would answer his phone, and every time I would ask him, he said, "No, Mr. Halston is very busy--click!  Mr. Halston is very busy."  So--nobody's gonna believe this, but it's true.  It was--I was walking down the street; it was a rainy--I think a Thursday, and I picked up the phone and I said, "Halston, please," and they said, "Who's calling?"  I said, "This is a friend of his," and they said, "From where?"  I said, "I met him in a bar"--that's what I said.  I said, "I met him in a bar."  And he came to the phone, he picked up, he says, "Who is this?"  I says, "My name is [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell, and I have to say this very quickly, sir.  I've been trying to get an interview with you to show you my portfolio, and nobody will look, and everybody keeps hanging up the phone on me."  And I said, "And I'm, and I'm new in this city, and I don't have anybody to talk to but my friend Willi [Smith]," and he's a--and he--it's his first job; we're talking really quickly.  And he says, "And where are you?"  I says, "I'm in a telephone book--telephone booth, and I'm looking up at you on the phone talking."  And he says, "Well then, you should come up, well then we'll let you come up."  And they let me in and I came upstairs (laughter), and he interviewed--he didn't interview really, he talks to me, he told me--it was fabulous, by the way; you know, I mean I love this story.  The first time I met him and he interviewed me, I mean it was--he didn't interview me, but he said to me--it's a famous part--he said, "Do you need to work to pay your rent?"  And I looked at him, I remember, looked at him and I said, "You mean am I rich?"  And he said, "Well, are you?"  And then he looked at me and he said, "I'm sorry"--he had a really soft voice--he says, "I'm sorry."  He said, "I never had to work to pay my rent, so I don't know anything about that, but," he said, "how can I help you?"  And he said to me, "Don't be shy with me, by the way.  Anybody who can say what you said on the phone to get yourself up here, is destined to become somebody.  I'm sorry," he said, "so don't, don't get shy on me now."  (Laughter)  He said, "How old are you?  You can't be but so,"--he--and I said I was--I mean I was twenty--twenty-five, twenty six.  He said, "Who do you want?  I know everybody who's important as a designer; there is no designer that I don't know and I'm not friends with.  I don't need an assistant," he said, "like you because I already--I just started my own business; I used to be a hat designer, as you know, so I have a lot of, a lot of energy and ideas inside me that I'm bursting with ideas, and this is--I'm only--," he was only in business for two years, or something like that, so he was new at it, and so I said I wanted to work--I wanted to meet Anne Klein and Calvin Klein.  He said, "I know both of them very well; I can call anybody."  And he called them.  And then he called me back at my house the next day.  He said, "I'll call you at 6:00."  He called me exactly at 6:00, I swear, swear on my mother [Catherine Bell]--6:00 on the dot; I'll never forget it--not a minute before, not a minute after--and he says, "I've arranged an appointment for you to see Anne Klein, and you are to see her, and good luck."  And I said, "But what do you think?"  He said, "I think," he said, "your designing, I don't--it's okay; your illustrations are breathtaking.  You haven't learned the, the idea of full designing yet because your ideas are too way out there and too--and reason why you can't get a job is not because you're not wildly, wildly talented, it's that you still draw as an illustrator; you don't draw as a designer or you would be more simple, you know.  You would understand the pattern, and you would understand the cut, and that--he said, but you have the chic; you have the talent, you have all of that wonderful good taste already built in, but you don't have--a manufacturer can't look at your sketches and see that you have been technically trained."  And I said, "Okay."
Story_ID: 269898
Speaker 1: So, Anne Klein hired me--she did hire me (laughter); she hired me, and then everybody start hiring me after that--
Speaker 2: Hired you as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a sketcher for her.  Her sketcher then was Donna Karan, and she said that she had to let this girl go who was--she was her assistant.
Speaker 2: Why was she letting Donna go?
Speaker 1: Because she wanted somebody who could sketch very well, and Donna Karan was, was a, a wonderful tastemaker and she was great, and I ain't gon' get--talking about Donna Karan because she's Donna Karan, so--she went on to Patti Cappalli [Taylor] but she--you know, she went back to Anne Klein and she became Anne, Anne Klein's associate designer, that's where she started.  And--but she wanted somebody to sketch and--I don't wanna get into my stories; I have nightmare stories about Anne Klein and I--you know--all that, just like, I, I mean I'm not a sole lover of her.  Was she genius?  Yes.  Did I learn great things from her?  Yes, but she was a--she was a sincerely tough lady, and she didn't--she wasn't the nicest person in the world, and I was used to being--coming from working--but not really nice people who adored me and loved me and not, not that she wasn't, but she wasn't a person who adored people.
Speaker 2: How long did you work for her?
Speaker 1: A year and a half.  But she was tough, and she did some pretty not-so-nice things, and we--you know, my ending with her was not wonderful, but I learned a great deal.  And when I left her, when I showed my portfolio from working with her, then everything opened, and then I really knew what designing was because that was my first really designing--being an assistant to her, I learned something, you know; she was a very utilitarian designer, and she would drink a lot after work, and how they trained you then for the job was not really wonderful.  They trained me for three weeks how to pick up a phone and say, yes, this is Mrs. Klein, and they--and whenever I didn't say it the right way, they would just make me do it all over again, and I had to learn how to make her scotch exactly how she wanted it--always a quarter after five, always to take--when she walked in the door, I had to stand up, no matter what I was doing, go over to her, take her coat, hang it up, come back, say, "Would you like coffee with two drops of sugar, Ms. Klein?"  I mean really like really, really--it's the truth.
Story_ID: 269899
Speaker 1: I remember one day, before I left, she--when she [Anne Klein] walked in in the morning, my first job was to make sure her desk was clean and organized and stuff like that.  And she came in one day and she--and I was--something--I had a--trouble with my love life or something really dramatic happened to me, and I got there five minutes before her, and then the telephone rung for me, I picked it up and I was almost in tears, and something bad happened--I'm not going to get into that--not anything bad about my health, just my life, and I was living with somebody and--
Speaker 2: An issue.
Speaker 1: An issue, right, exactly.  And she walked in and her--and she said, "Get off the phone right now and clean my desk off! Are you crazy?"  And I remember looking at her thinking about my mother [Catherine Bell], and I looked at her and I didn't, and, and I didn't get off the phone and--because it was an issue I was having and she should have said, you know--she came back and she took her hat, and she took her hat and she wiped the table off of it on--and she put everything, everything on the floor.  She says, "And now you will get off the phone and you will pick it up from the floor."  I remember getting off the phone but I was one evil child.  And I just came over, and I was thinking about my mother, what my mother would do in this situation.  And I looked at her and I said, "You should be happy you're still fucking standing there because who do you think you're talking to?  Don't you dare ever talk to me that way.  You have to be crazy!  You," I said, "not only will I not pick it up from the floor," I said, "but you're picking it up from the floor.  You're picking up from the floor before I leave, you're picking it up from the floor."  Well, she, being Anne Klein, and like that was like being Calvin [Klein] now, she hit every telephone--like she was scared I was just gonna hit her or somethin' (laughter).  You know what I mean, she was just scared.  She--and I knew she was scared, and I knew she was 'cause she was just like shaking; she's not even this big, and I was bigger than her, and I just said, "Are you crazy?"  And I had a slightly twitch in my eye, and it was not a good sign, it was not a good--and I don't remember ever talking to anybody the way I talked to her, I don't, but she had that mean streak; I just matched her minute-for-minute.  I just said, really!  You know how they always want you to be the nice, sweet little assistant?  No, darling, I was never that; I just looked at her and said, "Darling, I ain't going anywhere."  And she got a little scared because she thought me--you know--I don't know, she just got really--she really did, she got scared, and I saw she got scared, and I wouldn't let her move; I was blocking her way, and I said, "No, you're picking it up.  You're picking this up from the floor, honey.  You're picking this up."
Story_ID: 269900
Speaker 1: And all these people started rushing into the room, and she [Anne Klein] started crying.  And then she leaned against the wall and she said, "Somebody help me," like, like I was going to--trying to kill her or something.  And, and she started crying and she said, "I want everybody in this whole entire place in this room.  Get everybody in here for this performance."  And she looked me and she said, "No, you're not moving, you're staying here."  And she wanted--she said, "Get every designer, every pattern maker, everybody in this place, I want in this room right now."  So they came in, and she started crying.  And she said, "I want everybody to see me pick up all this stuff from the floor because that's what he asked me to do."  And then people started crying.  No, I swear to God, people started crying--her staff started crying and, you know, grabbing me (unclear).  She said, "No, no, no, don't touch him; let him stand here.  But I want everybody else to stand here, too," she said, "because he thinks I'm being grand, he thinks that I'm saying--I'm belittling him; that's what he thinks.  But I'm going to show him that I'm not."  Took her like a half an hour.  Everybody started crying but me; everybody was in tears because Anne Klein was on her knees, in all of this suede and velvet and jewelry and diamonds, picking up this stuff.  I wasn't so impressed, but everybody else was crying, and everybody else was just hating me, like they couldn't even look at me.  And then she said, "No, no, I'm not done yet."  She said, "Everybody's going to stay here," and she went to the bathroom and got a cleaning cloth (laughter) and the spray, and she started cleaning, wiping off the table.  And she said, "No, I don't want anybody to move!"  And then she had to put all the stuff back on the table, you know; all the diaries--the way I would do every morning.  And then she sat down behind that desk and she said, "Somebody get me a drink."  It was only something after twelve, and everybody--I'm telling you--then everybody, her whole staff, was in tears; they were crying because I had--did this terrible thing to her.
Story_ID: 269901
Speaker 1: And she [Anne Klein] said, "What is the lesson here?"  She said to me, "Do you know?"  I said, "Yeah, I know what the lesson is.  The lesson is that I don't mind doing something," I said, "but my mother [Catherine Bell] would turn in her grave if I picked up anything off this floor; my mother's not dead, she's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]."  And I said, "My mother raised me never, ever, darling, to pick up anything off anybody's floors.  It's bad enough I have to wipe off a desk, but not a floor."  I says, "And nobody should be able to talk to anybody that way."  And she said, "How much money do you think I make?  Make a guess--a wild guess.  I know how much you make," and I was very well-paid, by the way.  I remember when they told me the amount of money I would be making as her assistant; I--it was--I don't know, it was like a thousand dollars; it was like a, a lot of money--they were.  And she says, "And you were paid a lot of money, and I have to make sure that this company runs in volume.  And all these people standing around here in the last hour work for me and make a fortune--sales people, this person, that person, and it's because--I am tense and crazy because I'm running an empire, and you thought I was being personal and you took it the wrong way.  I'm here to tell you that I have cleaned before, and every job I had at your age, I had to do even more.  I only ask you to clean the desk because I work so late at night, and because I walk in and I want to have a clear head, and I came in late and you were on the phone; it was twenty after eleven.  Now, who's wrong, me or you?"  Then I put my head down (laughter) and I said, "It's me, Miss Klein."  She said, "I am going to fire you, but I can't fire you now, but I am going to fire you.  I need you right now, but you should know that you aren't staying here with me--in front of everybody.  You are not."  And then one day I walked in--and I knew it was coming--she handed me two weeks' severance pay and whatever that thing, and she said to me, "I don't know so much about your future," she said, "you know you have a little bit of a chip on your shoulder."  And I said, "Well," I said, "maybe you can call it a chip," I said, "but you know, I'm not a cleaning person; I wasn't meant to clean, sorry."  And so I think about that--I think I was pretty successful, but the, the sad thing about it is all the truly academic things of my mind about knowing the female, knowing the real true ins and outs of the seasons of becoming professional, and knowing what women want and when they know it.  The idea that she was into talking about washable buttons--things that couldn't break, plastic zippers--all of these are the continuity of sportswear--interchangeable pieces; all of this came from her.  All of these great things that I learned when I went around looking for work after her--people just looked at my portfolio and just said, how much do you want?  She was genius, you know?  She was a genius.  I just was in another world.  I mean, you know, I had dreams of working for [Cristobal] Balenciaga and [Coco] Chanel, and I, I had a love for Paris [France], really.
Speaker 2: When did you start the Design Report [sic. Designer Report]?
Speaker 1: I started that--I worked at Jonny Herbert Pat, which was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this after--?
Speaker 1: --after Anne Klein.  And after working for them for six years, then--
Speaker 2: You went to who after Anne Klein?
Speaker 1: It's, it's a company called Jonny Herbert.
Speaker 2: And what type of company was that?
Speaker 1: They made daytime--like they were almost equivalent to Jones New York.
Story_ID: 269902
Speaker 1: You leave Anne Klein (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I go to be an assistant--
Speaker 1: --and you go--search around with your book, looking for people to--
Speaker 2: No, you gotta show them my book, and the first--you know, I was only, I was only employed there what--a couple days, I mean that's the truth.  Somebody led me, told me to go to this company, Jonny Herbert, and I went there, and I would meet Preston Smith who became a very good friend of mine, and Ted Duckworth who was a really hotshot great designer.  And they looked at my book, hired me, and I would work for them for six years, and I learned how to be a designer, you know?  And I learned what to do, and--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I'm gonna ask you--I mean--and I'm gonna play the race card.
Speaker 2: Yeah, please--
Speaker 1: For what we've talked about up to this--did--what did you being black have to do with what you'd experienced up to this point in your career?  Were you ever aware of, of having--of, of being black?
Speaker 2: No.  Sorry.  I was aware (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's not sorry--
Speaker 2: --I knew, I knew I was black, and I knew that--let me, let me say this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a very Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] thing; it's almost like Bill Cosby.  It's almost like--Philadelphia, if you don't know anything about it with, with, with Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and, and, and Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Philadelphia people have a very heavy educational thing going, and they just believe it's a city that trains you to prepare for all of this.  If the race card had been played early on, if I--if Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.] or Mrs. Angelo [Edythe Vincent Piccione], all these people I was meeting, were saying to me, oh, well, I wish we could give you a job, but you know, you're black and I'm sorry but, you know--or anything like that, or give me the look or the attitude, or something that would make me have an attitude or something, but it was like I'm--I hate to say this but I'm happy to say this--like I tell--schools who ask me to talk to black kids about this, and I interview them when they come here, and I talk and I said, I wanna hear it, and, you know, I said, ask me any question.  And they says, well, you know, well, did you, you know, like, you know, did the people try to get over on you and--you know, in color and, you know, all the white kids get all the jobs?  I said, well, I beat every white kid out of a job. I said, you know, do you go dancing at night?  What do you do with your nights, that you have a problem with this, with--let's, let's talk about this race card.
Speaker 1: There were no black designers that you--
Speaker 2: It was Willi [Smith].
Speaker 1: Willi, Willi, okay.
Speaker 2: --and Scott Barrie--
Speaker 1: --Okay, Scott--
Speaker 2: --he was from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], too.  All of us--I hate to say this, you know, but come on; we were all from Philly, sorry--there it is.
Speaker 1: So, there were black designers that were, were--that you saw and worked around, or at least knew of.  I mean you were not the only black person in the fashion industry at this time--
Speaker 2: --No, but it was Willi.
Speaker 1: There was Willi--you and Willie--
Speaker 2: --and there was Scott Barrie.
Speaker 1: Scott Barrie.
Speaker 2: And there was a Harvey [T.] Boyd, there was Jon Haggins; we all knew one another, but I don't remember ever a conversation about the race thing.  This is all new.  I mean it's not new for--it's--you know, let's face it; the garment center is a lot like the--it's like the music business.  If you got something that people can make money from--yeah, you're talking about the wrong industry.  There would have been more of a racial issue if--just say if I was going into politics, if I was trying to go to this government thing, or if I was trying to go to Wall Street, or if I was trying to go to CBS, if I was tryin' to go to a music company, you know what I'm saying?  If I was trying to go to anything--but when you get into the creativity of people knowing and smelling a dollar from what you can do, it's about that, it's not about your color.  Other industries--and I've had friends we can discuss; if you said to me, did you have friends--like my roommates I had at the time, are all black, and they were always at night talking about their supervisors, their bosses--not being able to move up a ladder, not being able to do this, where my life was at, I don't know, from ten, I would just like zoom!
Story_ID: 269903
Speaker 1: What did you think about, for example, images you were seeing on TV of blacks being persecuted in the South?
Speaker 2: I didn't look.  I wasn't aware, it was like I wasn't aware when I was young.  My mind--I, I was-twenty four hours a day was not--I said as a child I was a little crazy, and very much possessed by a twenty-four hour, twenty-four/seven type of situation. I believed that if you wanted to, to achieve something great, that you worked at it twenty-four hours, is that they taught you in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I, I can't--and my roommate was a Muslim, by the way, and he was very into Malcolm X--he was--one a my, one a my first roommates in New York [New York], and he was--always be talking about Malcolm X and this and that, and this and that, and he would always look at me and say, what I love about you is you're not with me, are you?  You're not even on this planet.  He said, I love it, that's why I talk to you, because I'm so political, I'm so--and he was like--he just talked about white people all day long.  He did!  How they didn't give him this, that, this, that, and he hated everybody, and he couldn't move up anywhere.  He couldn't get a job, he couldn't get anything, and he was just saying, you come back from Seventh Avenue, you're just all smiles, and you just are into those magazines, he said.  And we were friends before I, I, I decided to move with him, by the way, and he said, I will share a space with you because you take me away from all of that other world I'm in--this political world, this whole thing, or this--you know.  And he was into Malcolm X, and I would just say, who is he?  And he would say, nobody that you would want to know.  And I said, don't you want to talk to me about it?  He said, no.  And every time he--he was very involved with civil rights and all that kind of stuff, and every time I would ask him to talk to me about it, he would say, you're with Anne Klein; you're, you're in another world.  You're, you're in a world that one day I will be reading about you that same way your teacher said--that's what you mean to me.  You let me know how focused you really have to be to do what you have to do.  And eventually, he says, I'm gonna get out of this world that I'm in and try to move into yours whereas you are--people don't look at your color so much in your profession, they look at whether or not you can make the almighty dollar for them--that's the truth of this deal.  He said, you're in--he said, you need the arts, and black people suffer every different kind of way getting things, he said, but the mere fact that you can't even talk about it, the mere fact you can't talk about it is because you work twenty-four hours at what you do; you are constantly at that drawing table, [HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell]; you never leave, you never leave it, and when you're not doing that, your head is in the fashion magazine and all you talk about is one day making it.  And that was my ambition.  I can't sit here and pretend to tell you, and make up stories.
Story_ID: 269904
Speaker 1: So, the six years you spent with Jonathan--
Speaker 2: Jon--Jonny Herbert, not Jon--not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jonny Herbert.  Sorry, Jonny Herbert.
Speaker 2: It's not a hotdog stand, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Jonny Herbert.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).  You're talking about it like it's a restaurant (laughter).  It was a fashion company.
Speaker 1: Jonny Herbert.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Jonny Herbert--the six years you spent with him, you learned what from them?
Speaker 2: I learned to merchandise, color, fabricate, choose the right fabric, choose the right button, make the right decision, and learn how to make a line of clothing--that's what I learned.
Speaker 1: So when you--I just want to--when you were hanging out with Scott [Barrie]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Pat Robinson--did you know Pat Robinson [Patrick Robinson]?
Speaker 2: Now, are you talkin' about the new Pat Robinson or the old one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was talking about the old one.  Or, or--I mean I don't know--the older--I'm--the one that worked--
Speaker 2: The new one is the one who's in Paris [France] now, right?
Speaker 1: The one that works for [Giorgio] Armani and worked with Anne--did he work for Anne Klein?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he worked for--and he worked for Armani.  Yeah, he's at--he's in Paris now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you know Arthur McGee?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Now, did--was--did you guys get together and share designing ideas or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was only--should--I only got together with Willi [Smith].
Speaker 1: You only got together--
Speaker 2: Willi knew all of them really well.
Speaker 1: When you got together with Willi, what were things the two of you talked about?
Speaker 2: Glamour stuff; it was all very glamorous and very, very divine stuff, and gossip, and all the people that he knew, and I was like star-struck and--'cause he knew everybody of the day, you know?  It was like he was a designer, you know? I was merely his friend--who was I? I was nobody, you know?  But he, he and I had a very special relationship--
Story_ID: 269905
Speaker 1: What led to you starting the Design Report [sic. Designer Report].  Were you influenced by these guys?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you talk to 'em or, or there was an identity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was influenced by my--the, the guy who I was working for, Jonny Herbert--when I left him.  But he--no, the company closed after seven years, and I was outta a job, and he said to me, "Can I make a suggestion to you?"  And I said, "Yeah."  He says, "I don't know whether you should be a designer or not."  And I looked at him, he said, "Because yes," he says, "yes, you do beautiful sketches, but you don't seem to want to know how to make clothes; you never really caught on to it."  He said, "Now, were you of a great importance to this company?  Yes.  Did people like you?  Yes.  Were your drawings intensely beautiful?  Yes.  But you never really learned; your mind was never really into it."  He said, "I don't know what to say about you."  He said, "You know, you live in a dream world, and the things that Anne Klein said about you were true.  Now, it's, it's like--I'd like to see you go on with your life almost; if I had to make--say something," he said, "I don't really think you're prepared to go on to be a designer."  He said, "I think you should--like," he said, "if you could do something with your drawings because that's where," he said, "that's where your passion lies.  You're, you're basically an artist who likes the fashion business," he said, "but you're not like your friend Willi [Smith], and you're not like Steven [ph.] or Scott [Barrie], or any other--and there were other black designers."  He says, "You're nothing like them because you have no desire to cut anything--to drape anything.  You never pick up fabric, you don't, you don't--you have no," he said, "your mind is basically one who likes to draw and who likes to--you like drawing ideas, and you like drawing great ideas.  You like being known to being a creator of something that's new and something great, but you don't have the mindset to go into a design room and start working and start cutting fabrics."  And I said to him, "What do you think I should do?"  And he said, "I think you should go to Paris [France].  I think you should go to Italy.  I think because--since you've been working here, you've been to Paris three or four times, and Paris is where you--Paris is where you belong, Italy is where you belong, Rome [Italy]."
Story_ID: 269906
Speaker 1: The first time I went to Paris [France] I was working at Jonny Herbert; that was my second time.  I had went--I had went the first time at Anne Klein, and then when I started working at Jonny Herbert, I went and I saw my first [Christian] Dior--I snuck into a Dior collection, by the way.  I snuck and they told me I couldn't see it, and I waited 'til the show started.  I was very ambitious, pushy (unclear) (laughter).  I'd be calling Halston from a telephone booth (laughter) (unclear), but I wasn't the nicest boy in town.  I, I was a very resourceful guy, you know?  The old Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.] and my mother [Catherine Bell] thing really stuck in there.  But I remember I went to see--I was in Par- I was in Paris doing the collection--doing the couture, and I went to Dior, and that's when they were setting up for the, for the show, and I asked 'em for an invitation; they just looked at me and said, no, no, no, no, no, in very good French.  No, no, no, no, no.  You must, you must get out.  Get out now!  Psshh!  Out--you know, they--body guards.  Out!  Psshh!  So, I watched the body guards, you know, look at everybody, and then the day of the show, I watched them going in--the editors going in, and all the people going in, and then I waited until I could hear some sign of music or activity, and I remember sneaking up to the door and that these two body guards were standing there, and one of the body guards, I said, I am a designer in New York [New York], and I worship the ground of Christian Dior.  By the way, I forgot to tell you I'm a designer--it's why I mentioned--Christian Dior was the most designer who I wanted to be like.  And then, as I got older, I--when I started reading about his life, I realized that my boss at Jonny Herbert was right, because Christian Dior was exactly like me; I didn't know that until my first time in Paris, and then I started reading about him and I found out--I'll tell you what, what this all means--what brought me to this whole thing.  And then they said, if you're absolutely quiet, you could sit over there (gesturing), and you could see them through the corridors, but you can't go in that room.  Well, I just waited 'til the guards had turned their back and I went right into that room, parked myself in the corner, and I was this close (demonstrating) to the stage, and I remember seeing my first Paris collection--
Story_ID: 269907
Speaker 1: [I] came back to work at Jonny Herbert and I told 'em I had snuck into a [Christian] Dior show and my whole life had changed.  It was like when I saw my first Norman Norell show when I was young, and at (unclear) when I was thirteen--I saw a Norell show and I was mesmerized, and when I saw this Christian Dior show, I realized that I had nothing to do with this American market; that's when I knew that my--that this--that--the reason why I couldn't get into that whole Anne Klein, Calvin [Klein] thing--I didn't get it until I saw all the things that I looked at in these magazines as a child--all these great dreams of, you know, of this, of this workmanship and all of these accessories and style and, you know, it wasn't blue jeans--just to put it that way; it was a couture, and I was sitting there, and this stuff was so beautifully made I was like dying.  And then I came back and I remember going into my boss like I was going in--'cause we had a great rapport; it wasn't like Anne Klein, they--they just--they love and adore me, you know.  And I said--I remember with tears in my eyes, I was describing the Dior show, and I said, I, I always wanted to know what that was like.  I wanted to know what I--what my dreams were all about from these magazines, and why I loved 'em so much.  He said, well, I'm almost sorry you saw it because we never wanted somebody like you.  You're in a dream world as it is; you think like--that's what you sketch.  We don't make what you sketch, but that's what you sketch when you present your sketches to us.  It's like you--you're dreaming at--like you're at Dior or something, and you're not.  And we make clothes for average people here, and your mind is--he said, but I'm happy you snuck into Dior.  I mean, he said, that takes a lot to sneak into Dior.  He said, they let you stay there?  I said, they just looked at me and said, (gesture)--that's all they did.  And at the end of it I remember walking over to these--what they call these, you know, the, the directress of Dior--all them people with all them black dresses--just how I imagined, you know, all in black dresses, all in this gray carpeting, and all the workmanship of these dresses and coats and the models, and everything was just like so intense I was like a dream.  Afterwards, when he said to me after the six years, that I should go to Paris [France], I said, well, you know, you're right.  I need to, I need to know what that's like.  I said, I will not go and get a job now.  I said, I will go to Paris because I need--I said, because I'd like to learn how to eat well and dine, I'd love to learn to eat and dine, and I'd love to find out why the French, to me, and the Italians are so much better.  He said, because they have dreams, and there they allow them to dream.  Here, it's about money.  And so I wanted, I wanted the dreams in my life; I had them when I was a child, and--unlike Willi [Smith], Willi became famous because he was pedestrian, and he wanted to dress the average person on the street, and my mind had nothing to do with that (laughter); I didn't want to know what they were wearing out there, I just wanted to know what looked good on a, on a pad (laugher).  I just wanted the hair and feathers fly everywhere, I wanted gowns like they go on--lifting up and trailing them, and holding them with all of this fur and diamonds dripping (laughter), I mean just like the vogues were in the '60s [1960s].  I mean that's what I knew.
Story_ID: 269908
Speaker 1: What I loved about [Christian] Dior--loved and worshipped him--after I read about him one night I said, now you're not so crazy.  Because Dior, you know, he was in his forties when he became a designer, and he had worked for all the famous like Worth [House of Worth] and, and Long [Lucien Lelong] as a designer, and it was only in his--late in his life that he go to [Marcel] Boussac with his dream and his vision about what he wanted to do, and they said, all right, we'll give him a chance.  He came from a really rich family, and then after, he--they became poor.  But to make a long story short, what I liked about him was he had what he called three mothers--one who could interpret, one to make, and one to help him with the whole creativity and--but Dior always was the only designer in Paris [France] who didn't know how to make things and sew; it was unheard of.  Everybody else could cut, drape--just like--like all--everybody in New York [New York] could like, and I couldn't--but he believed in looking at clothes from a yardstick away, and he became the most commercial designer of history--of the world--because he wasn't what they call a stitch queen, who wanted to know every little detail of a dress.  He just said, I don't wanna know.  He--but he could sketch; he could sketch very well.  He says, I have a vision, and I wanna be able to look at women in my clothes from my yardstick, and I'm not touching anything.  I just wanna keep my vision.  And that's how I felt; I just didn't know how to describe it.  But, when I (unclear) I said, well, he didn't, he didn't make anything either (laughter).  You know what I'm saying?  He didn't either, and look how great he was because he knew how he wanted women to look.  All he knew was that he knew how from how his mother [Isabelle Cardamone Dior] looked, and his mother was this great woman of style, like mine was, see, and she had a vision enough to give her son, at my age--at nine years old, Harper's Bazaars and Vogues.  She had to sneak them to me, but she got me to them monthly.  She got me those things like a religion, and every other thing she could pick up--every newspaper she could give me.  And his mother did the same thing to him at the age of nine; she gave him a book on art, so he wanted to be--matter of fact, he was an art dealer until he was thirty-nine or forty years old.  So--but I'm saying, his vision for me as a designer, was very close to mine.  I became effeminate designer, really, you know--I make clothes very unlike my personality; my personality is very tough and entrepreneurial and business, you know; almost like Anne Klein's was, you know?  But when it comes to my designing, I don't think I'm gonna wear it, and since I'm not interested in being a drag queen, I keep it like a nine to five thing; I just try to keep it more on the feminine side of it, you know?
Story_ID: 269909
Speaker 1: Design Report came up with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's Designer Report; it's E-R.
Speaker 1: Designer Report
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was a creation from your own mind. It was your first venture into your own business.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was--tell me what it was and how it came about.
Speaker 2: A friend of mine, who was also very famous at the time (laughter)--his name is Gerald McCann; he was a very grand English--I won't say what I wanted to say; I'll say guy--this is for TV--I'll say guy (laughter).  He was--
Speaker 1: Well, you don't have to--
Speaker 2: Well, but I'm going to for his sake in--just--he's watching it one day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm not gonna say that he was a--kind of a bitch; he was very well-educated, very--he knew lord and lady everybody, but these are not fake stories, they're real ones; he really did know the duchess of this one, and Lady [Nancy] Astor and all the rest of them.  I became his best friend; I was a young boy at Jonny Herbert, and he and I--he was a famous designer from London [England], and I met him at a, a party one night and be became friends.  And he became like a new mentor for me, like another Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.]; he was very social, very grand and aaaaaaah!  He knew how to dine and eat, and I loved people like that; I loved people who could dine and eat and pronounce everything the right way and all the right terms.  He could speak English in--I mean real good; real, real English-English and Italian and French fluently, and so he became my best friend of course (laughter).  I mean who else would I want?  And he said to me, when I was--told him what I was gonna do and go to Paris [France], he said, "You know, I kind of agree with Ted Duckworth and Jonny Herbert."  He said, "I don't feel your excellence."  He said, "I think you go beyond clothes, actually; you're meant not to necessarily be a designer."  He says, "You really were."  He says, "I think that you're gonna be a pretty good businessman--at what, I don't really know."  But, he said, "I think you got into designing because of Willi [Smith] and, and, and, you know, peers of your friends.  Because you could draw fashion so well, you thought that you should have been a designer when basically you, you were never really into it.  You were very happy in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when you were an illustrator, and you wanted to be a designer because you--your mother [Catherine Bell] had inspired you for clothes, but basically, you don't show any signs of it."  I mean, he says, "You don't really act like one."  I really didn't so much.  I didn't talk about designing when I wasn't really doing it.  I loved working at it, but he said, "I think you should, and what I think you should do is"--and it was his idea--he said, "I think you should go to Paris and take some sketch pads with you, and I think you should go to Paris, do a lot of sketches, go to Italy, do a lot of sketches, show them to people, and come back and we'll talk--as your friend, we'll talk."  And he said, "And what do you think about my advice?"  I says, "I'm a little confused but," I says, "I'm well enough to do this if everybody feels as though," and Willi sort of knew this, he just wouldn't tell me, you know, 'cause even when I would say, how come I can't work like everybody else?  And he said, "You know, [HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], you're like a divine artist, like Erte, you know?  You have these dreams and visions, but I don't see--you're not a designer who wants to cut and make things."  You know, I mean I wasn't really into it.  Does that make any sense?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  And so when he said to go to Paris, and I discussed it with Willi, and he said, "I don't particularly like your friend Gerald," he said, "because he's, he's, he's," he said, "you think I'm grand, well he's like the Queen of England; he's grander than me, he's grander than everybody.  I don't know how you can have him as a friend, but--he's okay."  But, he said, "But I agree with him; I agree.  You should try it out."  And then I went to Paris and I came home, and I had made up my mind that they were right, and that I didn't know what to do.  And then he said, "I tell you what you should do, you should form a designer report.  You like to sketch, you wanna make things.  The world loves your drawings; that's what you're known as.  You're not known to be a great designer, you're known to be somebody that all the designers says, 'Wow, he can do beautiful sketches.'  He can't make beautiful clothes," he said, "because you don't know how, but you can do beautiful drawings."  And he said, "What you should do is call it Designer--."  "No," I said, "Designer something."  And he says, "Then call it Designer Report because you're a designer who will be reporting."  And that's how it happens.
Story_ID: 269832
Speaker 1: Today's date is December--
Speaker 2: Fifth.
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry--January--
Speaker 2: --January 5th.
Speaker 1: January 5th, 2007.  We are completing our interview with [HistoryMaker] Mr. Alvin Bell.  I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.  You will remember us from September, 2006 (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Story_ID: 269833
Speaker 1: --we left off talking about what would become known as the Fashion Report [sic. Designer Report], but at the time, you, Willi [Smith] and, and I can't remember the other friend [Gerald McCann], said to you--
Speaker 2: Go to Paris [France].
Speaker 1: --go to Paris--
Speaker 2: It's like my old, one my old bosses [Jonny Herbert].
Speaker 1: --and just sketch.
Speaker 2: And just sketch.
Speaker 1: And in--I mean basically, you ended, ended up saying that you were--the reason you called it the Fashion Report is because you were a designer who were going to report on fashion.
Speaker 2: Well, actually it really didn't start--it was--kinda started that way, but after I went to Paris and actually did the sketches, made some notes and came back, one of my friends name Gerald McCann, who was a very famous designer in the '60s [1960s], said to me, "Well, so you went to Paris, it's not really good enough (laughter).  So you come back with some sketches.  What are you gonna do with them?"  So, I said, "Well, I'll sell them."  He said, "No, it's not really good enough.  What you should do is put them in the book; put a sparrow on them."  So we took, took the sketches, put them into a book, and he said, "Now you gon' have to give it a name."  I said--he said--I said, "Design something."  He said, "No, you're a designer, and now you're reporting, so it should be Designer Report."  I said, "Oh, it's a good idea."  And that's how it came about.  And then I had to find an editor, then I had to find--then I became the publisher and the artist, but eventually I hired a very talented, great illustrator; matter of fact, he did that painting right there (pointing).  And I hired him and he became one of the artists, and that's how it started to, to, to move and, and then it became--then it was--it came out four times a year, then when I started rolling with it, then I had--then it came out once a month.
Speaker 1: And that became your business.
Speaker 2: It became my business and is--really is basically how I started, you know?  When I--actually, when I went back to designing, I found it very easy because publishing was really stressful; I mean if anything, I had to wake up at--every single night and worry about the stories because the publication was forecasting, so I was forecasting trends for the whole entire market, and then after--when it became successful and I got a name for it, it was really scary (laughter) because not only do trends have to be accurate, but you were actually telling people what they should be working on.  So, then I had to travel back and forth like five times a year, you know; I had to go to fabric shows and, and all the other forecasting services I had to look at, because that's basically what it was, it was a forecasting service.
Speaker 1: Right.  Were you one--and were--at the time, were you one of the only African American forecasters--one of the only black forecasters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the only one.
Speaker 1: The only one.
Speaker 2: I was the only one and I'm--yeah.
Speaker 1: Probably still--
Speaker 2: You--still--right, right (laughter).  But, I like how it happened.  If you would have asked me how was I ever gonna get into forecasting, I'd have said to you, you're crazy.  It was--I had--I--you know, I had a lot of older, successful friends; I was young at the time--matter of fact, I was only twenty-four when I was publishing this, and my friends, who were established older designers, were leading me into this whole thing (laughter).  I started off just by going to Paris so I could sort of get the little culture that I needed and the little polishing, and I learned how to eat French food really well, and all that type a stuff that I really wanted to become, you know.  So, I wanted to do that, and it just turned into something where when I came back with the sketches, they said to me, "Oh, so what?  Anybody can go into Paris and sketch.  What you need to do is start a forecasting service.  What you need to do is do this," and I was--'course I was being pushed by all these people, so I went there.
Story_ID: 269834
Speaker 1: Yes, for indeed eight years I learned to do that [fashion forecasting], and it was a very, very intense thing because once it grew and I got editors, and I did--I became the publisher of it [Designer Report].  And indeed, yeah, it was, it was a lot of work and it was really, really stressful and it really--it really kept me up at night; it was really intense knowing that you had to get out a publication once a month.
Speaker 2: Well, not only that, but that you had to forecast what you thought--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in terms of (unclear).  Now, is that a sci- is there any science to that?  Is that like--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there is a science, plus you have to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, tell me how it works.
Speaker 1: It's, it's, it's the gathering of information.  It's all information.  You get--first, you go to the fabric people and you find out what the colors are and--
Speaker 2: And where do they get their--what they're going to--colors are going to be--
Speaker 1: Well, they generally do it by--let's say like everybody watches the twenty most powerful designers of the moment; they look at slide shows every time they come out, how many purples, how many greens, how many reds, how many mohairs, how many jerseys (laughter).  So, you put all the slide together--put it all together and that becomes your trends of the season.  So you just--and you use the most directional designers for it--to go forward with, is basically how it works, you know; it's just a gathering of information.
Speaker 2: So I saw in like one of their reports--in 1986 you were doing forty--you talked about viewing, you--you know, the--in that forecast you talk a--talked about '40s [1940s] couture was coming back, and western shirts, and--like how would you come up with all those different forecasts to--you know, how did you know that the '40s [1940s] couture and western shirts were going to be the forecast for that next season?
Speaker 1: That's a very interesting question.  It's that I think you, you sit around the room with a lot of professional people in, in fabric and color, and you talk to other designers, and you sit around a table and everybody gives their ideas about it, and finally it all comes together.  I mean I'm, I'm making a--and, and short, you know?  But it's, it's, it's a matter of gathering information, and you use your intuition about what you, what you feel and what--of course, you're going by a little bit of scientific stuff because--
Speaker 2: And the science is what?
Speaker 1: The science is, is the--it's the material basically, you know?  If, if, if, if jersey is good one season and somebody comes out with--if the textile industry comes out with high tech fabric example, and if it looks new to you and it hasn't been around and you haven't seen it before, and you think it's utilitarian and everybody out there can wear it, and need it, then for me that was a trend because I hadn't seen it before.  And then when you see maybe [Jean Paul] Gaultier or you saw at the time Claude Montana or a Thierry Mugler and Son Jung Wan, and Angago [ph.] maybe use all one fabric, and this fabric you have in your hand--you can, you can feel that, and you can see the images, then you know that maybe this is going to be something that could be magic at retail.
Story_ID: 269835
Speaker 1: So when you were traveling back and forth to Paris [France], who were the people you were encountering?  I mean was that before Patrick Kelly had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, at the same time as that--Patrick (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --that Patrick Kelly--then he--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And don't get me started (laughter), no, 'cause I like him--I'm sorry--yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know--what was--you know, he was a black designer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a black designer, he was very good friends with Willi Smith actually, and that was the best friend of Willi Smith, so whenever I would go to a party at Willi's he would be there with a bag--large army bag this high (demonstrating) with his clothes inside of--dresses inside of it.  One day I was sitting on the bed and he hit me with it and I got into a little argument with him about it 'cause he was pulling out his dresses and they were hitting me in the head, and I said, sir, you, you know.  He said, you don't have to call me sir (laughter).  We're not gonna get into that; we're just making a joke of it.  Yeah, he was very good at big buttons--he put big buttons everywhere.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I thought he made a contribution, you know.
Speaker 1: What was his contribution?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Other than being silly?  (Laughter)  Joking--that was a joke.  I want that taken--I want that taken (laughter)--I want that cut out.  His contribution was that he wasn't very successful here, and he went to Paris and he learned to become experimental and make very interesting things, and it's very interesting like Josephine Baker or somebody like that.  It's amazing how the French love creativity and they love that kind of cheeky, kind of tongue-in-cheek, wild and crazy, and he wore overalls and a cap in the back, you know--all the things that Americans didn't get.  Then all of a sudden, he just started sewing things and became very creative and he put buttons everywhere and he had character and he was, he was whimsical and, and he--and yes indeed, he was creative, he really was.  And then, I think one--I can't remember the big company, huge big company, that bought him and, and--I think it was Linda Wachner, if I'm not sure, found him and offered him a big contract to do things, and he became really quite successful from it, you know?  I don't remember him really becoming a great retail success, but he was indeed successful with the press, and they liked him because he had character, and that's all I can say about him.
Story_ID: 269836
Speaker 1: The Designer Report goes on for eight years, so that's a lot of forecasting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really interesting.  It was eight years, and then there was a knock at my door one day from one of my clients, and that's how I became--I went back to designing and I--
Speaker 1: And who was the client?
Speaker 2: The client was P.S.I. and I, and I--that's when I--my label became Alvin Bell at P.S.I.; that's when I 'celerated and did all a those things and I think it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, let's just take it step-by-step so that--they, they come back to you and they ask you to come back to them and to design--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's not what happened.  He was one of my clients that I was telling my Designer Report to, and I had to go around to each one of my clients and make slide presentations; I had become somewhat of an authoritarian on this, on this whole fashion thing--
Speaker 1: So not only do you put the report out, but you go and give the report to certain people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I gave like, you know.
Speaker 1: --so, people don't just buy the report, the report is--
Speaker 2: No, no, I had to do slide presentations; that's all part of forecasting, by the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It really is.  And then after that, he said to me, you know, I was thinking.  This--one of my clients had just went out of business, and he said to me, you know, someone told me that you used to be a designer before you did this, and would you be interested in designing some suits for me--like twelve suits?  I said, well, I think it's a conflict of interest, because once you were a des- once you were a designer, and once--when you change professions and go into forecasting, then other designers allow you in their studios and you see everybody and you go to the collections and people who go to the collections twice a year, by the way, in Paris [France], all of a sudden they become geniuses because they see everything and they know everything, you know what I'm saying?  So, everybody--so you have--you know, you're like an editor so, you know, you, you see everything if you're on the front row, so automatically you have more information than everybody else, and he knew that.  So, I said, because I, I know, and I'm working with so many well-known designers, and they entrust me to come into their design rooms, so I think it would be a conflict of interest.  And then I went to bed that night and I thought about it, then I went to a few well-known designers and I said, what--I said, "Do you envision me designing anymore?"  And they said, "Why?"  I said, "Because somebody offered me a job to do,"--you know, jackets were always my thing; I had a passion for them really--a major passion.  Even in my book, you know--even that part of being that, that male thing, you know, the tailoring and all that?  And they said to me, "Well, if you want to, why not?  You, you, you say it's a designer report, you're actually a designer who became a publisher, so why not?"  So then I called him back up and, you know, it was a handsome $15,000 and I said, I'll do it really fast for you.  So I just remember I slid--I put, I put on my projector, took the best suits that it was, you know, the twelve best from everybody, sketched 'em front and back, he gave me the fabric--the manufacturer--he made them and then he called me back, without any exaggeration, six weeks later, and he said, "Do you wanna talk?"  And I said, "About what?"  He said, "The suits.  You should come and see them."  So I went to see them and they were beautifully done; this guy was really good.  You know, you couldn't always give your sketches to everybody and come back and they do them.  I mean I directed the muslins of them, though, you know--showed them where everything would go, but then they executed them from my, from my vision, and from the muslins that I made, and they were indeed beautiful and, of course they were everything that I had seen in Paris and Italy, so I took, I took twelve of the best (laughter), why not?  I had hundreds of stuff to work with.  So he said, "Every store in America is buying 'em.  They wanna know how I got the latest stuff from Paris in my showroom."  He said, "Every store--I mean Saks [Fifth Avenue], Bergdorf [Goodman]," and she said, how do--they said, "This stuff is not even in yet," and said, "this is impossible."  And then they said, "Who did this?"  And then he said, "Can I use your name?"  And I said, "Are you crazy?  No, you can't use my name (laughter).  I did this for you because I just--because it was fun and I just wanted to--I just wanted to--a diversion to take me away from it."
Story_ID: 269837
Speaker 1: It had been eight years since I'd been a designer, and I thought for my youth, to go back to see whether or not--but had, had my skills been there, and Paris [France] yes indeed, gave me the education that I wanted, it gave me the eye that I thought that I always wanted to have when I was young; that's the secret I would like every young person to know, actually.  There's nothing like going to Paris because they are the best at it, no matter what they say here--they are the best because they have been doing it longer and they know, and they, they have a way of translating the sketch into a form that you've never seen before.  They are the masters of shape, and they've been doing it since the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].  We are the masters of casual here--the masters of jeans and utilitarian stuff; we do that very well.  But after that, you have to give it to Italy and to Paris and to the rest of 'em because--no, 'cause they, they know how to make a gown that moves like, you know, for Marie Antoinette time.  So they are the best at it.  So, what I learned from them--he said, "Well, everybody thinks that all of these clothes came from Paris.  They, they don't even know the difference."  And that's when I knew that--when my older friend said to me, in, in order for you to be truly great, you must go to Paris.  You must go and, and, and train your eye to, to a, a, a new shape, and know how to, to make your sketches.  Because I did beautiful sketches when I was young; I didn't--but I never knew how to execute them, I didn't, and that was one thing I learned from Paris and because I became friends with Guy Polan [ph.] and Claude Montana and all these designers in Paris, because I was going back and forth, so I became friends with them because they loved my report [Designer Report], they loved my sketches, I was reporting on their clothes, but I learned something from being in their design rooms and I saw them in fittings and stuff like that.  So when I--when he asked me to make the twelve jackets, I said, this would be a test of which you've learned whether or not you could pull this off. And I did, and I made them when I went in, and I wanted to see whether my eye could do it and it did, to the point where these stores came in and said, it has to be a French designer who did this, it has to be (laughter).  And he [representative from P.S.I.] said--I, I--so he came back and he said, "Look, I'll pay you whatever you want.  Every store--there's no store who's turning them down.  They just think it's like something from another world."  I said, "So, go ahead."
Story_ID: 269838
Speaker 1: So when did you allow him to use your name?  How did that come about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--that's very interesting; I did, I did a total fall season for him [representative from P.S.I.], you know, from top to bottom, and then that became--and then they shipped it, and everything they made of mine sold out to the piece--everywhere; it was like a phenomena honestly.  It just sold--it sold because--
Speaker 1: And what year was this about?
Speaker 2: It had to have been '82 [1982], and this trick of it was this guy was very good, though; he was one of these great manufacturers that they had years ago who was a star hisself.  He was a star in fabric, he had great factories, and the genius was the production guy who, during those days, who knew how to make all those high-quality things; they just needed a stylist to come in there to give them, you know, the--you know, the ingredients to it, and then they knew how to take it and run with it.  They had the sales staff, they had everything--they had the factories--they just needed the chef to come into the restaurant to (laughter), to do it, and I was that person.  And then after everything just sold at retail like--they just blew outta the stores because--there's a really good story, too, but he said to me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go ahead, tell me the really good story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He said to me, would you join us?  And I said, yeah, yeah, I will.  And then they offered me, I think--it wasn't a lot, but it was like a hundred thousand dollars a year at that time--it was okay.  And I said, "But I have a publication [Designer Report], I'll do what I want, I come--make my own hours, you know?  I--I'll be a consultant, but I don't work for people; it's not my thing."  Because after you work for yourself for eight or nine years, you find it very difficult to--for somebody to say, what time are you coming to work?  I would just say--I remember once his wife said to me--stopped in the hallway and says, "We wanna know what time you're coming in."  I said, "Well, you know, you should, you should go back and talk to your husband because he's not an idiot and you are, you are.  How stupid of you to ask a publisher what time they're coming to work.  I don't work for you, darling, and I never will work for you.  I'm not working for anybody."  I said, "I am a consultant for this firm--we'll leave it at that."  And I came in the next day and he said to me, "I heard you had a little problem; I just straightened out my wife.  You can come in whenever you want to and do whatever you like."  I said, "I think so."  I think--what did I learn from Paris [France]?  I said to him, "All the designers work on freelance; they're all, they're all called stylists there; they're no longer--they're not designers, they're stylists, that's what they do.  And people want their stylists out there going to perfume counters and buying flowers,"--that's what I learned from Paris then.  All the designers would just spend all a their time to go to perfume counters, looking at scarfs, going to libraries, you know, and having long lunches.  I said, "My days here will be short.  I said I would come and to check fabrics, I'll come to check the muslins, and after that you will not be seeing me.  You will never have a designer that you control, you know--none of that kinda stuff."  I said, "In order to be creative, to do justice to women, what I've learned is you must be out there,"--come on, that's part of what you do.  You do not stay in offices, and you do not listen to nagging wives asking you what time you're coming back.  So (laughter)--I, I mean I--but I had a publishing career under me. Then one day a friend of mine said to me, "Why isn't,"--I said to him, "Aren't you happy?"  That's when my--the press was great; every time you picked up something, my name was on it; it was just--my press became really phenomenal, like overnight--yeah, just naming--saying within a year, everybody knew I was [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell.  And then one day, a friend of mine said, "You know one thing?  Who cares whether you're making a lot of money?  Unless your name is on the label, who knows?"  So I went back in the--from lunch, and I walked into this guy's office, and I said, "You know," I said, "I've decided that my name is going to be on the label, and my name will be big and yours will be small, and you take it or leave it."  I said, "I'm not giving you any ultimatums; it is your company, I am very respectful of that, but the idea that an artist's name is not on something is really--you know, press means nothing if your name is not on it, you know--don't let that," and he said, "That's fine with me, I would love your name to be on the label; I'd love that."
Story_ID: 269839
Speaker 1: Because I had just finished working for Michael Jackson, too, at the time.  I forgot to tell you, but during this same time, I had a big job with Michael Jackson.  A friend of mine called me and asked me to submit the big boards for Michael Jackson and I did, and then I flew to California and we shook hands and made a deal.
Speaker 2: And they were Civil War jackets or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I'll show you, and there, there--a whole thing I did for him.  I don't wanna get into that, you know--he was a little bit (pointing to his head) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Was he?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how did you get to him?  How did he get to you?
Speaker 1: Now, he--a, a friend of mine at the time, Reggie Morton, took me to--she called me up on the phone and said, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], darling, what do you think about doing something for Michael Jackson?"  This is when he was hot--the middle of his glove and hat, and dark glasses, you know, all that kinda stuff.  Anyway, I don't wanna get off the point; I'll go back to the point--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he said, "Yeah," he said, "you know, I, I would love it."  And then I became Alvin Bell of P.S.I., and then I took--I think the nicest part of this story, which I forgot to say, which I love and I say in every interview, the success of that story was he was bankrupt when he came to me with the twelve [suit] sketches; he didn't have a lot of money, his wife had borrowed money from her--and the whole thing--and he had lost his company; he was going back into business and he needed something new to go into business with, and that is a part of this story, so he went, went from nothing; I took him from nothing to $50 million in close to five years.  So, indeed, all the, the stories on me were vast, and I did interviews and he did interviews, and he said it was all due to me knocking at this guy's door, and I was at the right place at the right time.  But I wanted to do it, too; I wanted to see whether or not indeed my friends were right.
Story_ID: 269840
Speaker 1: And your friends being people like Willi Ware [sic. Willi Smith] and Scott Barrie, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Willi was--you know--Scott I, I knew, but he wasn't my good friend; Willi and I were different because we grew up together from, from really like--without any--
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--you know, he, he--I, I was--I was seventeen and he was seventeen, and we were the only people during that time--let's be honest, you know.  If you walked around with a Vogue, people would say to you, you wanna fuck or fight?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean you don't understand men walking around neighborhoods with Vogue magazines in black neighborhoods, oh, you gimme a break!  Are you kidding?  What kind of person were you to do that?  (Laughter)  Can you strike that word?  I don't wanna use that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let me ask--you know, I--yeah, I--but I, I've been to Philadelphia recently since, you know, we'd spoke last, and you know, I know a little more about it, but do you rem--you know, there were--Philadelphia had some pretty glamorous women--black women--
Speaker 2: Oh, intensely; more glamorous than, I won't say--but--
Speaker 1: Now, were you there around when--to be able to see Marian Anderson and--when she came back and forth through town?--the, the clothes she--
Speaker 2: We weren't in socials--the same social set (laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean but just to see; I mean she was in the papers a lot, and her clothes and her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I--that's when all of those women were all very, very, very, very, very--the land of Chanel; all of those women had all those Chanel bags and Chanel suits and ribbons and flowers and bows and all that kind of stuff, yeah (laughter); that was indeed a great era, you know?
Speaker 1: Right.  So, to move back forward, just to keep us going; so, Willi was your friend, you said; Scott wasn't so much.  So, Willi--now that you have a label [Alvin Bell for P.S.I.] also, I mean you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was actually surprised, actually.  He was actually--one day, you know, he, he--because when I sort of left designing and came back, one day we were having lunch together, and he was making jokes about me designing; it was another girl there, and she said to me, "Oh, I saw your stuff in Saks [Fifth Avenue]," and Willi looked at me and said, "What is she talking about?"  I says, "Oh, I became a designer."  And he said, "Excuse me?"  I said, "I went back (unclear)."  He says, "Well, how does she know?"  And then she looked at him and said, "Well, he's everywhere; his clothes are everywhere with his name on it and he's, he's bigger than you are."  And he looked at me with his mouth open like that, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], darling, this isn't working."  And he, "How long have you been doing this?"  I said, "A year."  He said, "A year, and you're in Bergdorf's [Bergdorf Goodman] and Saks, and Nordstrom's [sic. Nordstrom] and everywhere?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "With your name on it?"  So, then I think he left me, called me back two days later.  He said, "I went to see your stuff in the stores and I think that you--how could you have had a hidden secret?"  I said--and then the next day actually it was a, a big article in Woman's World [sic. Women's Wear Daily] and he saw it and he called me, and I have it in my scrapbook that he wrote me a letter from this note, and he said that he was in awe of the talent and he was happy for me, and all that kinda--but I sort of--he made inexpensive clothes and I made very expensive ones, so I was in the very fine stores and everybody knew it.  I said to him, "If you get off your ass and go look at expensive clothes, you would know, but you make cheap clothes, so I mean"--and he says, "Careful, darling, careful," (laughter).
Story_ID: 269841
Speaker 1: --nine years with them [P.S.I.]; you saw his numbers grow tremendously.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What affect did that have on your life?
Speaker 2: It was terrible; my ego became inflated (laughter), that ego became inflated and I got a big mouth, and my friend just said to me, you know, you were this sweet, nice little boy, you were this nice, little sweet boy who wore--
Speaker 1: --Did you really, really say to Willi [Smith] that he made cheap clothes and--
Speaker 2: Well, he did!
Speaker 1: Okay, go on.
Speaker 2: He did make cheap clothes.  I mean--okay, the word is not right, word is less expensive--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, let me ask you this.  He died young--
Speaker 2: Right, very young.
Speaker 1: Very young--
Speaker 2: That's what my mother [Catherine Bell] said when she called me.  My mother called me when he died, and I was asking her--she said, are you listening to the news?  You know, and I--and it was 6:00 in the morning, and then his sister [Toukie Smith] called me around 8:00 in the morning--
Speaker 1: Had you lost touch with him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had lost touch with him for six, seven weeks.
Speaker 1: Only six or seven weeks?  So, you knew he was sick; you knew he was HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew--no, I didn't know, I didn't know, I just remember it was at the lunch--last lunch we had, he said, you are being careful, aren't you?
Speaker 1: You asked him that, or he asked you?
Speaker 2: No, he asked me am I being (unclear), you have a wild life.  And I said, "Not as quite--not as wild as yours."  I said, "Yeah, I'm from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I don't take wooden nickels, it's not my thing, I mean, I mean I'm not a passive guy, so," I said, "I don't worry about things like that; I, I don't take wooden nickels," I said.  But that's when it had just hit, and then suddenly he--every time I called him for lunch, he was never available, and--
Speaker 1: How did you see that devastate the--I mean it was a, a huge loss for the fashion world at large; so many people were dying of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wiped out three-quarters of my friends; I think about it--as I was standing in a bar not too long ago with another guy, and he said to me, I come to a bar sometimes to drink because sometimes I think about all the friends that I've lost; I need to come out and drink.  And I said, so do I.  I said, you know, and I think that I lost three-quarters of mine.  I mean Willi, and Clovis [Ruffin], and all of these designer--I mean all of them were my friends.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of the designers that--?
Speaker 2: No, not particularly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't wanna start crying and I don't wanna do that.  I mean, I mean the tears would just start rolling and it would just change my whole thing.
Story_ID: 269842
Speaker 1: It was totally devastating--even with him [Willi Smith] it was.  I didn't hear from him and then every time I called him he said he had a bad cold, and then his bad cold went on until he was trying to shake this bad cold, and then I got a call from my mother [Catherine Bell] who said it was all over the news.  And then when I went to his sister's [Toukie Smith] house at--I remember arriving at her house at--no, she must of called me; my mother called me at six, she called me at seven; I got to her house, it's (unclear) Willi's apartment, at quarter after eight, and it was jammed like it was a party there.  I mean (unclear) everybody was coming in; every--you know, everybody famous was coming in the door--everybody was; I mean it was jammed at quarter--something after eight in the morning.  And she looked at me and she said, "Go ahead, you can look surprised all you want to; everybody here was surprised, what do you think?  You knew him.  Was he secretive or was he not secretive?  He never told me anything and we didn't know anything until they rushed him to the hospital and he was dead."  "No."  She said, "Yeah, he said he was sick, he had problems, he had this and he had that, but--," you know, during those days, it was not like you--people went and told people they had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]; that was the beginning of it, so it was all a secret to all these people who had any kind of problems.  It was always a cold, it was always a flu, it was always--you know, they were always scarfed or, you know, you know, layers on top of layers, and you know, their faces were all drawn, and one person, I think, saw him and said he was immensely thin and, and looked very weak and stuff like that, and I--half the story went right over my head, and that's when I called him on the phone and he said, oh, no, I'm fine, I'm fine, I just have a cold and that's the end of it.  And they were all like that, all of my friends; they all--all of them never used the word AIDS, and that's the truth.  They use it now because they're not ashamed of it, and they have all sorts of treatments for it.
Speaker 2: Why do you think it is that you, you--like Anne Klein died, and her line was able to live on?  Williwear [Ltd.]'s line was not able to live on after him.  Does that have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, families have a lot do with it.
Speaker 2: Families and--what do you mean?  In the way they--
Speaker 1: Families control the wills and, and the name, and Willi's name was tied up to his partner, so the sisters all had to buy it back.  I don't have all the answers; a lot of that is legal--honestly, it is.  But it's very hard for certain families to get it together; you know, you have to become--you know, somewhat--be somewhat sophisticated, let's be honest.  If you or I die, I mean our families would say, you know--they put you in the ground and say, halleluiah, and that's that, and go back to do--go back to church, you know?  They're not sophisticated enough to handle me.  If you leave a foundation, if you leave as foundation in wills and all of that kind of stuff, of how you want everything to go, then it goes okay.
Speaker 2: Patrick Kelly was lost to the same, to AIDS, as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He--they--Patrick Kelly, Perry Ellis, Clovis Ruffin, Ralph [ph.]--all of them; this goes on and on and on--the list, you know?  It's like a girlfriend of mine said, you know, once you--I remember when you had to have one black suit; by the end of this whole thing, you need twelve black suits--you needed ten; that's how many funerals you were attending, you know?  I just stopped going because it was something that people couldn't talk about.
Story_ID: 269843
Speaker 1: --in your professional life at the time?  I mean were you at P.S.I.?
Speaker 2: Oh, how interesting.  Where was I?  I had just gotten to P.S.I., I had just gotten there, and I remember everybody was saying, well, you're now--you should take over where he [Willi Smith] left off.  I said, oh, I intend to.  I--there's no question in my mind because every time I think of him, that's what I'll be thinking about, that we came here together, and every time I design something, it will be in his name, trust me.  He doesn't even have to worry about that he's gonna die in my eyes because I'm not gonna let him.  I wanna keep him going for as long as I can (laughter), because--yeah, it's--yeah, he, he and I came from that space of moving and doing things, and we--he was a really smart--to me, he was the first really first intellectual black designer.  He was more like Ralph [Lauren] and Calvin [Klein]; he was brilliant.  The press loved him, he was, he was enormously famous and, and--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, you said he was more like Ralph than Calvin?
Speaker 2: No, he was more like both of 'em together--
Speaker 1: But I'm, but I, but I mean like speaking in today's terms, you think of Ralph Lauren and you think like a whole lifestyle.  He does this and that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Willi had that, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and well, so what was Willi's other--how would you describe his lifestyle creation and, and was it for black people?
Speaker 2: He was very--he was very intelligent; he--when he--he was a president of an all-white school when he was seven--when he was sixteen--of an all-white school, so he was indeed very bright.  And he, and he read a lot.  And I remember I didn't read--really read right; I mean I, I read a lot now, but I remember back even then when we were sixteen, when we first met, I remember when our teachers introduced us, and we were on a bus and he said, "Do you, do you, do you read Jane Austen?"  I thought, who's that?  I mean I had a real sort of street (laughter) (unclear).  He said, well, you know, "I have to get you from being so streety."  This is when he was like sixteen.  He said, "You're very, very streety and I'm polished.  But, you know," he said, "you do wonderful sketches, but I have to get you out of that."  That's what he said.  And then he said--I mean he really didn't.  (Unclear) I said, "When you, when you come into my area, you gotta walk a little tougher."  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], darling (laughter)."  He said, "Don't you read Jane Austen?  You know, 'Pride and Prejudice' and, and,"--what was his [sic. her] famous--'Pride and Prejudice' and 'Sense and Sensibility' and 'Emma,' and all these other things.  He had read all of them, and I was just like, "Who are they?"  (Laughter)  And he said to me, "(Sigh) Alvin, what am I going to do with you?"
Story_ID: 269844
Speaker 1: When he [Willi Smith] arrived in New York [New York], yes, he became the darling of society.  He was very well-read, and I remember when I would--coming back and forth to see him--I was still in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he was, was going to Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] and he would say, "I'm taking a French class, I'm learning to speak French and I'm learning to speak Italian," and he was the--you know, and he was always with Halston and he was always with Andy Warhol--they were his best friends, and yeah, so they made him the darling very, very early; he was like twenty and he became--because he was so bright.  I mean he went into society because he was so smart, and he was very quick-witted and really, really quick-witted, and he, and he wrote letters--like who were these people writing letters?  He wrote letters to people (laughter); he'd write letters all the time (laughter).  Only people he didn't write letters to was me (laughter) because he thought (unclear); he thought I was too much (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Except for the one that he wrote when he saw the Women's Wear [Daily]--
Speaker 1: Right, right, he wrote me that (laughter), and he said, because you know you're not very literate (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No, but he was indeed wonderful, you know?  I don't think there will ever be anybody as wonderful, honestly.  And when I look at it now, he was so ahead of his era; he was so--really, almost like--I won't say he knew how to market hisself, you know?  I mean he died with-what--sixty-one covers of Women's Wear Daily, from a short span of--from--he was only outta school, out of Parsons, for a year and a half, and they made him that famous American; I mean he was the darling of this, of, of America--really--a black guy who just could speak on a, on a--such a level that, that he awed the press.  Like I said, at sixteen he was reading 'Emma,' [Jane Austen] you know?  And he was like this senator, you know?  You know, the one who went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know; he, he was like that.  So, yeah--and the only thing I sort of regret in telling his story was that he, he just died and just--I didn't, I didn't see him towards the end, you know?  I--'cause it--like people, like I said, were ashamed, and I thought that--and I said to his sister [Toukie Smith], would I have loved to have been there with him.  She says, well, join the club; he was famous, he didn't want anybody to know.  He was a star, he--you know, stars, you know--and you know, Rock Hudson and all a them like maybe admitted on their deathbed that they had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], but it wasn't the thing where you could tell people because of--you know, people thought they would catch something (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you around during that time?
Speaker 2: Ah, pretty close.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean, you know, so you move on, and so yeah, he was very inspiring to me.
Story_ID: 269845
Speaker 1: And I wish that most young people would know that because I think whenever we're talking about blacks in America, and being successful in, in the clothing business or the performing arts, that--I think of it as something I would love to say, and that is that for all the--for the youth that's out there now, that they would know that whenever they would even have that much (gesturing) of an idea that America is so racist, I always say--when I was in--I remember once I was a guest of the King in Morocco like when, when I was, you know--and these--sitting around a table and these--my Parisian friends and Italian friends were saying, "You know, you should, you should move here and--because someone as wonderful as you, you should be here; America is so racist."  I said, "Well, you know, America is so racist that being black is the only place I could be is America; I couldn't do--I couldn't do it in Morocco, I couldn't do it in Paris [France] and I couldn't do it in London [England].  I couldn't do anything that I'm doing now; I couldn't be sitting here paying my bill at the Ramoonia [ph.] if I wasn't American.  You could," I said, "You know, and I can say to every young person out there, you want to see racism then you should get off your ass and get a passport and go to another country, and then you'll see what this really--this deal of this life is really all about.  That is the bottom line of this whole thing is that they think here that I can do whatever I want, and all that.  And yes, indeed, you can, but this is a place where it's so wonderful that you could be a bum, you could be on the street and get paid (laughter).  The systems out here, and you can start a business.  You can start making t-shirts and become FUBU; you can do anything, you know?  You could be Sean John [sic. Sean Combs of the Sean John company], you can do anything--doesn't matter.  You can even be a senator; you could be anything you want, and this is the only country that allows blacks to do that."  Well, my friends at the table were speechless.  I said, "Let's not be fooled that I'm here and at this big table with you, you know--with Patrozies [ph.] and all of my friends who are heir, or caviar heirs and all that kind of stuff; let's not, let's not be fooled by all a that kind of stuff (laughter).  It's just that I, I'm not under the illusion that I could do it anywhere else; you can't even get a passport in these other countries.  You try to get a work permit in Italy or in Paris or something, they look at you--if you're black, they look at you like you're crazy."
Speaker 2: So, if you were going to sum up for me what you say to kids, you say to them that racism exists all over, but this is a great place to be to succeed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's the only place to be if you, if, if, if--I mean if you're white, I don't know, you could go anywhere.  But being black, you know, with--if you're going to--be on the conversation of racism, then call it the way it really is.
Story_ID: 269846
Speaker 1: Do you feel that you were designing for black women or all women, or is there such a thing as designing for one group of women (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I always--I, I trust my mother [Catherine Bell] (laughter); I was a mother's boy.  My mother owns, my mother owns, without any exaggeration, ninety-one suits of mine--the most expensive suit.  I used to put them in boxes like this (gesturing); every season I can ship them off to her, of the most expensive to her, and beautiful bags, and I put all her scarves in Paris [France] and all of 'em in Italy, and all of her shoes, all the stuff came from Paris.  And she would, would wear them to church.  And I remember once the owner appears (unclear) said to me, well, you know, he says, "You make three hundred, four hundred thousand dollars a year, you're gonna be paying for these?"  I said, "No, I'm not paying for these suits."  I said, "But the one tribute I'm giving my mother is--the one thing you should thank God for is every time I sketch, I think about her."  I said, "That's what I think about, I think about her, I think about she was the woman who, when I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], who kissed me at twelve and thirteen, and brought me--and snuck me Vogues and [Harper's] Bazaars.  She snuck because my father [James Bell]--she--my father wouldn't allow me to read a Vogue or Bazaar when I was thirteen, so she had to sneak them to me in the basement (laughter).  So she--and she snuck 'em to me and I would read them at night (laughter)."  I said, so, and she would, she would--you know, she, she looked a little like Lena Horne and she was quite, quite pretty and, and quite all a that, and she loved all of this.  She said, but, you know--and then she--I was sending her so much that she would give them to my sister [Tanya Bell (ph.)] and to her sister--and then she had so many that he said, "Well, doesn't she wear the suit she wore last year?"  I says, "No, no, no."  "Do the people who shop at Bergdorf's [Bergdorf Goodman] and Saks [Fifth Avenue] and all those people who buy this stuff buy them?"  I said, "No, she wears the latest stuff of the season."  And he said, "Well, where does she wear them to?"  I said, "She wears them to church.  But once she said to me, she say, 'I try to get your father to take me out someplace nice, but the only place I ever wear it was to church.'  She said, 'And then the people in the church think that, that I, that I kind of show up because I wear a different suit every single day (laughter) I was in church.'"  She would wear a different suit because she had that many; I was sending her sometimes a season, you know, forty-something suits, so she would have boxes.  So she start wearing them, you know, see, because I would call her and say, I'm sending you the suits for a reason; I need to know what you like and what you don't like, so come on, get it together.  So if they're sitting in a box, I'm not gonna send you anymore.  So, you know, I bought her mink coats, I bought her all this stuff, and yea, I always thought my customer was--I guess all of these sort of--you know, I had a--I thought my customer was multi-cultural, that they all wanted to be glamorous and they all wanted to look--they all wanted to look like movie stars, they all wanted to look like, you know like, you know, [Coco] Chanel and (unclear) and all my favorites--[Giorgio] Armani, and anybody who made the most beautiful suits in the world, I looked at, and then eventually mine became the most beautiful and, you know, I started off looking at Paris [France], and eventually my style became my own, and people looked at 'em and knew that they were the look of [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell, you know?  But yes, indeed my mother was one of my role models (laughter); I hate to say that she's (unclear), she was.  And then I had--I was surrounded by, you know, lovely, beautiful women who I took to dinner almost every night, you know, and so eventually they, you know, I, I, I dress the women who are around me, you know.  I, I, I try to hold a mirror to--there was blind to color, and had a lot of style to it.  Yes, all the black women, I mean--when people used to say that Jews--Jewish women--you couldn't go to a synagogue without seeing my, my suits in every synagogue every Sunday, everywhere, you know; they were beautiful, and they were expensive.
Speaker 1: How expensive are they?
Speaker 2: They, they were like, you know, $350--they start at $350, $450, they went to like, you know, eight [$800].
Story_ID: 269847
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Audrey [Lavinia] Smaltz said to me once, she said, "You can't go to Abyssinian [Baptist Church, New York, New York], honey, and not see them.  The women of Abyssinian, honey, cannot get enough of what you do; those women in Abyssinian own maybe six and seven suits of yours."  I mean I was happy 'cause women--you know, I was a feminist designer, by the way--
Speaker 2: Are you still in touch with Audrey Smaltz?
Speaker 1: I see her at the drag event.
Speaker 2: Well, we'd like to--you should--I'd like to talk with her; she'd be someone else good to be a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 1: Oh, are you kidding?  Are you kidding?  That would be the interview of your life (laughter).  You, you, are you serious?  Are you kidding?--you have, you have no idea because, you know, she's the era before me, so when I was going to Paris [France], by the way, she was there.  Yeah, she was a--she was big, Audrey Smaltz; she was in the front row, so she knew Scott [Barrie], and Willi [Smith], and all of them very well, and she could know the transition of this whole thing because you know I went from a publisher and her--and her and I never really--yeah, but you should meet her.
Story_ID: 269848
Speaker 1: But, how did the relationship end with P.S.I.?  You were at the height, you're selling (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went into my own businesses, I'm going to leave it at that, you know.
Speaker 1: You went into your own business?
Speaker 2: I went into my own business designing, and the partnership that I went into wasn't the best after I left them.
Speaker 1: And when did you leave them--what year?  When, when did you start working--?
Speaker 2: I, I would think like eighty--'89 [1989], '90 [1990] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, like--so, like in 1990s you start to branch out and do your own thing, and to do more glamorous-type clothing than suits.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I was, I was a glamorous guy then (laughter); I had money, and generally when you get money, you become--you don't, you don't get--you don't, you don't feel like doing poor (unclear), you know what I mean.  I won't say poor clothes, I would say less expensive stuff or every day wear; I wasn't really into doing--
Speaker 1: Who became the inspirations then, or even who, who--
Speaker 2: Girl, you know, girl--my girlfriends, my girlfriends.  You know, I, I was surrounded by lovely, gorgeous women constantly, all the time, you know, I mean, so I was always--dark glasses and scarves, and I always had a dark car waiting (laughter).  I was a man of the night, you know?  (Laughter)  I loved the night; I would say I did ravishingly dinner clothes, so I had to be a--you know, I wasn't very the day, you know?  My ego got a little inflamed, you know, and I became a little night boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: During the night?  Yeah.  The fabulous clubs at the time were--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, when it's dinner.
Speaker 1: Dinner, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the dinner hot spots were?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I loved 21 [Club, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: The 21 Club.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) (unclear), 21; I loved Le Cirque [New York, New York], you know, you know?  I loved all of those good, fine restaurants. You know?
Story_ID: 269849
Speaker 1: The '80s [1980s] and the middle '90s [1990s] were about dressing up, you know?  Now, people don't necessarily want to dress up and show any kind of obvious wealth.
Speaker 2: When did, when did, when do you feel that came into being?
Speaker 1: It started in the new millennium.  Every generation below us changes things, and I think the mood became less dressy and more casual, less matchy.  And I can remember, and maybe so can you, when people actually walked down the street and people had on the same jacket, or there was a trend where you could see people wearing something.  Now, you can see only that in the hip-hop age, where people are wearing the same--all the kids are wearing these printed hoodies; you know which ones I'm talking about (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a, that's a big thing.  Among our generation and mine, people became less, you know, they don't want anything--they don't want to see themselves coming and going, so things became more item-y and it became much harder for retailers because the consumer all of a sudden wanted an item, and they don't want the traditional stuff, that's why when you see--when you look at the streets now, they all look so--everybody looks so individual, and it's gotten worse because you don't see two people wearing the same thing anymore, unless it's these hip-hop people.  Other than that, people are so concerned with their own personal style of what they look like, you know?  That's why they loved the idea when the '70s [1970s] came back, or they loved when the, when the, when the vintage came in, because it was a chance for each one of these people to show that they were a designer themselves, and that's how the--that's how the public looks at it now, and it's very hard for designers at this era, and even going past that, to ever dictate the way (unclear) and [Giorgio] Armani wants, and everybody wanted to wear Armani.  Now, that's not so much thing 'cause people don't want to be in this--you know, they, they think of it as looking the same.
Story_ID: 269850
Speaker 1: So you started your own company.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You started your own company, and that went on for how long?
Speaker 2: Ahh, I would think--five years.
Speaker 1: Five years.  And then is that when we--you started to design, you know, your--when, when, when we spoke last, you were designing a new line.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, was that different from what you'd been doing before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just that you have to deal with a lot of sleazy people and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How has the business changed from what it was when you started?  Is it more difficult to do it now than it was before?
Speaker 2: The, the idea that America no longer--there are no more American factories, and so everything is made offshore, even--unless it's in Paris [France] we get--unless it's in Italy, they control that, but everything's American has--is made in China.  The Chinese who were once contractors for American manufacturers moved into this industry and became the manufacturers of it now, and where it used to be predominantly a Jewish industry, it has become a Chinese industry, so they run it, and everything comes from them.
Story_ID: 269851
Speaker 1: If you said to me, "Do blacks have their own style?" I would have said to you, "Absolutely."  Do they twist hats, turn up collars and do things with clothes like they did in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]?  Yeah, it is a style of theirs--come on, you know; it started in, in, in, in, in slavery times, you know?--when they wore rags, so they had to take the little thing that they had and do something with it; the way they turn a collar, the way they would wear the overalls down on one side, the way things were always baggy.  It was the same thing during the peasant times of, of Marie Antoinette, when the kitchen people wore all those aprons and they became layers and things like that, and eventually it came down to the style.  So it was those peasants with--I'm sorry, not the word peasants; it was the helpers, and the real domestic people who had very little, and created a lot of style.  The same happened with blacks with--throughout this whole thing.  So, if you said to me the sty- have they, can they influence a style, without question; they do have their own style, and it grew--it goes right into now, is when you see--like when all the, the black sort of style became--of everything being oversized and loose, and everybody thought, including me as a designer, said, ahh, it won't last; it'll pass.  And now, what do I wear?  I wear that; I--it's what I wear.  I wear oversized hoodies and caps all the time, with my dark glasses.  What did I wear--I used to wear Armani and all that kind of stuff--I don't wear it anymore; I even wore to Le Cirque [New York, New York] the other day for lunch; I had a tie on, but I had a, a, a hoodie and a cap, and my very, very, very, very rich girlfriend of mine took me to  Le Cirque for lunch, she was here from London [England], and she said, oh, you dress like my husband.  So, did you think that that style would become--and people would say ahh, I don't like it, ahh, it's just (unclear).  It was a comfortable, relaxed vision, and everything being loose and baggy, and I'm not saying that the style of the pants and this--and I don't wanna get into that, but you're talking about the overall mood of it stayed, along with the music.  And everybody in Paris [France], and everybody in Italy, and everybody all over the world, even when you see all these fighting going on all over the world and all these kids on the background, that's what they look like.  They all look like Sean John [sic. Sean Combs of the Sean John company] and the rest of them, don't they?  Is that my imagination, or has that happened?  And is it going anywhere?  No, it's not going anywhere for a reason; it's because it is comfortable and it's loose, and it's hip, and it goes along with the music.  It's almost like the '20s [1920s] again, really, where, you know--when, when fashion was at its least successful, is when designers didn't pay any attention to really what the real people were.  Now it's clothes go with the music and it goes along with their mood and who they are, and that's why it stuck, and that's why it's here, and that's why it isn't going anywhere, and it has a lot of comfort to it.  I'm not talking about all of it, I'm just talking about the overall mood--
Story_ID: 269852
Speaker 1: --You were going to say some, maybe mean things about that [The] New York Times article.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the designers who sort of are the ruling hip-hop designers, you know, they had--did you go to that big party they had in the museum--the black museum--the black designer museum?  I mean I wasn't invited to it because I don't think I've been on CBS (laughter) I don't know why.  You know what I'm talking about, right?  (Laughter) The new hip-hop people, you know, like the whole--those designer of that era which, I think they're very good at t-shirts and I think they're very good at hoodies and I think they're very good at jeans, and I think it stops there.  If you want that on the record, you just got it.  I think their ego is big--far bigger than their talent.  Do they come up with some interesting designs that are made in China?  Yeah.  Do they have the arts and crafts of a master?  I'm afraid not, and I'm not being mean and I'm not--you know--I, I know what [Giorgio] Armani says, if you don't have anything good to say about a designer, don't say it because it sounds like you're jealous.  I'm not really jealous of them.
Speaker 1: Who do you think, who do you--then who has--you have stepped out of the arena of designing.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You don't--you no longer design clothes for women?
Speaker 2: No, no, I do not.
Speaker 1: Who do you think it is that has taken your place that's black today, that's, that's working outside of the traditional hip-hop genre, and is not being dictated by (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I don't know--
Speaker 1: You don't know.
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: No idea.
Speaker 2: No, I mean because I don't see them, and they're not visible, and people ask all the time and they ask me all the time, and I just look at them the way I'm looking at you now--blank and--if they were visible, then we would see them, and I don't see them in newspapers, and that's where you see things.
Story_ID: 269853
Speaker 1: Macy's called you and asked you for, you know--they want to do something for Black History Month and, and the--and--you know, the conversation we had before, you say to them, "Why look back? Let's look forward."
Speaker 2: Sure, because it, it would be--if, if--you know, if people dress the way they dressed in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], yeah, but because people have been so casual and people are so item-minded, that clothing doesn't really have the importance to people that it once had.  It's like, you know, maybe people are more concerned about other things in the world that are going on now at the moment; we're living in very kind of strange, dark and mysterious times, you know, where we are at war, and everybody doesn't love America and, you know, we're going through political changes and social changes, and there's a lot of bad things happening with a lot of bad people out there, and people's minds are more into fixing up their homes.  People are into spending their money differently.  Fashion is not--doesn't have that major importance; you can tell by how people dress in the street--that's how you dressed.  You dress--you're not--I mean in the '90s [1990s] and '80s [1980s] you would be sitting here maybe in Armani, but now that's not the mood of the--that's not how people feel.  There's a lot going on; they're more concerned about children.  You're reading in The [New York] Times every single day; it's gruesome one cover after another; it's been going on now for the last four years--that's a long time.  So, no, is fashion on everybody's mind?  I have to say it's--you know, I have to say--this is very interesting, you know.  A girlfriend of mine met me and she was wearing, the other day, her simple (unclear) coat--beautiful--no pockets, clean--and she looked at how I was dressed and she said--and I--which I thought represents this new era.  She looked at me and said, am I over-dressed?  (Laughter) I said, I said, the idea that people could wear a $3,000 coat and carry a $2,000 bag, to me, is a computer (laughter).  To me--I said, $5,000, $6,000 is a computer.  And she said, you know, you're so right.  I find that when you go to Bergdorf Goodman's now and you look at a skirt from Dolce & Gabbana for $3,000--a skirt!  A skirt for $3,000, you think about all the children in Africa who are starving; you think about these things, to me, that I didn't think about.  You know I don't, I don't think that anything as, as--I think of it as being slightly pretentious thing.  I mean, of course, if you're a good humanitarian, you're already doing things, you have enough money, you know, to build schools and--you know, like Oprah Winfrey, and build these things and you can go and buy yourself a Valentino without feeling guilty (laughter).  But if you're not, you look at, you look at all these things and say what?
Story_ID: 269854
Speaker 1: That fashion, also represent--it's an opportunity for people to express on the outside somewhat of what they--of how they see themselves and, you know, and what we wear becomes a reflection of who we think we are, or at least who we want to present to people who we are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is no question in my mind the, the importance of fashion because every time you want, in history, you want to know what year something was, you can just turn to that year and find out what people were wearing without reading the script, you know?
Speaker 1: And that's one of the things they said about the movie, the 'Dreamgirls,' which you've seen twice, is that you can see the fashion, you can--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, so--
Speaker 1: --check, you know, the periods.  Buy these clothes--dah, dah, dah, dah, dah--
Speaker 2: Right.  So, that's where you can see the importance of it--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) the importance of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm not saying that it's not, I'm just saying that--
Speaker 1: When do you feel we've had the most influence as black people on fashion?  Is it now, or at--currently we are having more influence on the way we look than we have in the past (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think now is a really fabulous thing you've said because I think now is when it shows.  Didn't show--I mean I can't think, including myself--I had a really tremendous influence on what women wore when I was in it, but now I think this new sort of hip, new age generation has their own style, and I think these Afro American sort of designers out of Brooklyn [New York, New York] and Queens [New York, New York] were doing this--these printed hoodies and all that kind of stuff; they really have my vote; I'm sorry, they just do, I mean I just love all that stuff and I don't know why.  You know, it takes all of my education of fine dressmaking and superbly tailored beautiful stuff is out the window, but I think because I like wearing it that I love it, I'm sorry.  Does that make any sense (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And yeah, it does, and all that's--also interesting about that is at home--Christmas--I mean--or Thanksgiving, I'm in Mississippi, and you cannot go ten feet without seeing one; one was with big dice on them, ones with the dollar, you know, dollars on them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, really?  Is it--they was everywhere?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's everywhere (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: It was amazing, and so I was interested; I'm like, well, you know I see so many people (unclear) sixty bucks [dollars] a pop--
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: --but they're expensive.
Speaker 2: The Chinese guy at the grocery store--I was wearing mine, you know; I, I--and it wasn't printed, and he just looked at me and said--and I looked at his and I said--and it--and what I liked about is that the writing all over here (pointing) said, Akademiks, which I thought was--and it had all of this sort of, you know, galaxy stuff which I'm really into at the moment.  And he sort of looked at me and said, oh, yeah, I bought it online at--and he named some, you know, some hip store on 34th Street that he was proud of, the black store that he had got it from--big huge chain; and they're on the Internet now, so--he said, "It was--you know it was $160 bucks."  And he looked at me and said, "It was $160 bucks."  I didn't ask him.  And he said it was, it was marked down, and I thought, yeah, if you saw it--and what I love about all of it is I think it's far more glamorous to wear that stuff because it says things, and it does things, and it, and it uplifts them, and it's fun, and it's happy, and it's non-sophisticated, and it's casual, and you wear it all the time, and it has an image and it has a look.  I mean I, I mean I'm gonna say something really horrible.  This guy--this black guy came in to a dinner party I was at, and he was wearing a Ralph Lauren jacket with piping going all around it, English plaid pants and crested shoes, and, and a vest, and a Ralph Lauren something--oh, and an ascot (laughter).  I did like this (gesturing) (laughter), I crossed my arms and turned around and looked at him and said, "Oh, my!  Aren't we well-dressed!"  And he says, "Oh, (unclear), I don't choose to talk to you."  I said, "Well, you shouldn't--because if I was you, dressed like," I said, "you should go home and change (laughter).  You should go home and change, 'cause nobody looks like that anymore."  You talk about left over from the '80s [1980s]!  (Laughter) Do you know what I mean?  And then he just sort of very grandly gave me his back, and I thought, okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 269855
Speaker 1: Now I think that style among every generation below us changes things for the best, like when I did my thing.
Speaker 2: When--what, what do you feel you changed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it's the suits at the moment; when I came into the market, all looked like graveyards--you're walking into a graveyard, that's what they looked like, and that's when they--when he--when I went out and looked at them and he said to me, what can you, what can you do?  I said, well, first of all, they all look like they were sleeping graves; they were suits that people should be buried in, you know what I'm saying, at a funeral, I said, lying in a coffin.  I said, you know, all this stuff needs to be hip, and young, and up and, and, and, and hot--and hot and sexy and glamorous.  I mean, come on, you know?  These women are not in graves, you know, bring them back, give them a shape--belts and, you know, collars--big things and over exaggerated stuff, and really high experimental stuff.  He said, would you do all that to the--to a suit business?  I said, yes, I would bring them--I would take them out of the grave.  The suit market, when I walked into it, was a graveyard; I just brought it back to life, and the same thing with--like these kids did; they took a utilitarian item, a pedestrian, that people really needed every single day, to wear out casually, and took it and gave it life, and snapped that thing up and said, write all over it (laughter), make it bigger, do something.  You know what I mean?  And, yeah, I, I love it now because maybe if you would have asked me five years ago, I hate it.  I used to say, oh because I was too little bit grand, you know what I mean?  But now I think, yeah, I wear it.
Speaker 2: You wear it.
Speaker 1: I wear it, so I love it, you know?  And that's my take on it.
Story_ID: 269856
Speaker 1: So what was the deciding factor for you to--moving beyond designing clothes again?
Speaker 2: I, I no longer was able to dream, and I lost my enthusiasm for it, and I--it was a very painful six months I went through when I looked at my sketches, and they didn't have the--there was something that I didn't like about them, and I loved what I did all of my life, and I was one of these people that--to lose that, was really crucial to me; it was like losing an arm or a leg or a vision, honestly.  And I'm probably saying something that I shouldn't say, but it really devastated me.  All of a sudden it hit me that I had loved this business since I was seventeen years old, and wore--and had to have a Vogue magazine, had to have a--you know, I was one of these really devoted fashionees of, of, of, you know--and I looked at it like a priest with a collar, honestly; I--that's how much I worship my craft.  And then one day I woke up and I just couldn't look at it, and I had to search my soul for it because, you know, I was devastated.  And it was me; wasn't any criticism I was getting, everybody loved what I did, and that's a known fact.  I'm not talking about losing  help or something; I'm talking about people loving everything of my line, and people thinking it was breathtaking--it was just me; I just kept thinking about--all of a sudden I had all of these dreams about what my art teachers would say, and then I thought, everybody needs to move on.  I had to find something, and then--and like I said, my, my--girl--one of my girlfriends came by--this is how it changed, and she said, I think you should write a book.  And I got aggravated and said something unpleasant to her, and then I'm a let it--I, I was looking at TV and watching [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton, and he said, everybody over fifty should write a book, and I thought--then I thought of writing notes, and then I had a--some of my friends who teach at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and he said, you know, I think--if you don't mind me telling you, I think for somebody who published a magazine [Designer Report], at least worked for all of these stars that you worked for, traveled as much as you have for twenty years, you should rethink your--this--your creative mind, and that you need to draw other things.  And I said, there it is, there it is; I can draw, I can do things, and I'd been drawing fashion too long.  And it had hit me just like that (snaps fingers), and I said ahh, how could you be so stupid?  How could you have been so stupid?  You can draw, you know?  You love the streets, you love everything around you, come on!  It's like--your life is your library; that's what I learned from, from going--traveling.  Your life is a--French designers always used to say, genius comes from the one who has a great library, you know (laughter).  Doesn't come from just out of the air.
Story_ID: 269857
Speaker 1: I was reading a book, then I started making notes about my life, and then I went on to--then one night, I was writing my autobiography, and then one night I pulled out a book on Napoleon [Bonaparte], and that's when it came to me, and I woke up--and at 3:00 in the morning, because everything in your dreams really do come true, you know.  One of the things you dream--most of the things in my dream have come true, they have, ever since I was young.  And of course you have to guide the dreams, but everything in my life that I dreamed about came true, and I thought--I woke up after--3:00 in the morning I was reading this book on Napoleon and I said, that's it!  That's it!  You're crazy, that's it!  You need to do an area, go into an area that you don't know anything about, that you can draw all the things that you thought about when you were young, you know?  And then I called a girlfriend of mine at the Times, The New York Times, and I said, "What about if I wrote a book about fashion about your pencils and pens, and your fabrics coming to life, and they're becoming your good friends, and then they help me with this really big battle at the end?"  And she says, "[HistoryMaker] Alvin [Bell], darling, what have you been doing with your mind?"  (Laughter) I said, "You like it?"  She said, "Well, I think it's creative," she says, "but you wouldn't dare do anything like that, would you?"  And I said, "You know, I think I'm gonna write a real new chapter--it'll be a big one."  And yes, I'd spent so many years of my life in fashion and I was in publishing, and then I was in art, but this time I thought, you got it.  The world is, you know, is like you have to know when to--as my art teacher said, you gotta know--when you're walking around looking at your own work and it hasn't changed any, if you haven't progressed, you know?  It wasn't like I was going into casual sportswear men, and doing like oversize stuff like that--I was stuck, and the public can stick you in something.  You have to know when to get off of a stage; you gotta know when to move on your life and know when you've had enough of that, and you don't need somebody--you don't have to wait, you know, to, to do something else.  And I thought, You know, you're not gonna take a course, you're gonna go to Barnes & Nobles [sic. Barnes & Noble] and you're gonna buy some books (laughter), and you're gonna read how to become a writer; you're gonna learn to become a writer because I could never really spell very well, and my concentration wasn't always good for reading, and then I made myself read novels, then I learned how to write, and then I started illustrating the characters of my book and the dream that I had, and then the book actually started moving like a camera, like a, like a movie in my head, so--and then it became what it is, it's a science fiction thriller, so it's really exciting and I have a new life now, and I became like a kid and now I actually work like I worked when I was in fashion, you know, I remember.  Like I used to work through the night, you know?  I used to work through the night and I be--that's how I became great at it, because I used to sketch throughout the night.  Now, I haven't looked at a fashion magazine in--a year; it's been a year and two months--I can't even buy one.  I buy a novel (laughter), I write architectural magazines because now in my book, I always have to describe the atmosphere of the rooms people are in, and things are moving around, you know, like a movie, so I'm constantly looking at interior of--or people who could describe the space and what it looks like when you're walking into a room, and all that, and it gives me a chance to go on the Internet and deal with science and technology and physics.
Story_ID: 269858
Speaker 1: Now when my friends are talking about fashion, I look at them like a, like a ghost because I don't know what they're talking about (laughter) and I think that's great (laughter), and I'll talk to them, and so one of my girlfriends now, from these fashion editors, they read what I'm writing, they said, well, how do you feel?
Speaker 2: How do you feel?
Speaker 1: I feel like--like you were reborn, you know?  And I think the idea of writing sci-fi [science fiction] is almost like the gift of prophecy; it gives you a chance to move out of yourself and move into another space, and I was stuck for almost--for a while, trapped inside of a body, trapped inside of the same mind, and you can't--you tend to think the same; I'm so afraid of that, being an intensely creative person, of being--of not going from point A to point B, you know?  I think if we don't give ourself new projects and new things to do, you can be trapped in that.  I think it's very important for me to have been able to come out of myself, and now I am not that person that I was for that twenty years; I am another person now who is in another area, that I, I can look at it and say what people in fashion say, have you seen that?  I say, no, no, I haven't seen it (laughter).
Speaker 2: If you were going to write about the history of, of, of black fashion, who are the people you would include?
Speaker 1: I have no idea.  Who I was--who influenced me?
Speaker 2: That, that, that influenced not only you, but fashion itself.
Speaker 1: I would only have to say Willi [Smith] was the only thing, and my, my teacher Miss [Margaret] Canavera [ph.], of course, and--but fashion itself, I have to tell you--we're talking, I'm sorry to say this and--but I'm proud to say it, I really am.  I could jump to the sky to say, I'm so happy, I don't want to know it!  I'm so happy, I think that when I look at it now, it all looks very, very plastic and abstract to me.
Speaker 2: What part of you--or plastic and abstract--what part of you then has--do you feel has grown, or grown up or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it's like an editor that used to say to me who, who used to work for me when I was publishing, and I used to say, why are you, why are you leaving me to go into something else?  I mean fashion--she says, how many ways can you describe pink, and fabulous, and wonderful, and darling?  How many times can you describe a (unclear)?  How many times can you say the collar is to be turned up or down?  She says, no, no, no; it's not for me.  It's like in that movie, you, you know, The Devil Wore Prada [sic. 'The Devil Wears Prada'], where the girl walks off in the end, you know; come on, it, it wasn't--it, it's not a fulfilling plate--was it when I was doing it?  Yes.
Speaker 2: What was fulfilling when you were doing it?
Speaker 1: The idea of seeing something new and wonderful in front of your eyes every single day.
Speaker 2: Now, is your mother [Catherine Bell] still alive?
Speaker 1: No, she's gone.
Speaker 2: She's gone.  When did your mother pass away?
Speaker 1: I think she's been dead now five years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Do you think--you know, your inspiration was your mother, you had dressed her for so many years.  Not having her to dress, did that put a new perspective on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, it--just like Clint Eastwood who became a director, it's like Robert De Niro who became now a director.
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell was a designer, has become a--
Speaker 2: Has (unclear) to go into the movie business; that's where he's going to be, that's where I'm--that's where I'm headed.
Story_ID: 269859
Speaker 1: Speaking about some of the people you worked with--Michael Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's so interesting because--you asked me how did I get that earlier, and I, and I didn't tell you; it's really funny.  My girlfriend [Reggie Morton] was a--kind of a big-shot, you know, knew everybody in the world, very rich broad--lady--sorry--very rich lady, and I, I was--I was having dinner with her and I said to her, "You know," I said--that's when--that's at the height of my Designer Report.  I says, "I want to do something, I want to do something like--something, something more wonderful," and she said, "Well, you're already doing enough wonderfulness, you know; you need to do something--," and then she said, "like what, though?"  I said, "You should maybe think about something wonderful for me to do"--almost like she was my agent--"like, like something big," I said, "like something really big, like something big I can handle."  And then she said--and she called me back, oh it was like three weeks later, and she said, "You know, I was thinking.  I was meeting with the--you know, all the publicity people with Michael Jackson, and I sort of talked them into doing a ready-to-wear line for them, knowing that you would be great at that (laughter), and knowing that if anybody could do the most breathtaking sketches, it would be you."  I said, "That, that sounds big, that sounds big; big is good."  I mean little, to me, never really--is not a good thing, which means you're, you're still hungry after you've eaten (laughter).  If you do something big, at least it gets your adrenaline going (laughter) and you can really, you can really do your thing; when things are small, it becomes--I mean you're walking away still hungry after dinner; it's, it's not really good.  I mean that's my idea anyway, and I'm not trying to be smart or anything, it just doesn't--you know.  So, she said, "Well, why don't you work on some concepts," so I did, and finally, you know, the Michael Jackson people looked at them and sort of did like that (shrugs shoulders), you know, like they weren't impressed, and then they said, "Well, maybe we should arrange an appointment for him to meet with Michael and let Michael be the judge of the--," trying to, you know, play me on.  So, I said, "Well, I already know that I'm really good at this, so I don't really need any approval from him, I really don't, but I think--because I can dan- I can draw as well as he dances."  That's what I told them.  I said, "So the world has already told me that, so I don't need any validation in that area."  Not that my ego was through the sky, I said, but it is, kind of, you know, come on.  So they flew me out there, and he sort of played cat and mouse with this whole thing of whether coming in and I, and I remember he came into the room and he said, like this (folds arms), and wearing these dark glasses, and he said, "You know, they're, they're okay."  So I said, "I think they're a little better than okay," I said.  I remember I don't think he liked it too much, but that's what I said.  I said, "I don't think that I do okay things," I said.  "It's not where I come from and it's not my space."  I said, "The way you sing and dance, I can move a pencil faster than your feet."  I said, "And I'm one of the few people who can do that and I know I am, so--that leads us to where we are now (laughter)."  His publicity people didn't like that, not at all; they cut off the meeting really short--and I don't think he did either, actually.  And then they called me back, I think, two hours later, when I was about to leave back--come back to New York [New York], and said, "The job is yours," you know.  I said, "Well, am I gonna have to put up with his--," (laughter) that's what I said, you know, "am I gonna have to put up with his--him just being the star, or could I be a star, too?  Or is it just--or can we be stars together, or is it just me saying, thank you, no, yes, no, yes, no, yes, no.  I mean am I gonna share in this glamour, or is it just gonna be like the stage is constantly his?"  They said, "The stage is constantly his, you take it or leave it."  I said--I remember I just said, "I don't, I don't--don't--no, no, no, no.  It wouldn't work for me," I said, "because I already have something now, and I'm already doing something; I already have a stage, and I'm not willing to like not get billing or any--," you know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 269860
Speaker 1: And where you stand now, I'm going to ask you to do like the same thing, to look back and tell me what stands out most of what you've done, and then to look forward and tell me what you're still looking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I think the most of things that I've done, I have to say it would be Designer Report, and then I would have to say P.S.I., and then I would have to say him [Michael Jackson], and I would have to say, I think--being a creative person, every day is kind of outstanding--every day is rewarding, too; it, it really is, you know?  I, I had to say one of these days, if I had to close my eyes tomorrow, or something was to happen to me, I would have to say that I was a pretty lucky guy.  I started in something at the age of thirteen that just escalated and evolved and, and all of my dreams came true, you know?  I have to say that.  I can't say that--you know, I can't think of something--I was very lucky.  I think I have to--in this whole thing thank God, honestly, seriously, because I think having a gift is one thing, and there's a lot of gifted people out there, trust me, and there people who get breaks, you know?  I think I was totally surrounded by a, a network of people who constantly helped me when I was younger, which brings me--us to the point of why certain people make it and other people don't, you know?  I surrounded myself with role models who, who I worked for that I liked, who were great people, and in turn when my turn came, they helped me and voted me into the CFDA [Council of Fashion Designers of America] which is a major achievement; in fact, you know--in fact, I was voted in by Calvin [Klein] and Callen Herrera [sic. Carolina Herrera] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the CFDA stands for the--?
Speaker 2: You know, the Council of American Designers of America [sic.].  And I think that's a major achievement and I think all of this stuff comes from something, you know?  I worked for all of these people, and--yeah, I think, I think being crea- I think if you're in this creative arena, it's a blessing, it really is; I mean, you know, you--when you have to wake up every morning and do something that you absolutely love, you know?
Story_ID: 269861
Speaker 1: I think there's a reason why my friends say I have a fear of intimacy; I wasn't really big on marrying anybody--male or female, and my relationship with a girl lasted for six years, seven years; I don't know what happened to her, but she said to me--before she left, she said, "You married a career, you know."  She said, "If anybody ever--I've ever known married a career, it was you; you think of nothing else, you live--you are totally devoted to your career."  I said, "Is it that?"  She said, "I, I think that you will get everything that you want, but you are really not the kind of person who is going to leave this earth screaming for somebody."  She said, "I think you're gonna die with a pen and piece a paper in your hand.  Your magic marker is--your pencil is your best friend," she said.  And it's something, you know--and I was reading about [Pablo] Picasso when he died, you know?  I was reading, I was reading that.  I was thinking about the end of my life as well, you know?
Speaker 2: You have been?
Speaker 1: No, I think about--yeah, I think about--you know, because I think--I didn't have any kids, I don't have a wife, I don't--you know, have any, you know what I mean?  And I wonder why I'm not lonely, I wonder why I'm not lonely, and I wonder why that's odd, you know?  But then again--
Speaker 2: Well, you can be a loner and not be lonely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people are married and lonely, which I (laughter)--and it's no longer the thing where a lot of people don't get married anymore, you know what I mean (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's not the thing anyway.  I mean don't commit yourself so quickly to something.  And your whole life is ahead of you, I'm saying.
Story_ID: 269862
Speaker 1: When I think of what we do--we--you and I--do, how wonderful is that, when you think that 10 percent of the world don't have a passport--only 10 percent of the world have passports, you know?  And everybody don't get a--doesn't get a chance to experience all the things that we might, and it's because we, we made those things happen.
Speaker 2: And then even fewer black people.
Speaker 1: And even fewer are black people.  I think this whole black thing escapes me.
Speaker 2: And it escapes you how, and why?
Speaker 1: It escapes me because, at one point when you look in the mirror every single, single day, you look at yourself, and unless you're crazy, you see what you are, you know.  The idea of--that we were once enslaved people, there were a lot of enslaved people, and through education and through generation, they--you know, they evolved and changed, and you're able to, at one point, have to look in the mirror and say, yeah, I am black and I am--what?  And what do I do, and what contribution am I going to make for my people and far more for myself?  What are you going to leave behind?  Are you gonna leave behind what?  I mean you have to answer to yourself and to God at the end of the day, you know, and be able to look at yourself and, and look at your accomplishments and say, I've done what, for what?  You know, it's a very hard thing when people say in your family, oh, you're so lucky, you're so lucky, you're so lucky.  And I say, being black, come on--in America?  It's not luck, it's a person who so chooses to work that hard.
Speaker 2: And there's some luck involved, but I mean what--something you say that is interesting, why I think it's important to at least acknowledge that, you know, like being black is being black.
Story_ID: 269863
Speaker 1: When I asked you to--well, who has taken your place today?  You were like, "Well, you know what?  They're under the radar."  I mean, as far as just having people for other people to look up to and say, "If that guy did it and he's black, then I can do it, too."  Did you have that?
Speaker 2: I kind of had that because I was--we were--it was in the '60s [1960s], so I had friends who were young, who were artists, so when we went to these private schools and stuff like that on Saturdays, that our parents arranged for us to go to, then we were all--you know, they were black students; you were all friends with them, and you sort of inspired one another.  So, you know, it was that whole melting pot of the beginning, and that's when I said I have to thank God for that because I was in the beginning of all of that, you know?  I mean I still came from a father [James Bell] who said--you know, who looked at me with really evil eyes and said, that boy is crazy.  That boy draws all the time, Catherine [Bell]--it's my mother--he said, boy draws all the time, you know?  He said, you know, the boy has a problem; the boy has--you know, he doesn't read that well, you know?  And my father was so academic, and my other two brothers [Jimmy Bell and Donald Bell (ph.)]--I mean he would pay a dollar a week if you could--if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three bucks--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, how much?
Speaker 1: Three dollars.
Speaker 2: Three dollars if you could read a book, so I mean I was drawing and looking at fashion magazines, and he would just look at me like he was ready to hit me every time he looked at me.  He just couldn't see it.  But of course, when he died, I mean he said, you know, don't you love your mother for having that vision?  I just looked at him and said--when he was on his death bed, I just looked at him and said yeah, yeah.  Well, you know, that's why all basketball players and all these people look at their mothers on camera and said, thank you, mom; they don't say thank you, dad.  It's all different now because you're a dad, and so dads of the past don't believe in having that, that tough, tough-tongued way of, of (laughter) treating their kids, you know what I'm saying?  You see, you see fathers now in the streets holding kids and, you know, they're doing--the ones that doing the feeding and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, things have changed.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Things have changed.
Speaker 2: You, you know what I'm talking--
Speaker 1: I know exactly what you're talking about, and older women stop me in the grocery store and say it often.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And that's what we have to go by for this whole black thing to go back to that original question.  All of these stigmas that black people had, you know, came from oneself.  Yes, we--yes we have racism, but racism is something that starts within our own race, and then it's white people, but then it's all over the world; it's just this thing that, that is.  Each individual--and once he gets past that (unclear) its thing, you know, you can't really believe everything that you hear or say; at one point you got to stand up for oneself and say, I can do this, I don't even care about it, and move on, you know.
Story_ID: 269864
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Do you have any hopes for African Americans that may be coming up today at-- like at Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] or, you know, black students today wanting to be designers.  What, what do you say to them?
Speaker 1: I say follow your dream, follow your destiny.  Work--work night and day as hard as you can, and you will achieve every dream that you have, that there is nobody holding you back from anything.  You can't say white, black, green, this person, my mother or father--at the end of the day, when you have to close your eyes and leave this world, you can't say they any longer.  You gotta say I did this, I was responsible, you know?  You have to be the--your own chairman of the board of your own life (laughter).  You can't blame things on people--for how long?  Even if you had a bad childhood, you gotta rise above it and move on.
Story_ID: 269865
Speaker 1: Do you think just as in, say, the art world, there are like black pop art, there's black classic art, there's black modern art or new--you know, do--are the--do black designers fall in the same categories?  Like would you see yourself more as the, the classic black designer, and--okay, and FUBU today would be pop design, you know?  You see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but FUBU has become classic.  He started with t-shirts and jeans, but you have to look at him as somebody great too because sometimes--there's two types of greatness; there is a major creative one, and then, then there is the commercial one.  There is the one that serves the purpose of the need of the people; now, they are called great merchants now, they're not called great creative people, but in a way they made their contribution.  You know, creativity used to be all up there (pointing), where it was something so of the divine that you couldn't touch, you know what I'm saying?  The divine now should be--of your generation where you can touch it; you wanna know it--it's mine (unclear), I mean I bought it in a thrift shop, but you don't have to know it has to be somebody's name.  The designers of this new era, everything has changed; it will no longer have that kind of luxury that my era had, and the ones had before them; that's all dead, you know.  They want you to make money; it's all about this whole corporate world that we're in, you know.  Stores have to have money back, and the whole thing has changed, so a lot of their dreams will change with it, you know?  You know everything is--became science and technology, even in, even in fashion where, you know, I used to draw, what--ten years ago; now, everything that is sent to the Orient [East Asia] is on a computer.  So you're in the age of, of, of--you should say to me--ask me really the, the bottom line question.
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Is where do you think it's really going (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Where do you think it's going?
Speaker 2: I mean forget about, forget about the, the Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] designers of the future; I think that--of the future for me, no.  The real future is that robots will be doing this, you know?  They will be talking into a voicemail, then the voice will be--then the images will come from that and be scanned, and it will come back, and they'll do everything from voice, you know?  And--you know, and they'll just--and that's how designing will be done and mass-produced.  And course there will be some creative people, but I think clothes will be about--in the future about safety and they will become like, you know, built-in mechanics and, you know, you'll be able to look inside of your jacket and see--and communicate with somebody from it, and defense weapons and all that will be built inside of them.  Now, maybe I'm talking too futuristic, but I think that's part of the voice of prophecy because a lot of these things that happened fifty years ago that people look back on now, have just come to pass.
Story_ID: 269866
Speaker 1: You had an accident before we--in-between.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was it a bad one?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was hospitalized, and somehow--I heat--I hate to keep saying this--maybe because I'm, I'm from such a religious family, which I am because my brother's a minister and everybody in my family is so religious--is that I think that God seems to always tell me, and these troubled things have helped, that I've saved you for a bigger picture.  So I was remarkable in this accident; I had this and had that, I healed really fast, I had no repercussion from it, it was being in the wrong place at the wrong time--that's how I look at everything, by the way.  You know when that type of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you were hit by a car, or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my--you know, and my bike or--went up really into the air, and came down like--really like, really into the--I mean--but I'm not exaggerating, it went into the air, you know?  And these people helped me up from the ground, and I remember coming home and my hands and legs, you know, felt a little swollen, and thank God you can call 9-1-1 and--'cause they asked me did I want to go to the hospital and I said no because I didn't feel bruised or anything, I just didn't--I just felt like--some pain.  I just said--and I said, I only live up the street; I can make it home.  And within fifteen minutes my face and arms and legs had just blew up, you know.  I just locked up the doors and I just called 9-1-1, and I told them the whole story, they were here in less than three minutes.  They asked me could I breathe, I said I was having trouble, and they took me there and they got me to the hospital and they said, "Sir, sir, you are really--you are fractured like everywhere.  Everywhere; you're just like fractured."  And I just said, "Oh, how unglamorous (laughter)."  I said, "There's no sketchpads in here obviously, and I'll be here."  And they said, "Yeah, yeah," they said, "but you have a sense of humor."  And I was in pain, and then they put me--wrapped me up in these things--in the arms, and legs, and back, and--no, you never feel glamorous in that stuff (laughter), and I hate to say, I hate to say you don't feel as your most creative thing but, you know, yeah, it is what it is but, you know, I didn't--it wasn't like cancer, you know what I mean?  It's like--
Speaker 1: It was an accident.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, and I just thought I couldn't meet with you, to see your charming face (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, thank you.  But lying up that time, did that have anything to do with the new vision you have about what you were going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I, I--you know, I think of the vision like you think of it; it's that I think about it now--like the only thing I hate about it is that I didn't do it ten years ago, that's what I think, because now, I'm so alive, I mean I'm just thinking, how many books can I write at fifty?  You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: You can write a lot of books at fifty.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can, but it's just that my drives now go to the sky with God, you know?  I mean, you know, and there's--and I, I, I just--and I'm not--and I'm a little spoiled, I'm so--you know, I am; it's just that I, I need excitement (laughter).  I need to be happy, and I'm--I don't--when I--if I've been drawing something and it doesn't make me happy, I become mis- I'm like a miserable person--I am!  I mean I have to have this sort of creative energy going where I'm always doing something new, and if I don't get it, then I get really aggravated with myself and I start beating myself up.
Story_ID: 269867
Speaker 1: When you think of your career in fashion, what is it you want to be or, not that you care, but what is it you would like to be remembered for from those people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't care.  You know, I got a lot of press and I, I made some beautiful--I made a major contribution to it; it wasn't--I wasn't just another designer, I became a name designer, and I made breathtakingly beautiful stuff--I did.  It's not my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was your favorite to make clothes for?  I mean outside of your mom [Catherine Bell], did you ever--
Speaker 2: Oh, I--it's just a list--you know, the list of celebrities goes way up there--
Speaker 1: I know, but--
Speaker 2: --I don't want to, I don't want to get into that.  I don't want to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I make--I was fortunate enough to be in an era where I could make beautiful things that I loved; that era is gone, by the way.  Will you ask me to change?  I'm a--young designers no longer even have those workrooms; all those workrooms that all of these great designers lived by that you know had great--had all these great technicians who were the engineers, you know, and, you know, and the science behind you are gone--vanished as of yesterday because they have been replaced by the Orient [East Asia], and spec sheets that are sent, so all these young designers who were coming up, now they're probably forced to go back to making things themselves, you know; all these young designers who are opening up like these guys do in Brooklyn [New York, New York]?  You know, the (unclear)--black fashion and all them?  They're, they're the smart ones; they don't really have all that technical training, and they're just doing things like [Coco] Chanel did and, and [Maxfield] Parrish, when she [sic. he, Nigel Preston] started off making jersey--jersey jackets and jersey pants like, you know, for men's wear; that's how she started--in her basement, in the south of France; that's how she started, and these guys are doing the same thing.  So, in order to do what you have to do, you have to start in a smaller way to fulfill your vision.
Story_ID: 269868
Speaker 1: So are you happy with the way your life has turned out overall?
Speaker 2: What do you think?  Aren't you sitting here talking to me?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do I look like I'm unhappy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do I look happy or unhappy?
Speaker 1: You look happy.
Speaker 2: I look happy.
Speaker 1: Do you feel lucky?
Speaker 2: I--you know, I--well, lucky means--you know, to me--I mean the only thing I hate is--okay, maybe I don't have a limousine waiting downstairs, and maybe I know I'm not going back and forth to the south of France, you know (laughter), I mean (unclear) (laughter), and maybe I don't own a jet, you know?  But--
Speaker 1: Those are all material things.  You've gotten to do what you love to do--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you have--
Speaker 1: --and you're still young, and you're about to embark on something else that you love equally as much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even, even more, I tell you, because if--I think when you get to see what I'm working on--
Speaker 1: And you have a greater awareness of who you are, I'm sure, now, than you did twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what one of my girlfriends said (unclear), and I said to her when we was going to buy these books on nanotechnology--not fashion, not a Vogue, by the way--you hear what I just said?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nanotechnology (laughter).  And we were going to buy a book, and what I loved about it is, she just looked at me, and I looked at her and I said, "You know, I really, I really wish I would have done this ten years ago, or twenty years ago.  I could have been a big, huge movie star."  You know what she said to me?  "You could only have done that now.  Now, you have the experience to pull that off; you could have never have done that in your earlier years because you didn't, you didn't have the experience."  She said, "It's because of your past that you are able to do this," and she says, "and most men," she said, "your age, when they get older, they look to do their childhood dreams, they all do, like the guy who wrote Superman and Spider-Man; they wait--men wait until they get in their fifties to do something really boyish and young--that's what you're doing."  She said, "You're going back to your childhood, that's all you're doing."  I said, "That's something!"  And it--you know what I'm saying?  At least it keeps a smile on your face.  The whole idea is that if you wake up in the morning and you love what you're doing, to me that's a part of life; I can't imagine being a person who didn't love what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Well, we have one minute to go, and I just wanna end it with you saying, you know, you love what you do, and--
Speaker 2: I love, I love life, I love--I think life is made up of, you know, of course all these atoms and flowers and people and, you know--and stars, but all these stars in the universe, you know?  You think about it--is--that if we could be sitting here now and you can, you've fulfilled all the dreams of your life, that you can't say one negative thing--maybe one little excitement with Anne Klein, but that was nothing.  I mean eventually, it was her who gave me some of the tools of what I had now.  I mean (unclear) people would say I'm kind of, you know, tough too, but when you think that--what can you say when you've had everything, you know?  When you've had health and family.
