Story_ID: 93848
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's Robert Blackwell, R-O-B-E-R-T, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 28, 1937, Eastville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a consultant, I own a consulting firm, Blackwell Consulting Services.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 7? 8-- it is December 8, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Oh you're in the offices of Blackwell Consulting Services which is located at 100 South Wacker Drive, Suite 800 in Chicago.
Story_ID: 93849
Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth, there are five light weight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.  The first one is sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food probably chicken--fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, but the nicest vacation that I've ever had was in Vieques which is off the coast of Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: V-I-E-Q-U-E-S it's all one word.  It's an island and there was a lot of controversy about it if you remember.  [HM] Al Sharpton went down there about the [U.S.] Navy bombing it, right and the Puerto Rican people were upset.  That island was called one of the sort of undiscovered islands and you go down there and my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] and I spent, I think three weeks down there.
Speaker 1: Was that prior to the bombing or after?
Speaker 2: Oh no, they've been bombing there regularly for years.  I was down there, you don't notice it very much but the navy does bombing runs and then every now and then you hear them.  They are beautiful beaches though so it was nice.
Speaker 1: Okay now the last of these light weight questions is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah I do, as "you understand me right," you know I say something-I tend to when I'm talking especially to an audience of people, I always say--make a point of saying now "you understand me, right" and I suppose I say that more than anything.
Story_ID: 93850
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family-
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of the family.  Let's start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure it's Mary Ellen Blackwell, M-A-R-Y, E-L-L-E-N.  Do you want her maiden name?  Satchell which is S-A-T-C-H-E-L-L and then she married my father obviously Blackwell, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born July-watch me mess this up. She was born July 12, 1909.
Speaker 1: Yep/ In Eastville?
Speaker 2: In Eastville, Virginia, the same place I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well I know-- this is what I do know about her.  She came from a family of seven children.  She had--there were four girls-four girls? Five girls, two boys.  They--her mother [Elnora Fitchet Satchell] was born and raised in Eastville, Virginia.  Her father [Robert David Satchell] came from Barbados.  So he was a West Indian who came over and he was a carpenter.  I don't know much about his--I don't know anything about his parents on his side of the family.  What I know though is about my mother's.  My mother's people lived--were named Fitchet, F-I-T-C-H-E-T and they were--if you go to the graveyard in Eastville, Virginia half the graveyard are Fitchets.  There are just Fitchets everywhere and so I don't know specifically about my grandmother's folks.  I haven't done a genealogy thing.  I know that she had a long history there in Eastville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay now where is Eastville?
Speaker 2: Eastville is if you fly into Norfolk [Virginia], okay and then you go inland, you go across this huge bridge that's spans the Chesapeake Bay and you go into a town called Cape Charles and then--the thing of Eastville as a suburb of Cape Charles.  You know how that works in the country, right?  But you know Eastville's just a little--you know my folks--my grandparents there might have been five houses in a square mile and they were--my grandmother and grandfather's house and the houses of their children who chose to stay in Eastville.  So--and that's who was there.  So you know it's a typical country atmosphere.
Story_ID: 93851
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your-did your grandmother [Elnora Fitchet Satchell] talk about her ancestors or have any stories about what life was like in the 19th century there in [Eastville] Virginia?
Speaker 2: No, you know they honestly did not talk a lot about that and you would think that in the Nor--in those days--like talking about race as an example.  My grandfather [Robert David Satchell] always made a point that he was a carpenter and they never saw anybody but black people all the time and so the whole notion of a lot of what you think about the South just didn't seem to be part of their lives because they were very much independent and you know, and actually hunted their food, had gardens, had chickens.  It was very much a rural life that they had and my grandfather had a troller and he would take it out in Chesapeake Bay and there's a funny story.  I really thought that clams and shrimp and lobsters were things that poor people ate because my grandfather would go out and would dig clams in Chesapeake Bay.  You know, he would go get crabs, right, which you know crab cakes and--you know Baltimore [Maryland] right, that's the Chesapeake Bay.  And so the kind of food that we ate was always a lot of seafood type things and whenever we were down there and so it was always kind of amusing we thought that's kind of what poor people ate was this stuff that later on you find out is populating fancy restaurants.  But no to be honest with you, I did not talk--I've never had a conversation with my grandfather about his parents or Barbados and I don't think I talked very much at all with my grandmother about who her people were at the time it didn't happen very much.  But my mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] always talked about her family and talked about everybody, I knew all of them but I didn't know previous generations of people who were not living.
Speaker 1: Okay so they never discussed slavery or the Civil War or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: No it didn't happen not for us it didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay now did they own their land or did they rent?
Speaker 2: They owned their land, they owned--in fact everybody down there in Virginia that I knew about in my family owned their own place.
Speaker 1: Okay is there any stories about how they acquired the land or how they--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No it's interesting, I haven't heard I just assumed-- my grandfather thought that land was the single most important thing that anyone could have and in fact he owned the air rights.  And he, when he-- he died he put in his will that his heirs could not sell that land.  He thought that land was the single most important thing anyone could own.  And I've heard him say that a bunch of times.  He thought it was really important to be in business for yourself and to own your own land, own your own business and own your own, own your own land and then he thought that you would be a free man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 93852
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes my father's name is Richard Blackwell, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L.  My father was born in Beverly, New Jersey which is right in the middle part of New Jersey near Trenton, near Fort Dix, near Burlington in that area.
Speaker 1: Is that farm country?
Speaker 2: No no it wasn't, it's more like a suburb.  If you know New Jersey, New Jersey is full of little towns.  There's a lot of farm stuff but my father was more like a city boy in the country--  My mother was really country girl; my father was more like a city boy.  In fact, my father graduated from high school-- my father was born in 1904, okay and he was--he graduated from high school when he was seventeen and that was 1921, I believe.  Now do you know how many people graduated from high school in 1921, not many; a very small number of people graduated from high school and it was interesting.  And he took Latin and chemistry and physics and he took Latin, he took French.  But his father [James Blackwell] had died when he was a small boy, eight years old and he had a family of--there were two boys-- one-- there were three boys.  One died at a very young age and he had three sisters, there were three boys and three girls.  When my father graduated from high school, he was kind of going to college, right but he couldn't because he went to work.  He got a job and-- supporting his family and he was like the, I think the third child but the oldest boy and so the boy was expected when he got out was to kind to be a man and help support his family and that's what he did.  And so he never ended up going to college and he ended up being kind of a handy man, a janitor, a cook, a domestic all those kinds of jobs, right.  So--but again my father never talked about his family beyond his immediate family.
Speaker 1: Beyond his parents?
Speaker 2: Beyond his parents.  I've never had a conversation about his grandparents or his grandparents and there was never any discussions from a historical perspective because that wasn't until I was really a lot older that I realized that my, that my father's parents were from Virginia.  In fact, I found that out with my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] doing genealogy and she tracked his family and in fact, I have a cousin who in the '80s [1980s] became very interested in the Blackwell genealogy who had done a lot of work understanding who we were and where we came from.  But we never had those discussions when I was a boy.
Story_ID: 93853
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well she was a--she had five boys and she was a beautician and she did hair in her house--in our house.  So she was working but she was always there.  She was a very devout Christian.  If you lived in her house, you went to church all day Sunday, all day.
Speaker 1: What denomination was she?
Speaker 2: Baptist but, you know, but at night she would go to the Methodist church, she would go to the Church of God and Christ which we always called "holiness churches" and my mother was--she was just very, very religious.  And so church was a part of it.  My father [Richard Blackwell] went to church, sometimes didn't go to church, but she was just devout and her kids had to go and we also had to take piano lessons if you were in--you couldn't live in her house without doing piano lessons.  So every kid learned piano.
Speaker 1: So she played piano too, I take it?
Speaker 2: She didn't play piano but she made you take piano lessons.  She thought it was good for you, discipline, right.  My mother was big on discipline.  And both of my parents were really strict about school.  I grew up in a neighborhood where lots of kids would skip school and do all that.  Her words were you know I'll kill you dead before I let you mess your life up.  So I grew up in a family that was--which was driven by my mother in the sense that my father had three jobs.  I never knew him when he didn't have three jobs okay, and he was very much into his kids going to college and being able to escape the life that he had and to moving on up, if you will.  So we were there with my mother and my father what I remember about him was he was the disciplinarian and my mother would threaten us with my father, you know how that goes.  But she, you know, she was, in the life of all of us, the kids this extraordinary woman who--for example, I remember when I learned to read and I was four years old and my mother read to her sons, all of us, every single night that I can remember until I was in school around six or seven years old and it wasn't until later that I realized that she couldn't read very well.  Sounds funny to you, you know but I remember that every single night she would pick up a book and read it and she took us all to the library to get library cards and she would never walk in the library, she would take you to the door of the library and then she would tell you that you have to walk up in there and tell the lady that you want a library card and get a book and she sat right on that park bench while--I was seven years old while I walked in there and got my book.  I subsequently learned that she was friends with the librarian but she was trying to get her boys to grow up, right.  And so she had--my mother had tremendous influence on, on my life. And--
Story_ID: 93854
Speaker 1: She had a thing which I recall so much was that if I would come home and say--think about back in '66 [1966].  So I went to high school--I graduated from high school in '55 [1955] so I would have gotten to ninth grade sometime like '52 [1952] and the sports teams and I lived in a town with a very small black population called Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania and you were either rich or black there was nobody else in that town.
Speaker 2: Rich or black?
Speaker 1: Rich or black there were no middle class people in that.  You know like you see now three, four hundred thousand dollars homes, there was nothing like that in Bryn Mawr.  Either Rockefeller's first wife that came from Union Pacific, she came there, the Campbell Soup people, some people--  it was just a very wealthy town and there was that sort of domestic class.  That was my sense of it and I'm not so sure that I'm absolutely right but that was my sense of the place--it was basically.  When I went to high school, you just knew for example, that on the varsity basketball team there were only going to be three black kids and the other two are going to be white and one of them is going to be the point guard and the point guard was going to be white no matter what okay.  So--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: And this is presumably because--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Because of the issue of the smart guys that is the point guard directing activities for everybody else and it was this--there were three.  So it was just commonplace.  Football team there was quarterback, you know.  I mean that was-what happened my mother's attitude was kind of interesting.  My mother's attitude was okay fine there's three positions open for you so you need to figure out how you're going to be better than everybody but two.  She would not entertain the race issue, wouldn't do it.  You could come home and say mom you know I didn't get this job because I was black and she said well you know if you'd studied harder, if you had done better, if you had been fifteen percent better than that kid, they would have given you the job.  So the lesson is you got to do what you've got to do to succeed. And now that--  And she was just relentless about that, okay just relentless about it because her view was that the world you live in is the world you live in and so while everybody else is trying to fix some of these things that are wrong, the problem for you young man is to make as much of your life and remember it goes back to religion.  She always said, "Just remember Robert," she called me, "just remember Robert, white people can't take anything from you that God has for you.  So what you worry about is what God has for you and if you do your part, God will do his part so don't worry about it."
Story_ID: 93855
Speaker 1: She just was, you know, in my mind, a rather extraordinary person and I always remember about her that in the '60s [1960s] when we had all the black power moves, she disliked the whole black power thing intensely.  She said to me one day, my hair was long, right and she said you know we raised you kids up and send you to college and now you're trying--you remembered you were black, you just figured it out after you spent four years in college.  You didn't know you were black when you got there?  She'd say "What is this black power stuff? I mean it's like you--who did you think you were?" And she once talked to me about "Do you realize there are generations of people who are washing dishes and taking care of people's babies and we are bringing you guys into this world raising you up, right? Now I'll tell you what all you black power guys are going to do."  She said, "Now you've got white girlfriends?" and she would stop and she would look at you and say "Oh you want black power but you know why don't you go and find yourself a nice little black girl, marry her and have some nice little black children and raise them. And wouldn't that do more for our people?"  Now I'm not where I am and not agreeing with all this but she had this point of view that--it always reminds me somewhat like Chinese.  She had this really long view of things and she just figured out-figured that if you would do your part, God would do his part and we'll be fine.  Now I didn't agree with all of that then and I don't agree with all of that now but I have great respect for it because she was--.  I remember my brother [Donald Blackwell] had a white girlfriend and she was very polite till my father [Richard Blackwell] got really sick and this nice little girl went to see my father in the hospital and my mother said "Oh she's serious about Donald."  She said "I'm going to put a stop to this" (laugh).  She brought this little girl to the house and said "You know have your parents met Donald, have you taken Donald to your house, to introduce him to your parents, do your parents know that you come over here and pick up Donald every day?"  The little girl said "No they don't Mrs. Blackwell."  She said "I'll tell you what you do, why don't you stay away from my son until you tell your parents, okay and when you tell your parents and your parents call me on the phone and say that they feel very comfortable with their daughter and my son, then we'll talk.  But until that time why don't you cut my son some slack and go away."  She was hard about it, right, and I remember my brother was just devastated.  "Why mom? Why is that any of your business?"  And he was like at the time he was in college, he was nineteen years old and, you know, she looked at him like he was crazy and said "I'm your mother that's why and you're going to do what I tell you to do or get out of my house" and she was mincing words.  This is a tough woman in that regard and sweet.  So in this sense, my mother I think, represented to me and has forever in my life represented this fundamental hard working, working class black woman trying to raise her children the best way she knew how, right.  And she had dreams and visions for them and by in large she did alright.  You know she's got five boys and none of them are in jail, all of them got married, all of them have nice families so I think good woman.
Story_ID: 93856
Speaker 1: Yeah. Who do you think you take after, your mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] or your father [Richard Blackwell] or in what respects do you take after either one?
Speaker 2: I think that I take after my mother in the sense of kind of determination to worry about what I'm after and not what other people would have me do.  I just--I figure out what I want to do and try to do it.  If I do it fine, if I don't do it, fine just to push.  I get that from my mother.  I think that what I've gotten from my father is that he'll encourage me to leave home and encourage me to go and not be just dependent on my family, to see the world in a different way and not to be content to live in a very narrow, little circle of people and just to be consumed with my family and that's kind of my mother's world.  My mother would have been more than happy if I ended up driving a taxi cab but an honest living and having her grandchildren close by.  She would have been happy as could be.  My father on the other hand thought you know what's really important, Robert, is to grow up and be a man and to tackle this world and to make something out of yourself, right.  And what's interesting is it's just a subtle difference between the two of them.  And so I think I got a lot from my father.  I was one of those fortunate kids that grew up in a family that I never thought about being poor, I never thought about not having money.  The things that we needed, we had and we were pretty happy about it.  It wasn't until I got to be in college and coming back home that I noticed how small my house was, right and that sort of what I think.
Story_ID: 93857
Speaker 1: Tell me how did your parents [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell and Richard Blackwell] meet?  Is there a story about--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No well the story is which you might find interesting because people just don't see this anymore.  Remember I told you I grew up in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania?  Bryn Mawr College is there and Bryn Mawr College is a pretty famous girls' school and there are also-what were there in Bryn Mawr were finishing schools for girls.  My mother and father met because they both worked at Bryn Mawr College.  When I was--my mother was a maid and my father was a porter and you know these, these, these girls, who were wealthy girls, man they had to marriage somebody rich because they were pampered when they were at college.  People would just--they just had an extraordinary large number of people that were just taking care of their every need there and these--and it seemed like half that population was my family.  My mother and her sisters and my father and all kinds of relatives I had over at Bryn Mawr College.  I used to go over there all the time when I was a little boy but that's how they met.  My father was working there and my mother was working there.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 93858
Speaker 1: Do you think that the--well that the influence of being at Bryn Mawr [College in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] really changed their [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell and Richard Blackwell] lives?  I mean being around people who were--been on the college campus with all these rich people with their--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: It changes it positively and negatively. Have you ever read E. Franklin Frazier's book 'Black Bourgeoisie?'
Speaker 1: Some of it.
Speaker 2: --where he talks about in there.  I read that book when I was a freshman in college and I was fascinated about it because I thought this is my family he was talking about.  He's talking about people who measured in some ways, their own worth and direct relationship to what they thought of white society and they thought they were better than less fortunate black people. For example, people in Bryn Mawr knew they were better off than--better than people that lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Better than and I was taking on these characteristics of "We're in Bryn Mawr, we live in the middle of the main line of Philadelphia." And you know they're poor as dirt but there was this feeling that we are better than other black people.  That resonated in my family and it was fascinating to me that after I met my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] and I use to talk about Bryn Mawr and my wife came to Bryn Mawr she just couldn't believe it. She thought "who are these people," right?  And they are you know--we were walking down the street talking about "my Madame" and you know, and "I took care of my little Johnny" and you know the madam's child and it's that kind of servant class and that living vicariously other people's lives.  The perfect example I can give you of that is, my dad, he's a good man you know, I'm not dogging him, he lived the life he lives but he can look at glass and tell you fine china, he can look at glass and tell you where it was made and when, okay?  He could look at silverware and dishes and tell you what it was and knew it.  I mean he understood that stuff, right?  And when he retired, he took a job at a fabulously wealthy place and one of the biggest things that he did was kept the silver organized, and he would keep the silver polished and he would do this little kind of stuff and he was happy 'cause' he understood it.  And he--it made him feel special that he had this expertise that very few people had. Including the people who he worked for, okay?  And it gave him the sense of superiority and he would talk about it and I remember he quit working at one guy because he said you know this guy never had money before, he didn't know what to do with it, you know I'm not working for this guy he doesn't--you know, okay. But you know it's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yes it's an interesting dynamic. It really is.
Speaker 2: It really is. And you know--but I saw that when I read this book by Franklin Frazier and he was really not talking about my dad, he was really talking about kind of black society as portrayed by Ebony magazine and you know the celebrities and you know movie stars and you know school--this whole fraternity/sorority. You know what I'm talking--that kind of stuff. But it really resonated because I saw my family, who would have been house servants not field servants, okay?  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: It does, it makes a lot of sense.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Speaker 1: I think that anybody that's had domestic workers in their family, and people that have worked for the rich can kind of recognize it's a you know--that's why I ask the question because I think
Speaker 2: Right, no.
Speaker 1: their aspirations you know--
Story_ID: 93859
Speaker 1: You were saying your mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] --a lot of her aspirations came from her father [Robert David Satchell] too, right.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Pretty much.
Speaker 2: Yeah and--which was very contradictory, her father never worked for anybody.  He was a carpenter; he built all those homes down there.  If you saw a black person's home there in Eastville, Virginia, he built it, okay?  He's very, very independent and in that regard he never understood my father [Richard Blackwell].  He just couldn't understand why my father would work for other people and you know, "Richard you could come down to Virginia, you could go and you know, and you could--you don't have to work for these people." So my mother always--she just idolized her father she just thought her father was the beginning and the end you know, so.
Story_ID: 93860
Speaker 1: Okay. Now there were five brothers and where do you fall in?
Speaker 2: I'm in the middle
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two--two are older, two are younger, one is--I have-- one brother [James Satchell] died.  He would have been eight years older than me; he would be seventy-four today. I have a brother--I'm sixty-six. I have a brother [Richard Blackwell] that's sixty-eight, sixty-four [Earl Blackwell] and sixty [Donald Blackwell].  So, one lives in California, one's dead--the oldest one is dead, next to oldest lives in Sacramento and of course me.  I have one brother in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I have another brother that lives here [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 93861
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  You know you were a little kid what did--how did things impress you?
Speaker 2: Well you know first a big thing that I remember was World War II and what I remember about World War II is I remember crawling around in gutters playing soldier, right and I remember air raids and I remember sugar rationing and I remember eating hot dogs everyday and I swore I'd never eat another hot dog as long as I live.
Speaker 1: Was that a staple food during the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess.  It was a staple for our family because we had hot dogs every, everyday it seemed like.  But then I would have been say 1941, I would have been four years old and I just distinctly remember that and I remember very much my mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] who read to us and I think about things.  But I also remember vividly when I first went to school and it was a half day for kindergarten and we rode the train to school and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: A train in another town?
Speaker 2: There was a trolley and yeah the actual school was a couple of miles away and so you'd catch the trolley up and when you got it back my mom would put us on the trolley and we got back and then older kids would take us to the school in the morning.  And then when I was in first grade, we walked to school and the walk was a mile and a half.  Now think about this, right.  A six year old boy, the school is a mile and a half away and I walked.  I walked to school until I got to seventh grade every day.
Speaker 1: By yourself or with your brothers?
Speaker 2: With--yeah there were several kids in the neighborhood but the fact is, you walked out of the house and you were on your way to school.  You hooked up with all these other kids right, but think about now, nobody would let their kids go a mile and a half walking and right in the middle of traffic.  We're walking, no sidewalks.  Walking down the-- There would be all kinds of rules about make sure that you're facing traffic and all that but we walked to school.  And I remember that and I also remember the-going to school and I loved school and I remember school was just a kind of a terrific place and I was a really good student in elementary school 'cause I could read and I could read at a high level. And so--.
Speaker 1: Could you read before you started elementary--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah I could read before I started, before I started school.
Story_ID: 93862
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Now was this Rosemont School?
Speaker 1: Yeah this is Rosemont Elementary School [Rosemont, Pennsylvania] and I was interested in the theater, sort of.  Not theater, I competed to be in these plays and I remember I played Squanto in the Thanksgiving play and--but like I was one of the really good students.
Speaker 2: Now is this an integrated school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah there's only--not--I wouldn't say it was integrated, it was a white school that had five or six black kids in it, right is what it was.  When I graduated from high school, I graduated from high school with maybe 120 kids, there were five black kids. So. But what happened was and I remember this, it's when all of a sudden things stopped and in retrospect, I know what it was but at the time it was just a total mystery to me.  There was a little girl who was-- lived down the street from me who I used to play with all the time and all of a sudden she couldn't play with me anymore and I remember that.  Then at school I was like--I got the part in several plays and all of a sudden I couldn't--it just went away.  I just couldn't compete for any roles, for any roles.  I was the star when I was in second and third grade and then when I hit sixth grade it just stopped, okay.  I realized what happened was little girls were coming into puberty, right and this world had changed.  Now this little girl--their family didn't want her to play with me anymore.  And so it was--there were things that I just--at the time I just didn't understand and I guess--I'll give you a classic one and we'll see if you know where I'm going.  Went to a movie theater and whenever we came to the movie theater all of us--the kids who-- where I lived were all little black kids, all my friends were black kids.  We would go up to the movie theater--Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania] movie theater and we would walk right in and go on the left hand side of the movie and sit down.  It's where all my friends were, nobody ever--that's what we did so we went over there.  One day and it was right after the end of the war [World War II], a black guy who had had both legs--a double amputee came in, swung on his crutches and came down the aisle and sat in the middle.  The next thing I know, policeman are in this place and they snatched this guy out of there and that's the first time I realized that black kids couldn't sit in any other section except on the left hand side where I--this is Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], this is not Mississippi.  We had done--set up pins you know in the bowling alley--pin setters and one time when I was about sixteen, I walked in and we said oh we weren't working there anymore and we said well I don't want to do pin setting, I want to bowl and they wouldn't let us bowl.  This is Pennsylvania; this is not Mississippi I'm talking about.  So when you're a child, I found myself really be affected by some of this and finding myself really, really confused because--about kind of what was going on.  We'd hear things about the South and the North wasn't like that and Bryn Mawr for sure wasn't like that but it was okay.  And so it was difficult and then one of the crowning blows was my best friend was a really rich kid named Bobby Watson.  One of the things that happened was I thought--I don't know how rich he was but he was rich to me because I went to his house's barn was bigger than my house.  And what I remember was that we were talking about and he said he would like to be a business man and I said well that's what I want to be is a business man too.  So I was a good student and when--you know in the ninth grade when you come and they take you through well they told Bobby Watson that he should take chemistry, physics, Latin right, to be a business man.
Speaker 2: These were the counselors in school?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: The counselors or the career counselors.
Speaker 1: The career counselors told him he wanted to be a business man therefore he should take French, Latin, chemistry, mathematics, algebra and so I came in and they said to me that I should take short hand, typing, accounting to be a business man, right.  So you know, you come up and you have this sense-
Story_ID: 93863
Speaker 1: Now that's one sense and then the other sense though we had and this is talking about the black--the sports world was where it was just so different.  We always had wonderful athletic teams.  These guys come back from the war [World War II] and they're playing baseball.  We had a guy in our school who played professional football for the New York Giants, Emlen Tunnell who if you--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Great player and we knew that athletics was very important in my community.  It was like you had to play sports, it was just mandatory and listening to Joe Louis on the radio and Jackie Robinson and all the pride that emanated from--I mean Jackie Robinson--I mean baseball--basketball will never have ever gotten the attention baseball got.  Every kid--oh God every black kid that I ever knew wanted to be a professional baseball player, right they're out there.  And so all and all, I had this set of experiences that were in the North and what I knew about the South was-- were just like little stories I heard and I never had any experiences until I was working for Allied Van Lines one summer and we took and drove a naval officer from Philadelphia Naval Base [The Navy Yard in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] down to Annapolis [Maryland].  As soon as you get outside of Philadelphia, when you get over to Delaware the 'we serve colored' signs started.  I had never seen that before.  People don't-- forget that--they think that where does the South start, the South started right outside of Pennsylvania going south.  As soon as you hit Delaware, you saw those signs.
Speaker 2: "We serve colored."
Speaker 1: "We serve colored" and if you don't see that sign, you can't go in and so we went down to Maryland and we got lost when we got down near Annapolis and I always remember that we stopped this policeman--state trooper and we asked him for directions and he said "You niggers didn't know where you were going, why are you down here."  That's what he said.  You just felt this, right.  That was a big exposure to me.  So my life on the one hand was wonderful, bright and warm and friendly but whenever I went into this biracial world, I knew that there was--that it was just different.
Story_ID: 93864
Speaker 1: What about high school [Radnor High School in Radnor, Pennsylvania]?  Now high school, I guess, you were one of five black students in your class?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Now you were into sports.  You played, I guess you played baseball, basketball and football.
Speaker 2: Yeah I played all three.  You know it was just different.  It was--I can't describe it, we all got along.  I just say that just uniformly we all got along and I thought we were all kind of great friends, right.  I always remember this boy, Bobby Watson, his mother came by to help my mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] start a Cub Scout pack.  My mother was the den mother and Mrs. Watson--I remember this very wealthy woman walking in and sitting on the floor at my house with the greatest of ease.  This really nice woman, not patronizing at all, helping my mother get this Cub Scout thing together, okay.  I just thought what a nice lady this is.  There was another-there were some men who helped me get a football scholarship to where I went to, you know.  There was a good who was a--his father was a contractor, a guy named Paul King, his father was a contractor and he said "You know Bob, I'm going to make sure you go to a good college" and he took--treated me just really nicely, right.  And you take that and you--and it's the week when you do all the parties when you graduate from high school.  I found out about a party when I graduated, there were two parties and the rule was you just kind of went.  So I went to these two people's houses and they just politely told me that I wasn't invited right in the middle of senior week, told me I wasn't invited; it was obvious why, just wasn't invited.  So what I remember about my high school days was that I was confused about how I felt.
Speaker 1: Did you participate in normal high school clubs?
Speaker 2: Athletic clubs, nothing else.
Speaker 1: Nothing else, okay.
Speaker 2: And nothing else in college either.
Speaker 1: When they had like dances and stuff like that, did you have a social life in the black community?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had a social life in the black community and when we would have dances, I would take a black girl to the dance and that would be fine, that wasn't a problem.  Because you have to know that my mother is--this is who we are, right.  It wasn't like I wanted to cross this thing and have--take a white girl out, you know, my mother wasn't having that, you wouldn't even think about it.  But it was just interesting and complex the relationship which I think down South it was less complex and sort of more clear and I'm not arguing for the southern version because that was sort of mean spirited and dangerous and I remember all those kids got killed in Mississippi and all that.  So you don't want to romanticize this southern treatment of African Americans but the northern model was complicated for me in that it was confusing.  I go-just to jump ahead to college for a minute and two or three times a year I go to Wichita, Kansas to see a woman who is now ninety-seven or ninety-eight years old who taught me and was a white woman who was on the faculty, math professor in Wichita [Wichita State University in Wichita, Kansas].  Now I once told that she really complicated my life, why?  She treated me like she really cared about me, you know and I always wondered does she really, do you know, and I found it frustrating.
Story_ID: 93865
Speaker 1: Just to take you back to high school [Radnor High School in Radnor, Pennsylvania] again to, were there any teachers in high school that gave you any encouragement?
Speaker 2: Not-- I can't remember, I can't remember any teachers in high school.
Speaker 1: Were there any mentors or coaches or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I mean I had coaches that were nice to me but to be honest with you, I don't think to this day that I can't remember anybody.  I remember college [Wichita State University in Wichita, Kansas] well.  There were some people who took interest in me and I don't know why they did but they did, they took interest in me.  They weren't involved in the athletic program.  I didn't find one single coach who I actually thought cared about me as a person.  They were interested in playing football.  Now it happened that there was a really great coach who was really fair to me about playing the game of football and as I tell people if I had to pick people who were white and how they've treated me in the area of athletics, they were all Southerners which I've always found interesting.  There were southern coaches with these drawls who seemed to care about talent than anything else.  They cared about winning football games and they would subordinate whatever other feelings they had and treated me pretty well.
Speaker 1: You played line at football, you were a center.
Speaker 2: Yeah and a linebacker.
Speaker 1: And a linebacker so you all played both ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah some of that time we played both ways.
Story_ID: 93866
Speaker 1: How did you wind up at Wichita State [University in Wichita, Kansas]?  Now how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh it was simple; I was on my way to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Now think about this and the minds of a kid and what you think about colleges, right.  I had a scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania and one of the things I needed to do was to go do some prep school stuff to catch up on some of those courses I had missed.  But there was this fellow, Paul King, who I told you his father was a contractor and always said that he would look after me, came and talked to my dad [Richard Blackwell] about Wichita and he said that his-- he had a friend whose brother was a coach and he thought it would be a great place for me to go play football and he thought it would be a good idea for a young man like me to get out and see the world and get away from home and my father agreed with that.  And so my father said, you know "It would be nice, you get away from your mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] and go fifteen hundred miles and you'll learn you can be your own man."  So he suggested that I not go to the University of Pennsylvania and go to Wichita and, you know, what did I know, I just kind of felt my father was wise about these things and so I did what he suggested so I went to Wichita.  There was no more complicated than that.
Speaker 1: So a scholarship to Penn you know, this top school-academic school (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly, yeah and I will tell you what I think, I think my father was right.  Because if I had been at Penn, I might have been living at home but as it was, I got out to Wichita and man I got a remarkable education.
Story_ID: 93867
Speaker 1: You know, I learned a lot of bad things but I learned a lot of good things. And I was exposed to some things that I had never seen when I got--
Speaker 2: For instance?
Speaker 1: Oh my--a guy that was my roommate, a guy named Howard Stewart [ph.] invited me to come home with him in Tulsa [Oklahoma] and he and I were talking and he said to me, "Man you don't know anything about being black, Bob." And I said-- you know.  So he said you have to come home with me and I went home with him and he took me to a football game.  Booker T. Washington [High School] versus Okmulgee, Oklahoma and all of sudden I saw this band with these high stepping black girls, I had never seen anything like it in my life.  I've never seen so many pretty girls that were African Americans in all my life.  I'm just--I mean these stands going, oh my God and that was one and then the funniest story was we couldn't stay in hotels in Oklahoma or Texas when we went to play football so we played Hardin-Simmons University which is Abilene, Texas.  You go to Abilene; we can't stay there so I get to stay with a black person at there home.  So we're driving down the street and this guy hits this button, now remember this is 1956, hits this button and we see a garage door open.  Ted Dean and I said do that again, he hit the button and the garage door came down, I had never seen that in my life and he's laughing, right.  And we go in and Ted and I feel the same way, we've never met anybody black who wasn't poor, we didn't know anybody and here we meet this guy in Abilene, Texas that's got this big house, right and a garage door opener.  I remember we were thinking to ourselves "wow" and then we went to Houston [Texas] where we played Rice [University]--no we played the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] and we couldn't stay in Houston, we stayed on the campus of Texas Southern [University in Houston, Texas]. So we got to see what Texas--
Speaker 2: Black college?
Speaker 1: Yeah a black college and we got to see what that was like.  Then I went down to Tempe, Arizona to play--there you could stay in the hotels, played Arizona State [University] but when the game was over these guys invited me to a party.  I wander into the party and there is this, I mean beautiful, beautiful, beautiful black woman who walked over to me and said hi Bob how are you and she said welcome to my home.  We were looking around this house; this house must have been 10,000 square feet, right and the (unclear).  Tim and I we couldn't believe that we were in this, you know.  That people that look like us owned stuff like this, did what these people did and I saw through this thing of playing football and going around and seeing a world that I didn't know existed. You know, because not everybody is taking care of babies, right.  Not everybody is doing domestic stuff.  There were some people out there doing things and I'd also never seen you know all-black high schools and all of that.
Story_ID: 93868
Speaker 1: And the crowning thing was Howard Stewart [ph.] who was from Tulsa [Oklahoma] was--spoke slowly.  He had a southern drawl--Oklahoma twang and I was thinking, at the time, coming from Philadelphia, I talked fast like easterners do and you know come on, come on and Howard talked really slow and so I was taking this algebra class trying to figure it out and I remember he looked over my shoulder and he said "Bob, could I help you" and I'm thinking there is not a chance you could help me. And I-but something, I said "Well yeah I'm struggling with this problem" and he said "Well I think you're looking at this wrong."  And it hadn't occurred to me that he was bright, right, really bright and he was an electrical engineering student and the way he talked and his complexion.  He was a very dark skinned guy with this accent; remember what I said about E. Franklin Frazier, right.  I'm writing all this off and I realized that this guy was very bright and he lived--and his parents lived in what was, man oh man, like a 6 x 8 shack, and he had come out--   So my college days I learned a lot.
Story_ID: 93869
Speaker 1: And I-and we did-you know, in college [Wichita State University in Wichita, Kansas] we did the sit-ins and we did all that stuff.
Speaker 2: Did you--I mean were those going on when you got to Wichita State?
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: Were you there when [HM] Ronald Walters was in Wichita?
Speaker 1: Yeah I knew Ron Walters real well.  Yeah, in fact Ron-- Ronnie and I are about the same age--almost exactly the same age, he may be a year younger than me.
Speaker 2: Okay so Wichita NAACP Youth [Council]--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah was there but then he left Wichita and went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] and he actually graduated from Howard [sic, Walters graduated from Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee. He later was a professor at Howard].  It was funny because he ended up being a different guy.  Ronnie was really a wild kind of playboy type guy but then he met this girl who's his wife and he changed and got-when he got married, he changed and-for the better.  I mean he became a very serious, no nonsense guy.  But yeah I knew Ronnie real well.
Speaker 2: And Ted Dean that you talk about, I can see his picture in sport magazines in 1960 or '61 [1961].  He was like rookie of the year with the [Philadelphia] Eagles, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah he was a great football player.  Hurt himself, he got traded to Minneapolis-I mean the Minnesota Vikings and he had a--they had a car accident and he threw his hip out, okay and so he chipped the bone on the way out so football is over.  But he's had a good life, he's retired, he lives out in Surprise, Arizona which is just outside of Phoenix and we're still friends.  He married a beautiful, gorgeous woman and so we've been blessed.
Speaker 2: Okay alright so how good was your football team in Wichita?
Speaker 1: It was okay. When I first got there we had some lousy years.  It was kind of a mediocre kind of a old--one year we lost, I think we only won one game but then we were six in four one year.  The year I came there, it was nine and one but it was-- it's not-- it wasn't Oklahoma [University in Norman, Oklahoma], right.  It's not the big ten although they did have a first class basketball teams.  They've always had really first rate basketball teams.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the stars on the basketball team?
Speaker 1: Oh well it started out--there was a guy named Cleo Littleton was just a year before I got there which was say like '55 [1955] and there was Dave Stallworth who played for the New York Knicks, Nate Bowman who played professional basketball.
Speaker 2: Yeah those were both outstanding basketball players.
Speaker 1: Yeah and there were some others, they didn't end up playing professional basketball.  But you know like my freshman year you see who the--who we played.  We played [University of] San Francisco [California] when Bill Russell and K.C. Jones and those guys were there and Oscar Robinson went to [University of] Cincinnati [Ohio] and was in the Missouri Valley.  And Oscar was you know, man great basketball player.  Boy he came down to Wichita and they just wore us out.  The Missouri Valley was a very tough conference when I was there because it was Bradley [University in Peoria, Illinois], it was Cincinnati, it was Drake [University in Des Moines, Iowa].  Drake had a very good basketball teams, so it was good.
Speaker 2: Yeah those are all great basketball teams.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Right
Story_ID: 93870
Speaker 1: Now how did you become a psychology major in school [Wichita State University in Wichita, Kansas]--I mean how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh I think it was that the--you know I kind of got interested in social science.  I was just like a lot of--especially a lot of black kids, I got steered away mathematics and engineering and didn't do that and social science when you think about it seemed so intuitive, you know.  But I got interested and I took psychology seriously when I really started taking school seriously.  I read a book by [Sigmund] Freud, 'Civilization and its Discontent'; I think is the name of it [sic, "Civilization and Its Discontents"].  I thought it was kind of extraordinary and so I got interested in psychology and sociology but what I discovered was if you don't have a Ph.D., you can't make enough money to feed your children.  So I ended up going to work for IBM and finding that-- a lot of this technical stuff that I didn't think I could do, I could do.
Story_ID: 93871
Speaker 1: Now you spoke before about the teacher, Ms. Fugate [ph.] who was the math teacher that kind of got you started with IBM.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well it was simple, I had periodically gone to her for advice and I was thinking about going on to graduate school.  I was trying to get a master's degree and it became clear to me that being a social worker, I wanted to be a psychiatric social worker and they offered me a job making $421.00 a month and I was burring parts out of Boeing making $600.00 a month, okay.  And I said, you know, I'm going to get a degree and I'm going to have my salary drop by thirty percent.  So I went to see Mrs. Fugate and I said look, it's clear to me that I need a Ph.D. in psychology if I'm going to get anywhere and I said on the other hand I've got Marj [Marjilee Blackwell] my wife and I've got two children and I've got to figure out and I wanted your advice what do you think.  And she said "Bob you know, when you first came here you were a lousy student" and she said "now you figured out that you're a lousy student and now you want to be a professional student."  She said "You need to take care of your family, you have a beautiful wife who you say hadn't had, hadn't bought a new dress in two years; you need to go get a job."  She was a very stern woman.  And so I agreed with her and the next day IBM called me on the phone asked me if I'd like to interview for a job with IBM.  I didn't know who IBM was and it turned out that she was their contact on campus and one of her sons worked for IBM and she called him and said "You guys are always coming to me about affirmative action stuff and asking me if I know anybody black, she said I'm going to tell you what, I'm sending Bob Blackwell down there and if you don't hire him, don't ever call me again." Okay.  I found out that she became on really hard to them and said that--"hire him or else," so they hired me.  That's how I got to work there. And I mean it was just that kind of-- you know and IBM puts through all these hurdles.  They give you an aptitude test and they interview with God knows how many people.  They offered me a job before I ever filled out the application.  Now was that affirmative action, I think so and it worked out great for me and I did good.
Story_ID: 93872
Speaker 1: Now those were the days when IBM was running big mainframe computers and-- with the punch cards and--so what was your job initially with IBM?
Speaker 2: I was a technical guy.  They hired me in to be a systems engineer and taught me to program computers and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So what language did you have to learn?
Speaker 2: I learned the Simula language, I learned COBOL, Fortran and PL/1 and I was real proficient in the Simula language and COBOL.  I was okay in Fortran and I could kind of make my way in PL/1.  It was all mainframe stuff and it was interesting and really kind of exciting.  And I loved every day I ever worked there; it was a great company.
Speaker 1: Okay so you worked there in Wichita [Kansas] from '66 [1966] to '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Then I went up to Topeka, Kansas where I stayed until '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: You worked for the State of Kansas, right?
Speaker 2: Right and I worked for the State of Kansas for about a year--a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Now why did you leave IBM and go to the State of Kansas was it more money or--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well because--no because I had been a salesman and I didn't like it so I left for less money not more money.  I had a friend of mine, a guy named Ken Orr who was the director and we had gone to college together and played football together, he was a good guy, he was a bright guy. And, you know, I was the salesman but I've been a technical guy for a long time and I missed that part of it, I missed being a technical guy and I had an opportunity to manage all the programmers for the state and to be the assistant--what would now be the assistant CIO [Chief Information Officer] and so that's what I did.  And I loved to doing it and I loved to work for state government but the politicians--it just gets in your way.  I look up one day and I got a boss who is a new guy who wants to make sure that I know that he could let me go any time he felt like it and I said "Yeah I know that that's why I'm resigning today."  IBM hired me back--IBM actually came looking for me to hire me back and I came to Chicago [Illinois] in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I got here. Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you have the chance to do the technical stuff when you got here or were you still--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I started as a salesman--I came back as a salesman and about that time I'd kind of settled in and I got in Chicago and I liked it fine and things worked out, so.
Story_ID: 93873
Speaker 1: Now were you some kind of surprised at the turn your life took basically when you were thinking about becoming a psychologist and you end up as a--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't think about it very much because the fact of the matter is I had been driving a taxi cab, I was working, I was married, I had two kids.  My mind wasn't in to any great ethereal thoughts, I was trying to make a living and when I went to work for IBM, I would come home at night not believing that I was getting paid to do this stuff.  You know, I was used to doing nasty jobs and I'm all of a sudden I get this job that-you know, I enjoyed it so much, I learned so much and I just--it was just hard for me to believe I was actually getting paid to do it because it just seemed great.  It was the first job I ever had where I just worked and my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] got sick of it.  I would come home at ten o'clock at night and her question was "where've you been."  I would tell her "well I'm at the hospital getting a computer--" but I didn't have to do it.  I just hung around there working, mastering the computer, trying to know as much as I could know.  It was a wonderful part of my life--a sense of personal achievement. So no I never thought about psychology much even though I still read books on it.
Story_ID: 93874
Speaker 1: Okay now let's back track a little bit.  I'm going to ask you--now when did you get meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] in 1958. She went to Wichita [State University in Wichita, Kansas] for one year and I think--September of '58 [1958] I think so.  Yeah September of '58 [1958] a friend of mine introduced me to Marj and then she decided that she couldn't afford--she was a good student and couldn't afford to come back in the second semester and she went back to Louisville [Kentucky] and--but then in June we were kind of going steady via telephone; I asked her to marry me and so she flew out to Wichita and we got married in the courthouse with only two people at our wedding.  Two people other than us at our reception and everybody was--our marriage was supposed to not last more than about thirty minutes and here we are.  It will be forty-five years in July.
Speaker 1: Was it rough being so far away from Virginia and your parents all that time?
Speaker 2: No not after I've been away.  Once I had been away, it was rough the first year.
Speaker 1: Was it tough on them?
Speaker 2: You know I've never been quite sure.  I think my mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] wanted all her boys to be around her and I think my mother missed us a lot but I think it was just my mother.
Story_ID: 93793
Speaker 1: What was Chicago [Illinois] like for you, the Chicago area? Did you--  We talked for a little bit off camera--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was two things; one is Chicago is a great business town and coming up here and working for IBM was good from day one.  There were no issues with that.  I wanted to live in the city and my wife [Marjilee Blackwell]-- I had five kids now.  I wanted to live in the city in Chicago and I wanted them to experience the life of the city and my wife was skeptical about it but I was determined to try and I actually negotiated and found a place at 67th and Paxton [Avenue] and it was, you know, a beautiful place.  It was one of these three flats.  It was a huge house when I say five kids and I'm on one of those floors, it was more than enough room for all of us but it was clear that the neighborhood was at least the owner thought the neighborhood was somewhat dangerous because he Dobermans out there and would put up a fence.  He kind of scared the life out of my wife.  We came from Topeka [Kansas] where we didn't have to lock our doors when we went out.  But the school situation was what really-we were going to live on the South Side and if I could work out the schools but I couldn't work it out.  I tried but I couldn't get it worked out.  So I moved out to Glen Ellyn [Illinois], I lived in Glen Ellyn and the Glen Ellyn/Wheaton area for about, oh gee, fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Now when you were on Paxton, did your kids go to school?
Speaker 2: No I never lived on Paxton, I was talking about going--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh so you saw a place--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: I didn't--wanted to live there but I couldn't get--I couldn't handle the school situation and couldn't get--I still don't understand that.  It's just, it's just--I just don't understand it.  My thing is look here I am, I'm a brand new guy, I'm coming from Topeka, Kansas, I have five children, I would like for my children, in this case, to live in a black neighborhood, to live and see all that Chicago has to offer which is substantial. And the idea I was in a diverse community and lots of--they could see lots of different things, I thought it would be good for them.  I didn't know how long we would be in Chicago but I thought Chicago was a great city and that it would be good.  But you go look at a school and you see that they need cops on both corners when your kids are coming to school and someone looks at me and says "How dare you not want to send your kids to that school."  I said "You must be nuts," I'm not--my children are not going to be part of some little experiment for you.  I'm sending my kids to good schools so I moved and I went out to the Wheaton [Illinois] area and I lived out there for fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Now how was that, how were you--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well it was-you know, the suburbs we had a bunch unfortunate incidents out there that were racially motivated and my children-my son especially--my oldest boy [Robert Blackwell, Jr.] had a lot of trouble in school with kids calling him "nigger" on the bus and stuff like that which really surprised me because I thought we had come north from Wichita and it would be less but there was more of that.  We tended not to have racial problems and really the racial problems where I was worried about were with my children being picked at and racially, you know, attacked.  But we got through it and we ended up with a home in Wheaton that, you know, we had a lot of friends out there and a lot of good people and so we tolerated the periodic incidents that happened but they happened pretty regularly and I found far that more of that in Chicago than I had anyplace I had ever lived.
Story_ID: 93794
Speaker 1: How are things at IBM?  What were you-how are you progressing with IBM at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh when I came up here in '73 [1973], I really figured out I wanted to be in management.  I really pushed for it and I had a really successful career in IBM.  I was-I got a first line manager and a second line manager and I ended up a director at IBM and it was good.  I just had a wonderful career at IBM.  I love IBM, I still do.  I don't work for them anymore but they gave me a chance and they provided me all the training that anyone could ever need.  They gave me an opportunity to be who I could be.  I wouldn't argue that IBM is perfect, there are lots of imperfections and they have a lot of problems other companies had but when I was there, I was really pleased.  They just treated me very well and when I came into this job, I really realized that I really had been well-trained to step out on my own and do the things that I did.  So, you know, with me IBM was a wonderful part of my life and still is.
Speaker 1: Okay now you were at IBM when the computer world sort of changed from the big mainframe computers to small PCs [personal computer]--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's kind of why I left, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well you know IBM is in what's called the mainframe world and that's what I did.  I sold these big boxes for lots of money and we'd done it for years and IBM was, you know, just dominant in every market and I like a lot of other people in IBM thought we were invincible.  That there was just nothing that could get in our way but some things did get in our way.  We had competition on the mainframes which were getting out of hand and then when the PC came on board, and IBM embraced the PC, the sales force and lots of other people hung on to mainframes for dear life and one thing led to another and IBM's business really, really declined to the point that under the rubric of severance packages right, which are layoffs by any other name.  I decided when I walked up on fifty-five that the chances that I was going to survive this downsizing at IBM was very low and I was--I had moved from the hardware to the services business and it was immediately clear to me that in the services business, the barriers--the entry were low and that a smart guy could plan and build the business in services with a little bit of money.  So I made plans to get out of IBM and do just that as soon as I retired.  So I retired July 31, 1992 and then I started my journey with Blackwell Consulting.
Story_ID: 93795
Speaker 1: Now Blackwell Consulting [Services]--was that started by you or your son?
Speaker 2: Well it was--my son Robert [Blackwell, Jr.] had a business, it was called Bytewise and when I left IBM we--I joined him and then what happened is we dissolved Bytewise and created a new company, Blackwell Consulting Services.  My son was the motivation for how I got out.  I always kid about that, people always think that children followed their parents; sometimes parents follow their children and so it was a nice story.  He's doing well now; he's off on his own doing his thing.
Speaker 1: So he kind of takes after your grandfather, he's an entrepreneur?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, really an entrepreneur.  I'm not sure I'm an entrepreneur, I only had two jobs in my life so I don't know but he is really an entrepreneur, a good one too.
Speaker 1: Okay now he went on to something else, right?  He went on to another--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He's got a company, yeah EKI [Electronic Knowledge Interchange] which does what we do.  In that sense, we're competitors but he also does something with table tennis which is called, oh geez I had a brain lapse but he's got a table tennis company [Killerspin L.L.C.] and he's doing really spectacularly well with that so it's good.
Speaker 1: He makes ping pong tables?
Speaker 2: Yeah he's getting people interested in that business and he'd sell them some supplies but it's really good.  He'd tell you all about it but he goes to China and Germany and traveling around the world convincing people to do this stuff and it's really interesting.  It's the entrepreneur, it's the classic entrepreneurial thing that he's got and we're pretty proud of him.
Story_ID: 93796
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about Blackwell Consulting [Services].
Speaker 2: Well we started out wanting to do--to be a technical firm.  We wanted to be a technical firm, we wanted to be a "do the work" firm and we thought that there really three kinds of consulting.  There is strategic, there is the process reengineering type stuff and there is implementation.  We decided we wanted to be in implementation because that's what we understood, that's what I knew from IBM.  That was the one where we thought that brand counted the least.  So we took off and we pushed hard and we started with about four people and now we have well over 250 and we're kind of plugging along and the market is changing, the economy has been tough but we're doing okay.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any investors when you started?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Partners?
Speaker 2: No just Robert [Blackwell, Jr.] and I and then when he decided to go his own way, I had two investors that brought--who would work with the firm who bought sixteen percent but then I owned eighty-four percent.  So we haven't had much investment but it's been good.  We've just plugged along and made sure we didn't borrow money and collect our receivables and stay out of debt.
Speaker 1: Okay now you own twenty-eight million dollars worth of business in 2002, is that correct?
Speaker 2: 2003 right, 28.5 and we'll do 31 to 32 this year and if the economy gets up and roars we're hoping that we can do better than 36 in 2004.
Story_ID: 93797
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you know what this sounds like to the average black person?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: It just sounds like it's just out of this world.  I mean, you know, to be able to generate that much money.
Speaker 2: Well it's not out of this world though.  It's not close to being out of this world and what we ought to understand here is it's not a mom and pop store, okay.  It's a real business with real challenges, real plans but it's small; it's 35 million dollars and it would be really, really nice if Blackwell [Consulting Services] was about 350 million dollars and then you'd have something that we could really face some guys down with, you know.  We've got to raise our sights about what kinds of companies we want to build, you know.  The reason you have small businesses is to create big ones, you know.  I find this infatuation with little businesses tiresome, you know.  You look out and you see the IBMs of the world, Dell, Microsoft those guys make real impacts and what we need are some African Americans firms that really make big impacts on the communities that they're in.  I'm talking about business communities and I want to be able to go to large companies in Chicago [Illinois] be it insurance companies or pharmaceutical firms or retail firms and be able to say to them, "Look we can do the work that needs doing for you.  And you're a global company, hey we can go global right with you, you know.  Yeah, you know, I know you have offices in Paris [France] and, you know, we have offices in Europe too and we can have resources that can accommodate what you're doing."  So we need to think big about our businesses and just recognize that we can do this and that as much as you talk about complexion, the fact is there lots of people of color that are doing okay.  The Indians are doing okay, the Asians are doing okay, there's are a lot of folks in Africa that are doing okay and are building substantial businesses.
Story_ID: 93798
Speaker 1: And what we've got to get in our heads as African Americans is that we need big businesses, substantial businesses and look you walk around Blackwell [Consulting Services], the fact of the matter is by any standards you can name we got more black folks working here than any white firm you're ever going to find as a percent of the total.  Now how does that happen?  Did we will it; do we discriminate against other people?  No we don't, we're out there trying to look and try to find the best people we can but, you know, we know a lot of our own people and we like them and they're good at this stuff and we hire them.  Other people don't know them, they don't know them.  They don't know anything about them so they're not willing to take the chance that I'm willing to do because I go to church with them.  I, you know, I have breakfast with them, they're my people.  So African Americans ought to think about business men and women as building institutions that can compete aggressively straight up in the general marketplace in America, the general marketplace.  And that is that, you know, not some separate role for black organizations that are servicing the black community, even though that's fine but we also need businesses that compete against the top competition in markets.  If its computers that, you know, somebody--the big compliment would say you know we're not sure who we'll pick but we're considering Accenture, IBM, EDS and Blackwell Consulting, okay, for who is going to do this multimillion dollar job, that's what we want for our company.  To be thought of in the same breath that you think of other companies of note, right?  Doesn't mean we have to be big as IBM but it means that we have to be substantial and if you're not substantial, if you're just the little business and you are in the technology business these big guys will blow you away, you won't have a business, you know.  So at the risk of preaching, I think that, that we need to preach in the African American--not just small business but small business because we want entrepreneurs to come into this world and think about--we got lots of bright folks and their entrepreneurial-- but you want them to build little companies that become middle sized companies that become big companies.  And so many of what I observe in our community is that we want small companies for the sake of having small companies and we want them to stay small companies.  And so, you know, you can look at our publishing institutions, you can look at our financial institutions, look at our banks and the fact is that we don't have the kind of size and clout and impact that we should be hoping for.  That does not criticize any small firm because every-- we're all doing the best we can but we ought to be striving to compete in an impactful way in these markets.  Does that make sense to you?
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93799
Speaker 1: I think that, I think my initial comment was I think a lot of people would feel that wow you all are doing stuff that seems to be beyond the imagination.  A lot of people right now and you're saying its small potatoes when you look at the big picture.
Speaker 2: Yeah it is.
Speaker 1: And that's something I guess that--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: And what you have to have confidence in in this thing because I understand my confidence and I'm just talking about computers.  Normal, average people who are African American can do this stuff. If they couldn't do it, we couldn't sell all these machines all around the world.  If an average guy couldn't drive a car, they couldn't sell all those cars.  Well they are selling PCs [personal computers] all around the world (unclear).  PCs are as ubiquitous as cars so how tough can it be to make these computers do certain kinds of things, lots of things?  Now does that say that you have a sixth grade education? No.  Does it say you have to be bright? Yes.  Does it say you have to be well educated? Yes, but the fact is we have bright, well educated young people in spite of what all you read and they can come in here and they can do this thing and they can build it.  Now Blackwell [Consulting Services] in my lifetime is probably not going to be 350 million/400 million dollars, probably not.  But, you know, I could get it to 100 million maybe a hundred and a quarter and whoever takes my place can run it up to 250 million and then there's a chance that you can do this thing.  And all of sudden we can--in a city [Chicago, Illinois] for example that is what forty three percent African American.  Do you think that we have forty three percent of the business clout in this town?
Speaker 1: Not a fraction of it, I would guess.
Speaker 2: I bet you we don't have five percent and it seems to me that that's not other people's problems.  We just can't run around saying that's everybody else's problem and we're not being treated fairly.  My deal is we've got to make up our minds and get it and getting it means lots of things, mostly creativeness, passion, hard work, commitment, those things.  We put all that stuff together; package it right, I think we'll be fine.
Story_ID: 93800
Speaker 1: Would you [Blackwell Consulting Services] hire a person with a psychology degree right now, a B.S. in psychology?
Speaker 2: Probably not. (laughter) Now, here's the thing though, a lot of big companies will.  Now this is the other thing, you can take a chance.  IBM could do it because they train people, they have training programs.  IBM can hire the best athlete.  Now a small firm like ours, here's a limitation, we don't hire brand new people off the street.  Why? Because we can't afford to train them.  Now think about this, 35 million dollars, we don't have the wherewithal, the investment capital to say we're going to train somebody.  We're going to go hire fifty people, we're going to pay them 75,000 dollars a year and they're not going to be productive for two years and you eat all that cost.  We can't do that but big guys do that all the time.  They're hiring--they're going to Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois], they're going to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], they're hiring the best and the brightest they can find and they're making a tremendous investment into their human capital in order that their firms continue to grow and to prosper. And so, you know, no we can't do that right now but given a certain size, given a certain--we would be able to do that.
Story_ID: 93801
Speaker 1: Who are some of your clients and stuff, is that a proper question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we [Blackwell Consulting Services] do business with State Farm [Insurance], we do business with Aon Insurance, we do business with the city [Chicago, Illinois]--Chicago Public Schools, Chicago Housing Authority, done business with the Chicago Transit Authority--CTA, we do business with Cincinnati [Ohio] Public Schools, we've just won a contract with the City of Miami [Florida], done business with Kraft [Foods]--we do business with Kraft, we do business with Kemper [Corporation], we do business with Waste Management, we've got a pretty good business.
Speaker 1: Okay and you've got branches with other cities, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah we have--we've got a location in Cincinnati [Ohio]; we have a location in Atlanta [Georgia]; we just established one in Jackson, Mississippi which is interesting and that's it.  So it's good.  We just opened up in Jackson, Mississippi,
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where you--
Speaker 2: Pretty proud of that.
Story_ID: 93802
Speaker 1: Sir what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Oh I think we just have to keep pushing, you know.  I mean there are a lot of good things that are going on, you know.  The one I find interesting is hip hop and rap and all that and on the one side I don't really kind of care for rap personally but I've become kind of a fan of the people who do that.  I used to be turned off by all the vulgarity and all of that.  But you know when I see that Master P and [HM] Russell Simmons and [Sean] Puffy Combs have really built business institutions that are significant and these guys are really taking their music and figuring out how to handle the distribution side and the business side and they're seeing what the impact they can have and that they come into the marketplace with leading ideas.  For example, I happen to like poetry and I saw Def Poetry which is Russell Simmons' deal.  I mean it's just a wonderful program, I think and so there's that and then I think about [Stanley] Stan O'Neal at Merrill Lynch and [HM Richard] Parsons at AOL [now Time Warner] and [Kenneth] Chennault over at American Express and you see that and you see there is a significant number of African Americans that are popping up on the--in the major companies and doing well.  When you look at the entrepreneurial thrust that a lot of well trained people are coming out as entrepreneurs and doing that kind of stuff in the business community and you just couple that with a lot of other things.  In spite of all the difficulties we're having as a people and we have lots of them, I think we're pushing ahead.
Story_ID: 93803
Speaker 1: The concern that I have though is how we help ourselves because the obvious problem that we have as a people is this whole subject public education and somehow figuring out how to educate our children so that they can carry on and be full-fledged members of the community and be productive.  I certainly don't know the answer to that but I do certainly think that the difficulty in the area of public education is the inability of African Americans to talk to themselves in confidence for a little bit, right.  That is the big communication thing because you go on television and you say "Oh you know these parents don't care about their children" and all of that.  The message really gets all messed up.  So you don't want to say that.  On the other hand, my daughter [Janee O. Blackwell] is a school teacher; my daughter would tell you the secret to her first grade kids--her teaching her first grade kids is the involvement of their parents, okay.  So somehow we have to say to our people wherever they are, whatever their situation is, right, it doesn't matter whether you are a two college graduates that have children or whether you are a thirteen year old girl having an out-of-wedlock baby.  The fact is, it's your baby and we've got to figure out how to do this.  So what we need, I think, is a way of getting--having a dialog within our own race that's spurs people on and I don't know how we do this.  But we're not the only desperately poor people.  You go to places like India and you see what's happening and the sacrifices they make to get their children into school, right.  There are traditions amongst the Chinese of saving money and the like and the African American experience is, I think, the one that we're concerned about. We've got to figure out how to move ourselves forward.  We like other people to help and cooperate with us and I always thought that that place was the church.  'Cause I thought that was the institution that was best equipped.  I mean black folks give more money than anybody to charity; it's just that it's all through the church.  And so the church has enormous influence in our community and I always thought that was a place.  But it's sort of--so fractionalized, it's so--there are--I perceive to be some wonderful men of God and women of God who do wonderful things.  I think of [HM] Bishop [Arthur] Brazier and I think of [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah Wright [Jr.] down at 95th Street [Chicago, Illinois] and those guys don't know me from Adam but I think that when you go down and you listen to your messages and you hear what people say, they seem to me to have a lot of influence and they are doing the right things.  But there are too few of those people in the cloth.  So, you know, I don't-- but I do think this dialog is really important and the logical place for it is in the church but I'll bet a bunch of these kids who are in the worst situations may in fact not go to church.  So I think we really need to look for a communication vehicle.  We were talking about [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] at Third World Press who is an example of somebody who ought to be talked to and counseled with because he's got, I think, such a proven track record.  There are little theater companies and dance companies, I know eta [Creative Arts Foundation] a bunch of things of people who can demonstrate a real concern about what goes on in our community that we need to somehow connect with.  But I don't, you know, I don't know the secret to that.  I just think that we need to do it.
Story_ID: 93804
Speaker 1: That leads to a question that I've often wondered about.  I met you several years ago as part of eta's [eta Creative Arts] award, I just wondered--and you always seemed to be around and aware of the cultural activities in the black community and coming from out of town to a place like Chicago [Illinois], how did you get culturally educated?  You seem to know who's doing the good things and you try to support it.
Speaker 2: Well I just--I've been interested in the arts because I think in a lot of ways art is superior to sports.  Sports is a very good way, I'm not denigrating sports but too often especially boys learn how to do baseball and learn how to, you know--and don't learn anything else.  Art--you can't write poetry without reading it.  You can't be a poet and not be literate.  It's just the function of the arts that civilize people.  It's an enriching experience and you know eta which is one of my favorite places in the whole world, it is--that's what they do that I admire.  If you know [HM] Abena [Joan P. Brown], nobody can agree with Abena on too many things.  But the fact is, she's a wonderful woman who has a clear mission and she's trying to do this thing and she does it well and she drives it out.  That's what I think about an arts organization and there's Muntu [Dance Theatre of Chicago] and [HM] Joan Gray and these people that are doing things and producing high-quality art.  They know their craft and they do it well and they set examples right in front of our people that say you can do this because we're right here, right, and it can be dance, it can be voice, it can be whatever.  So that culture, that rich culture that we have and that richness is something that I need to be enhanced.  So you remember that I have five kids, I've got six grandchildren, right, and I wanted my children not to have these problems that I talked about my father [Richard Blackwell] and mother [Mary Ellen Satchell Blackwell] have about--that E. Franklin Frazier has.  These crazy ideas about who they were and whether they were superior people too and were members of their race not--there's lots of questions that I don't want my grandchildren to have.  I want my grandchildren to think it's okay to be who they are and the fact of the matter is they can be who they want to be and they can be doctors, lawyers, dentists, rap singers whatever but they don't look in the mirror and feel like there is something wrong with them.  So I've always wanted especially my grandchildren to get older, I want them involved in to see things and to get comfortable with it and then you know I think it comes easy.
Story_ID: 93805
Speaker 1: Alright. Is there anything concerning this business world and this business enterprise that you are engaged in that I probably should have asked you but didn't or that you think a business minded young person would want to know?
Speaker 2: No I think that what--if I were going to tell a young person is that believe that they are capable of doing things that they think are beyond their limits and if a young person were to look at me and take all the clothes aside and the gray hair and everything else, he would look at me and discover a man of fairly average ability.  That is the thing that we need.  You know I didn't graduate from high school when I was ten years old.  I went to college and screwed up royally.  I came back and studied and made good grades. The people that were at IBM didn't look at me and instantly say "well he ought to be the chairman of IBM."  What they saw was a guy of average ability--now I always wink and say "high average" but average never the less and they have to believe when they see these people like me or they see it in [HM] Eric Johnson who runs Baldwin Foods, they see it in [HM] Linda [Johnson] Rice, they see it in Oprah [Winfrey].  They just have to know that they are capable of this and that would be the message I have.  And that they're not put off by other images which caused them to believe that they can't perform at high levels.  Because half of being successful is attitude, you know, kind of got okay talent and okay skills but you got to have a lot of passion and you've got to have a lot of commitment and you have to be willing to work hard and that you can achieve these things.  That would be what I would tell people.
Story_ID: 93806
Speaker 1: And when you look back on what you've done so far, I know that I've read that you have plans to keep at this for awhile.  You don't have any retirement plans.  What would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh my legacy, oh I don't know, my daughter [Leah Griffin] is the president of Blackwell [Consulting Services], that's one legacy.  The fact that she's my daughter helped a little bit but the fact of the matter is my daughter is very talented.  I've got a son [Robert Blackwell, Jr.] I was in business with, he runs EKI [Electronic Knowledge Interchange] now and it's 10 to 15 million dollar company and he's doing very well, thank you very much.  I've got a beautiful wife [Marjilee Blackwell] and my life has been good.  Now if-- as legacy relative to the Blackwell Consulting as I would tell people that if I died tomorrow and I woke up and a God tapped me on the shoulder and told me it was fifteen years later and said "Hey Bob what would you like to know?"  I would say "How's Blackwell doing?"  And if he said "Oh my, it's a five hundred million dollar company or whatever and it's going strong and it's really one of the most respected companies around," I would think that I'd done a good thing.  But please note that it's not just me, it's a continuation, it's a generational thing.  One generation builds upon another generation and another generation so it's the long view, I think, that we all need to have.  So the fact is that when I'm gone my hope is that Blackwell Consulting continues to thrive and that my daughter will do whatever with it.  I mean she might sell it, I might sell it, you have to do those things but you continue to push on then I'd be pretty happy.  And I'd call that a legacy.
Story_ID: 93807
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything that you would differently when you look back?
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of things I'd do differently.  I was laughing if you had said nothing.  The first thing I'd do, I'd study when I went to college.  You know, I would take all those hard subjects.  I'd take math more seriously for sure because you're in the computer business or in business itself to ability to calculate numbers in your head and to understand complex equations is an important thing.  So I wish I had a lot stronger math background for sure.  And I wish I hadn't frittered away my first four years in college.  But it all works together.  I got married when I was 21.  My wife [Marjilee Blackwell] was 19 and somebody says well would you do that over again, probably if I had studied hard and really made good grades, I'd done all this stuff, probably I wouldn't have got married at 21.  But then I might have married somebody, we've stayed married for five years so I wouldn't want to risk that because I'm married to a wonderful woman who I love to death.  We've been together for forty-five years.  So I know that if I'd changed some things some other things would change.  And so in the aggregate the things that are most important to me which is my wife and my children, I wouldn't want that to change.  So therefore I'm not sure I'd change anything else for fear that it might mess that up.  But I wish I had studied harder, that would be-- that's one thing.
Story_ID: 93808
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh as a good guy.  The question is who do I--who would I like to say that he was a good guy, right.  I'd like the people here [Blackwell Consulting Services] to think I was a good guy.  I'd like for people in the arts community here in Chicago [Illinois] think I was a good guy, you know.  I'd like my wife [Marjilee Blackwell] to think that I was a good guy.  I'd like my kids and my grandkids to think I was a good guy but I'm done, you know, simple.  Just the people that I care about, I just hope they think I did alright.
