Story_ID: 545056
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Prudence Lo- Hathaway Burns Burrell [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell].
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that, can you spell those names for us?
Speaker 2: P-R-U-D-E-N-C-E for Prudence, Hathaway, H-A-T-H-E-R-A-Y [sic.], Hathaway, W-A-Y, Burns, B-U-R-N-S, Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 23rd, 1916 in Mounds, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Mounds, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason why they call it Mounds, Illinois?
Speaker 2: No, that's the name of it and see there's Mound City [Illinois] that's over from us, few miles over from us is Mound City and the next area is Cairo, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered if there were not Indian [Native American] mounds close by?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know about no Indian mounds.
Speaker 1: No, you don't, oh, okay.  I know that part of the country has a lot of Indian mounds.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --which would be up in Carbondale [Illinois] and around.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Nursing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a public health nursing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my--public health nursing.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Today is (laughter), today 7th of March, 1907, seven.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are at the office of our Town Square Co-op [Town Square Cooperative, Inc.]; we're in their office having this interview.
Speaker 1: Oh, in Detroit, Michigan, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 545057
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they're kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: So the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  Yes, I have a favorite food of fried chicken wings.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any favorite--I mix it, mix my colors.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't think that I have a favorite time of the year either.  I do whenever I feel like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not now.  I did when I was nursing and working, but now that I am home I go whenever I decided to go, and there's nothing permanent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's just something I do whenever I think that I want to do.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Saying?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's been profane and I have stopped that, whenever I find anything wrong (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I just say, "Hello, how are you?"  And act real nice--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --because, 'cause I have prayed to God to stop me from cussing.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 545058
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Allie Wade (ph.)] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Mary Burns [Mary Nickles Burns] is what I had for her.
Speaker 1: Mary Burns?  And can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think she was born in Paducah, Kentucky.  I think that's where she said Maggie [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte], her mother, delivered her.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what year was she born, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know 'cause she never really discussed a lot of things with me because I was one of hers that she got when she was running around.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, was your mother young when she had you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you think she was born maybe around 1900, what do you think?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How, now far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I really couldn't trace any trances- any back on her side, because her mother was acting as my mother.  And she was the one who took care of me, who taught me things, who sang to me, who had me to read books with a lot of the programs and, and poems, and what have you, is what Maggie did for me, Maggie, my grandmother (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what do you know about her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, her mother was a slave master's daughter.  So, therefore, she had everything.  A horse and buggy, house and all in Danville, Illinois, and he gave her everything.  And my grandmother, her daughter, Maggie, was a cook and she did the cooking for the central station of the railroad there in Mounds, Illinois, and I used to go and sit on the steps while she was cooking the food and what have you and wait for her, to walk home with her when I was little and just growing up.  Because she would read to me, she would treat me--my mother never did anything for me.  Her mother is the one who took care of me in my life.
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother, right?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and when she had a stroke I had gone--she wanted the cookies like from the bakery, I went and got some and I was pushing them in her mouth and she spitting them--it was pumping back out.  And when she died, they did the embalming there so, therefore, they had me to go in a room and sit.  But I fixed so that I could peek and see them embalming her and what they did with the blood that they took to the toilet outside.  I did all of that when I was in grade school, and--
Speaker 1: So, how old were you when your grandmother died?
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know the exact--I guess I must've been about ten or eleven.
Story_ID: 545059
Speaker 1: So you--your [maternal] grandmother, had she been to school herself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --or did she get a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: I don't know, we never discussed, because she read so much to me out of the books with all of the stories that they have.  You know, those big reading books with stories that were parched looking, yellow pages and all.  So she used to read all of that to me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at night and all.  And when she was working, and that's how I knew about all of the shrimps and chicken and shrimps and all, and that eating, because she always brought food for me to eat that she was cooking over there.
Speaker 1: Oh, for the railroad? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, from the railroad, yes.  'Cause I would sit on the steps and wait until she had finished--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and walk home with her.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what kind of poetry she would read you?
Speaker 2: It was poetry of, of poems and stories for all children, a big, big, thick book.  And I can't even remember the name now.  I knew it before but it was a big thick, yellow book with all of the stories to read to children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Maggie [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte].
Speaker 1: Okay, was it Maggie Burns or was it--?
Speaker 2: That's all I heard was just the Maggie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was trying to think.
Speaker 1: Did she have any other relatives in Mound City [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Mound City? No.
Speaker 1: I mean, in Mounds, Illinois, right?
Speaker 2: No, she had--her mother [Mary Reynolds] and all were all up in--
Speaker 1: Danville [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Danville.  That's where her mother and her sister, and brothers and all were in Danville, Illinois.  Because, you see, her mother was the slave master's daughter and he had everything for her.  And when she was sick, her mother came to our town to her daughter, and she cursed us out and said that we was the cause of her death, because she had to work and take care of us.  Because my mother [Mary Nickles Burns] was running around and not looking after her children.  She was just having us, period.
Story_ID: 545060
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have?
Speaker 2: I have half; all of us were different.  She had James [ph.], who was by the man who was from a big family there in southern Illinois.  James was the oldest and then I came along, and Allie Wade [ph.] was my father.  And his mother and all lived in--down in the south Mounds [Illinois] where a lot of the families lived.  And then I had another sister that died--was born and died right after.  And then my brother, Hershel [ph.] came, and after Hershel came Annabelle [ph.], and after Annabelle that's when she married.  My mother, Mary [Mary Nickles Burns], married this man who had been in the [U.S. military] service, and that's where Lionel [Lionel Burns] and his brother, Allie B, Allie Bruce [Allie Burns].  And my grandmother--[maternal] great-grandmother [Mary Reynolds], when her daughter [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte]--she became very angry and made my mother come to Danville, and that's where we had to all go to Danville, Illinois.  And that is where my mother was going with some man there, and that's where Inez [Inez Talley], my other sister was born.
Story_ID: 545061
Speaker 1: And we all had to--and this old [maternal] great-grandmother [Mary Reynolds] made me go with her to pick greens every morning into the wild area and then take them to the stores.  And I would have to go with her and pick them, and bugs and all over me, and then go to school.  And her son would meet me and give me clean clothes to put on and another boy who was in school with me.  And he has now since died--he was in the [U.S. military] service--but he would stand on the steps, while I would go in the basement and change my clothes where a lot of the students could go in Danville, Illinois.  My grand- my uncle would give me clothes and all, and he did not like the way his mother, who was my grand- great-grandmother, how she was treating me and therefore he, Uncle Joe [ph.], took care of me, too, when I was up in Danville.
Story_ID: 545062
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your--do you know much about your father's [Allie Wade (ph.)] side of the family?
Speaker 2: No, I know that his mother had them to bring me over to her house when I was a baby, but he had another brother who was mentally sick and real fair and ran all over the place and everything.  But other than that I did not have any idea that he was my father.  I thought it was just a family.  And then when I was in the eighth grade he came from St. Louis [Missouri], my father, he had gone to St. Louis to live and to work and what have you.  And he brought his wife with him and came over to meet me, and I wanted to know just who in the H- he wanted to talk to.  And so therefore, he said, "I am your father," and I said, "Well, if you're my father, you give me some money to buy some shoes and things and so that I can be neat and look like the other girls around here."  "Oh, I'll, I'll get you something, I have to talk to my wife."  I said, "Well, you go and talk to her and get the hell away from me now."  And my mother said, "I have told you to stop that cussing," and I did.  And, he lived in St. Louis, and he never came back with any shoes or anything.  And then when I worked around for all the people, white and black, and the old teacher who taught me French, and she became angry and didn't want me to really pass.  She wanted me to flunk out and therefore I knew French and that's all I spoke.  And one of the teachers who had been doing her practice teaching knew me, the Chambliss family, and she had me to come to her house and do the laundry and help with cleaning and all at her house, Gwendolyn Chambliss.  And she was teaching now, after having done her practice teaching around me and what have you, she had gone to, over to the place over from Mounds--I have all that written down, I should have it.
Speaker 1: That's okay, we're getting too far ahead anyway.
Speaker 2: Lovejoy.
Speaker 1: Lovejoy? Okay.
Speaker 2: Lovejoy High School in Mound City [Illinois], and, therefore, I went to Mounds City and when I got there I had to switch from French to Latin, (speaking Latin) Gallia est in partes (speaking Latin).  All Gaul is divided into three parts.
Speaker 1: We don't wanna get too far ahead yet. Let me go back a little bit to--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, you don't know much about your father's side so much?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did they do for a living in your father's side?
Speaker 2: They were all doing farming work and like corn and potatoes and all.  That's what they were doing in southern Illinois.
Story_ID: 545063
Speaker 1: Because this [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte] was the top cook for the central station, train (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's your mother's mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right, your mother's mother.
Speaker 1: My grandmother, the one that I would sit and wait 'til she finished, would go with her.  'Cause she's the one who raised me.
Speaker 2: And you were about eight years old when she passed away, was it?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: I must've been--I guess I was about eight or nine, eight or nine years old.  I don't remember the exact age now.  I know that I was in grade school.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you said now--I wanna explore this a little bit, you said that you saw them embalm her body?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Right. Was that a scary experience for a little girl?
Speaker 1: No, I just was looking to see what they were doing to my grandmother.  And they took the blood out to the, to the toilet outside and dumped it and all.  And I saw exactly where they cut into the right side and had the things placed for the blood to be drained out and everything.  I watched every step that they did, and I was in grade school, but I never forgot it.  And I did it when I was in training, when they had us to go down there and to say what you supposed to do, when I was in nurses training.  And they wanted to know, and I said, "I had been knowing this all my life."
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: And I did it then.
Story_ID: 545064
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in two places then, in Mounds [Illinois] and in Danville [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, can you--well, tell me this first, from what you know about your mother [Mary Nickles Burns] and your father [Allie Wade (ph.)], and your grandmothers, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte].
Speaker 1: Okay, and why?
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because she wanted me to be well interested in life and to know a lot of things.  And that's how she read books to me, that's why she checked on me and she reviewed me.  And she had the Chambliss family, Gwendolyn Chambliss, to do the same thing to me after she had died--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause she had told her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so when you were--were most of your brothers and sisters raised with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The brothers were but the sister [Inez Talley]--I was then in high school [Lovejoy High School, Mound City, Illinois] when she was born--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just--
Speaker 2: --so I helped to take care of her.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was talking 'bout the early days.
Speaker 2: The early days, my brothers and all, the ones--they were around or back and forth and in and out.
Story_ID: 545065
Speaker 1: We always ask this question and see if you can give us an idea of what it was like when you grew up.  What were some of the sights and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights?  The sights was seeing the carnivals coming into town, and they had the Charleston contest, and I went downtown and bought the material, 'cause I was working for people cleaning their houses and all.  And I bought material and made myself a dress.  And when they had they had the Charleston contest, I ran up on the stage and was with the others and the Charleston and there were three of us.  And then I had to dance against those two boys, and I won the five dollar gold piece.  And when I got home that old woman who was my mother [Mary Nickles Burns] was gonna beat me and everything.  And I said, "Here is the money that I won at the carnival," and she took the money.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did she say thank you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She just took the money.
Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up--how old were you then? Were you a teenager?
Speaker 2: When I was doing that? Yes, I was either fourteen or fifteen that area, fifteen.  I was fourteen or something like that.  I hadn't really gotten into the high school [Lovejoy High School, Mound City, Illinois] yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what were some of the other sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that I--with my [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte] being the cook, I would smell a lot of the foods that the restaurant and around, and shrimp I loved.  And all the different foods, mashed potatoes, and or either baked potatoes, and string beans, and then mustard greens, and cornbread, and all of that is what she cooked and served.  And I always knew that and always had that to eat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I knew all the different foods.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did most black people around or people around you get a chance to eat shrimp and other dishes like that?
Speaker 2: No, these were the train people.  This was at the train station where the trains would stop and the people would come in there and eat, and they'd get back on the train and leave.  This is where they fed them instead of feeding 'em on the train like they did when I was older and saw them eating on the train.  But, at that particular time, I saw them--the train stopping there and they'll come in there and eating, you know, in the station.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--what about, well, sights, sounds, smells.
Story_ID: 545066
Speaker 1: What activities did you really enjoy when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Charleston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hey, Charleston.
Speaker 1: Did you dance to live music or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Hold that--hold that tiger, ooh, hold that tiger, ooh" ['Hold That Tiger (Tiger Rag)'].  And that's when I would dance up a breeze.
Speaker 1: Did you dance to live music or to the radio or records or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, to the Victrola that some of the people had, not--my family didn't have one but I would go to the different girls whose families had a little more than I--
Speaker 1: Okay. --than I did.
Speaker 2: So were they playing the 78 records [78 rpm record] then, those--?
Speaker 1: They were just putting records on that the record player and winding and turning it.  You ever seen any of that?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Yeah, I have seen it.
Speaker 1: Yes, well, that's what they were doing back in that day and age.  They didn't have anything you just put in and start and it would run.  Not then, you had to wind it and play it.
Speaker 2: Did you have electricity when you were a little girl where you were?
Speaker 1: Well, some of the people did but we didn't.  We had lamps with all that oil, and clean those lamp things.  And had to blow in 'em and wipe 'em and dry them.  And see that the oil was in the, in the things.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah. No electric (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay. So when they had--
Speaker 1: --until later.
Speaker 2: So at that time--
Speaker 1: Then it changed.
Speaker 2: That time they had the Charleston contest did they have like a live band that played or was it music on a record?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they, they had a live band that was tracking with them and this was for the blacks only on this side, because the blacks had to stay in one side of the carnival and the whites another, you know, of the people.  And, [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas' family was one of that group moving and doing all that dance at different places, but not at my town.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: But I learned that after I nursed him and I found out that he had traveled in those different places with his family.
Speaker 2: This is Fayard Nicholas of the Nicholas Brothers you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Nicholas Brothers, Fayard.  And Fayard danced with me.  And in the [U.S.] Army he was my patient, and then when he got well he came over to the officers' club and danced with me.  And that's when I fell and bounced back up and just kept dancing with Fayard Nicholas.  Yes, long years ago.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Story_ID: 545067
Speaker 1: Now what was your, your first grade school?  What was the first grade school you attended?
Speaker 2: In Mounds, Illinois?  That was Douglas, Douglas grade school [Douglas School].
Speaker 1: Was it named after Frederick Douglass?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  It was just Douglas.
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: D-O-U-G-L- D-O-U-G, Douglas, A-L-L-S [sic.], Douglas.  Just like somebody's name.
Speaker 1: I just wondered 'cause if there's two S's on the end, it's Frederick Douglass, if it's one S, it's Stephen Douglas [Stephen A. Douglas], so I don't know.
Speaker 2: Just one S was on that Douglas.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, it's probably named after Stephen Douglas, that politician--
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: --the man that ran against Lincoln [Abraham Lincoln] for president in Illinois.
Speaker 2: Well, see, I didn't know all that history.  I just--
Speaker 1: Okay, Douglas elementary school. Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, the high school I finished was Lovejoy [Lovejoy High School, Mound City, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Now did you go to grade school in Danville [Illinois], too?
Speaker 2: --in Mounds, Illinois [sic.].  Yeah, I went to Danville too.  And the grade school in Danville I can't remember the name because the Red Cross worker was in Germany.  And that's where he met me and he said, "Do you know I've been to that same school you went to in Danville?"
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't remember the name of that one.
Speaker 2: I was trying to think of the name.
Speaker 1: Now, these were both all-black schools, right?
Speaker 2: No, not in Danville, Danville was an integrated school.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was? Okay.
Speaker 2: Danville, Illinois was an integrated.  And the little white girl sat next to me and she used to see that I always got a dime for answering or helping her with her subjects when they would ask questions.  She'd give me a dime or she would give me two dimes, or she would bring me cookies and things from home and everything, a little white girl--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was in the class with me.
Story_ID: 545068
Speaker 1: --Danville, Illinois, and then you went to high school, right?
Speaker 2: In--I went to the high school in Mou- Lovejoy High School in Mound City [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back to grade school.  Now, you said your [maternal] grandmother read to you and she really--
Speaker 2: Helped.
Speaker 1: --helped you with your studies when you were little, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: She took an interest in you and made sure that you could read?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, did she encourage you and tell you to get an education?
Speaker 2: Of course, she loved me.  That woman loved me and told me to be the highest of everybody here, continue, go to school and get the education and everything, my grandmother, Maggie [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked the French and since that teacher flunked me and I went over to Lovejoy, I had to switch to Latin.  So, I still--I still say some of the Latin.  And I've had that, you know, naturally in training as a nurse, you know, and a lot of your medicals, you know, have Latin, Latin words.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, and I don't know why all of that happened to me that I was transferred to there and then becoming a nurse, and then have Latin that I can know a lot of medical terms and everything.  And when I was in high school, one of the white doctors that he had a daughter and she and I ran together.  And he would check me and all and then he wanted to kind of start making love with me when I was in high school, Dr. Elkins [Homer Elkins].
Speaker 1: So, he was trying to take advantage of you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And he, yes, and he taught me a lot of things.  He let me drive his car.  I had a car to go up to Carbondale [Illinois] when they were having big bashes, and some of the guys who had bands and all, and I was in high school and he would let me drive one of his cars up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dr. Elkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Lovejoy High School was an integrated high school?
Speaker 2: No, that was segregated.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, segregated so that was a all-black high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, all those schools, all those schools except the ones that I told you I was in, in Danville.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: Southern Illinois.
Story_ID: 545069
Speaker 1: So how were race relations when you were growing up in southern Illinois?
Speaker 2: They had a lot of people who were white and good to the blacks, and they had a lot of them who were white and were mean to the blacks.  And so, therefore, some of the blacks would try to react and be mean to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us a story about one of those times when the whites were mean or the blacks were mean?
Speaker 2: Well, whenever you'd go to the movies, they would get mad, because the blacks had to sit up on the top of the building.
Speaker 1: Up in the balcony?
Speaker 2: You had to go up the stairs, in the balcony up in the top.
Speaker 1: So, it'd make the black people mad that they had to go up there?
Speaker 2: Yes, you had to go up there to the movies.  And the whites all sat down in the regular area.
Speaker 1: Well, how did the black people make the white people mad?
Speaker 2: Make them mad?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because they would cuss them out and lot of them had to work for them and then they were kind of mean to them.  And the whites were mean to them and blacks were mean to them, so it was just mean to each other I would say 'cause I could see the way they would carry on.  Because when my mother [Mary Nickles Burns] was doing all of her, this--not my [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte], but my mother, she was doing a lot of cleaning in the different hotels and all, then she's gonna make me come and work with her.  And some of the white doctor--some of the white guys in the hotel would try to start messing with me to come into their rooms and I'd cuss them out and run.  And she would say, "I wish you'd stop that cussing," but I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: You wasn't gonna get me up in nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you had to really be on your toes in those days, you had to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I have been that way since I start talking.  And I think my grandmother started all that on me, 'cause she told me to always do and take care of yourself and everything, my grandmother that died.
Story_ID: 545070
Speaker 1: So, when you were in high school you were raised by your mother [Mary Nickles Burns].  You were living with your mother then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't raised by nobody, I was raised by myself.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, okay.  So, your mother really didn't help you at all?
Speaker 2: She didn't care.  And, Gwendolyn Chambliss, the Chambliss family that was Chambliss family, they were outstanding people there that were rich people, rich.  And see, and Gwendolyn had met me when she did her practice teaching there in Mounds [Illinois], and you see, when she left there she went to Mounds City [sic. Mound City, Illinois] to Lovejoy [Lovejoy High School], Lovejoy and that's why she had me to come there to school, Gwendolyn Chambliss, the Chambliss family.  And she had a brother that weighed about five hundred pounds and they had to wash his shirts and things for him.  And I would do the laundry, I would do the cleaning over there when I was in grade school and high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and the Chambliss family.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: They had everything, they had real estate, had stores, everything.  And they looked like they were white--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but they were black.  But they had everything.  And one of them was a doctor, Gwendolyn was a teacher, and their Uncle Joe [ph.], that I used to wash all his clothes he was the one that took care of the people coming in making their payments on what they owed and all, and their houses, and everything.  And I just talked to one of the nieces the other day--that's still, you know, she lives in Chicago [Illinois] but they keep in touch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I used to drive her and her brother down to Cairo [Illinois] whenever they were up in Mounds and wanted to get back home.  And I was in high school and I was driving one of the family cars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you, you drove one of Dr. Chambliss' family cars.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: How did you learn how to drive, did you have a license then?
Speaker 2: I don't think that we bothered 'bout any license or anything, we just drove.  And they taught me how to drive, and I drove.
Speaker 1: Okay, about how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I guess I was about, what, fifteen, sixteen, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know the kind of car that you were driving?
Speaker 2: Oh, honey, they had Fords and they had Chevrolets, and everything.  They had all kind of cars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, in that area.
Story_ID: 545071
Speaker 1: Now did you win any honors in high school, did you, did you--?
Speaker 2: I was outstanding in high school there in Lovejoy [Lovejoy High School, Mound City, Illinois].  Several of us were outstanding for like in the Latin, and all, speaking in the Latin and the things, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you run for class office or anything? Or any of those kind of offices (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think I was at one time one of the secretaries and all.  And then they had me to do a lot of things because I had won that money dancing [the Charleston], you know, at the carnival.  So, therefore, they made me do a lot of things after having won the money dancing in the carnival.  And they knew about it and all, so they just had me just going.  It's one of the guys living here that I just talked to, he is ninety--ninety-three now, who was my classmate there at Lovejoy.  Yeah, he lives here in Detroit [Michigan] too--came here from down there with us, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you had pretty good grades, good grades in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I always had good grades.  It's just that some of--that ol' heifer at my (laughter) at my home, you know, she--and here I was doing her laundry for her, too.  And she was paying me but it didn't make her any difference she just--she was real fair in color and everything, and therefore, I was a little black one, you know.
Speaker 1: So, she was a teacher of yours?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the one that flunked me in French--
Speaker 1: In French, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and I was outstanding in French.  And the teacher who took me to Lovejoy, she knew that I was outstanding and that's why when I cried and called her that this ol' B-I-T-C-H had flunked me, she said, "Pack everything you got and leave that damn school," Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Chambliss].  And that's when I went back and forth with her.  'Cause, see, I was working for them, and she knew that I was outstanding in my schools and my classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were a senior in high school, or did you, did you know what you wanted to be, you know, or what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I had thought once of being a teacher, and then I said since my [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Stanfield Eskitte] died, and I had watched them embalm her, and I knew how she needed nursing, and I would try to give her a bath in the bed and all.  And I said and I think I just better become a nurse and take care of people like I did my grandmother, my mother as I called her.  'Cause I called her mama and I called my actual my mother [Mary Nickles Burns], I called her--what'd I call her (unclear) or something like that.  I didn't call her mama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I called my grandmamma, mama.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--now, you graduated in what, it was 1937 or?
Speaker 2: No, 1934.
Speaker 1: Thirty-four [1934], okay, 1934, okay.  All right, so that's--how old were you then?  Were you about fifteen, or--?
Speaker 2: No, I was seventeen or eighteen years old when I finished high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 545072
Speaker 1: Then that's when I decided that I was going instead of teaching, I was gonna be a nurse.  And that's when the guy who had been a principal at the school when I was at--in Lovejoy [Lovejoy High School, Mound City, Illinois], he had been the principal.  And he was a doctor and he was head of the hospital for blacks in Kansas City [Missouri].  And he and Gwendolyn Chambliss, you see, the Chambliss family, so therefore they made contact with him and helped me to get ready and sent me there to become a nurse.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is a black hospital in Kansas City?
Speaker 1: Yes, and we were connected with the whites with a tunnel.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was all segregated.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what was the name of the hospital?
Speaker 1: General Hospital No. 2, Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And General Hospital No. 1 [Kansas City, Missouri] was the white.
Speaker 2: Okay, General Hospital No. 2.
Speaker 1: Yes, and that's when that ol' buzzard had a haberdasher [Truman and Jacobson Haberdashery, Kansas City, Missouri] down from our hospital and from the prostituting area of the white women, and he had a haberdasher, that ol' president.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: The one that died, I mean, you know, what was ol' buzzard's name?
Speaker 2: Oh, a president of the United States?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: From Kansas?
Speaker 1: Yes, from Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Oh, Truman.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman].
Speaker 1: Yes, ol' Harry Truman.  I remember when he had a haberdasher and his store there at the red light district.  And we used to tell the students when they would come in the mail, "Get in the car, we're gonna show you something."  And we'd say, "Now get down, get down."  And we'd drive by there, you see, 'cause we had friends with cars.  And so we'd say, "Okay, sit up so we can see them knocking on the windows at you," (laughter).  And ol' Truman had a haberdasher there, 'cause he was from Independence [Missouri], you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they would make us vote at five o'clock in the morning.  They'd send a big truck thing there and wanted us to get in there and come in there and vote.  And I'd go in there and mark everything on the thing.
Speaker 2: You'd vote for everything?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'd just mark every square on the thing.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any idea then that Truman was gonna be important?
Speaker 1: No, no.  He was a haberdasher working hard.  And we didn't know that we were gonna be--I was gonna be a, a visiting nurse, you see, which is called public health nurse, but we then was called visiting nurses.  And when I did my student work then I was sent to university--when I finished they had a job and they sent me up to University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota School of Public Health, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and that's when I went up there and start working on my degree.
Speaker 2: Okay now, I don't wanna go too fast--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --but in Kansas City at the hospital, were you the only black student there?
Speaker 1: No, there was all black (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right, because it was in a colored hospital?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was all black.
Speaker 2: Okay, so how, how many years did you go to school there?
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: And then--
Story_ID: 545073
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then you took the state board exam.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there were--how many classmates did I have?  There were fifteen or eighteen of us and we had to go--they had the--you know about you having to take the state board, the students for nursing?
Speaker 2: No, you have to tell us (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, you had to take the state board in order to become an RN.
Speaker 2: All right. Okay, so did you become a registered nurse then?
Speaker 1: Yes, you took the state board and you--wait a minute.  They had--I finished in 1939 and I went with the group they had us white and black to take the state board.  And only, out of my classmates, there were--I don't remember our exact number now, like fourteen or some--oh, I would say I don't remember the exact number, but all of my--all the rest of my classmates and three of us passed the exam.  And the reason the three of us passed, one had been doing that teaching bit and all in Alabama or someplace, you know, going back and forth and to the schools.  And the other girl was from a rich family, so she had been going to school to be a doctor.  And I had been working to be a nurse so, therefore, the dietician would get mad at me and I cursed her out, and so, she told them that I had cursed her out, I was standing in line where you'd get in line to go to get your food.  And one of the doctors was there with me and he said, "Prudence [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell], where are going?" I said, "I'm going home where I can get all kinds of steaks and fish, and chicken and everything."  Wasn't going to get nothing, I was just talking to him.  And the dietician came out and said, "You shut up your mouth.  Why are standing here talking all this to him?"  I said, "You get your G-D-A back into your office and leave me alone.  I can talk whatever I want to talk."  And so, then she went back into the office and she went down and told them to put me out.  And when the girl called me down there to talk to me I said, "Yes, I cursed her out, and I'm not going anyplace."  So she said, "Well, since you're supposed to be going on leave, go home and rest and eat and have a nice vacation then get yourself back here to finish your training."
Speaker 2: Okay. So you were able to finish?
Speaker 1: Of course, 'cause I went back.  And this old buzzard became sick and they made me go in and special her.  And she cried and asked me to forgive her for cussing and messing with me.  I had to bathe her and everything.  Anytime they needed a special nursing, they sent me to any of those patients then at that particular time in Kansas City, Missouri No. 2 [General Hospital No. 2].
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any favorite instructors or teachers at nursing school in Kansas City?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had several of them who were really interested in me and knew that I was really doing what was asked of me.  And the doctor who was head of the hospital, he had been one of the principals in Lovejoy High School [Mound City, Illinois], so he knew me, and he knew I was gonna be outstanding.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: I did know his name.
Speaker 2: Well, if you don't, it's all right. I just thought I'd ask.
Speaker 1: I can't think of it now because they just did so much.  Because when I went in nurses training, they had everything at the school showing the people with me in nurses training and everything.  And when I got married and they had the picture of my wedding dress and me at the altar and everything, they showed them to all the people there at the place in where he was in Kansas City.
Story_ID: 545074
Speaker 1: When you passed the exam and became a registered nurse (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nurse.
Speaker 1: --nurse, you said you went to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota School of Public Health, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Yes, the public health people where I had done my little--where they had you to do when you were in training, I went up to the University of Minnesota to start on my degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, like you can go for the summer.
Speaker 1: Was it, was it tough to get in the University of Minnesota?
Speaker 2: No, no, 'cause, see, they didn't have any blacks there and they wanted blacks there.  Yes, and there were the other four girls who were in the class under me and had finished, and I had finished, and we were all public health so we all went there to start on our degree.  And all those girls are dead now and they were all in the Army [U.S. Army Nurse Corps] too, they went in following me in the service and everything, and they are now all dead.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so, you got your RN in 1939, so did you go to University of Minnesota the same year in '39 [1939]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had finished graduating; I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you able to finish your degree at the University of Minnesota?
Speaker 2: No, not then, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I just went there like they had for the summer for you to come and start working toward your degree, yes.  And I went there.  And, of course, in Kansas City [Missouri] they were real pleased to see you going and working toward a degree, because you'd get more interested and more information in public health.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was Sister Kenny [Elizabeth Kenny]--you ever heard of her?
Speaker 1: Who's that?
Speaker 2: Sister Kenny that did the wet pack treatment of polio and all, that was up at University of Minnesota and came from Australia and everything.  Yeah, she was teaching there then.  And I went in her class and met her, and I observed what she was teaching.  And then when I went into the service and was in Australia and all, she had me to see her relatives.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever to go to the Mayo Clinic up there in Rochester, Minnesota?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  I had to go up there and, and take subjects.  And I had Gwendolyn Chambliss who had been teaching in southern Illinois, that went up there for her checkup and all and that she needed.  And I went there and I taught, you know, worked with her and took care of her, private teaching and all.  And they said, "We know this little old girl," you know, there at Mayo Clinic.  Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I been back and forth.
Speaker 1: So, did you have--you were going to school and working at the same time or what or how did you do it?
Speaker 2: No, no, when I went with Gwendolyn I was doing my practice teaching of public health, I mean, not teaching but experience in public health.  A lot of this is just all just happening all before I went in the service, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you like Minnesota as opposed to southern Illinois?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I liked Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Must've been a big change, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's where the Mississippi River began, you know.  We'd walk over it.  Did you know that?  Mississippi started up in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: We walked right over it.
Speaker 1: But you could walk over it up there?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's where it started.  And it was just a little shiffle, yes, and we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm said, "I'm from southern Illinois where Mississippi comes, you see," so up there I knew.  So, I could--I had already been exposed to all of that and, you see, when you have been around something and you go back to another place, you can tell them what you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I said, "I'm where the Mississippi meets with the Ohio [Ohio River] down in southern Illinois."  And it has flooded up there in Mounds [Illinois] where I lived 'cause we'd have to move, the Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where M-I crooked letter, crooked letter, I, crooked letter, crooked letter, hump back, hump back, I, Mississippi, you know that spelling.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Were there many black students up there at University of Minnesota?
Speaker 2: No, there were a few.  And that girl who was in that class with me, she's here in Detroit [Michigan] too 'cause she's from there.  And she's also my AKA, you know, Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority sister.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where she lived and her family, and all.  She was born and raised there, and her family and all them.  She's here, lives here.
Story_ID: 545075
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] started what 1941 but--?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I went in in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what made you decide to join the Army [U.S. Army Nurse Corps]?
Speaker 2: I just wanted to join since they were saying that they needed nurses and I said, "Well, they'll need to have some of us black ones then."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were they trying to find black nurses for the Army?
Speaker 2: No, no, they had--I had the pictures of the group that was in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, we'll look at those later but--
Speaker 2: I mean, before I went in these girls who all went in immediately when they began, you see.  And the Tuskegee Airmen at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  They had nurses that had gone there, and some of the girl--several of the girls with them were from Kansas City [Missouri] where we was still in nurses training, where we finished nurses training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I just talked to her the other day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's in, you know, California.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 545076
Speaker 1: So you joined the Army [U.S. Army Nurse Corps] in 1942, and where were you stationed first, where did they take you first?
Speaker 2: I was sent to Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I registered there in Missouri, went to the station there and that's when I was sent to Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had additional training, Army nurses training, and what kind of things did they teach you at Fort Huachuca?
Speaker 2: They didn't teach anything they said, "You get out there and start nursing these patients."  And the ol' bastard was from Chicago [Illinois], and they thought that we were prostitutes and all, you know.  And that's what they were trying to do, and I cursed them out.  And I wouldn't even go up to the officers' club or nothing after.  No.
Speaker 1: So, you what you're saying is there was a lot of pressure on women being in the Army.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes at Fort Huachuca.
Speaker 1: Now, you got all these men concentrated, being trained.
Speaker 2: But the head, but the heads of them.
Speaker 1: And they all want a women but they're in the Army.
Speaker 2: And you see, and they had those women from--what's this little country down there at the--cross from there?
Speaker 1: Mexico.
Speaker 2: Yes, they had a lot of those prostitutes and these ol' damn bastards was standing up waiting to get into the rooms that they had set up.  And they screwing these guys, and they standing in line.  And I said, "You damn fools.  I don't want that (unclear)."
Speaker 1: Well, what was your fear that they would catch diseases (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was no fear, I just didn't want them, with prostituting and getting all these diseases.  And here they're having us nursing them, and giving them shots and everything.  Bing, bing, (demonstrates giving shots), that's the way I'd do them.  They was just getting all kind of diseases there at Fort Huachuca.  And I'm telling you--and that's why the ol' commanding officer who was from Chicago and thinking we was just prostitutes said, "Get her out of here."
Speaker 1: Now, in those days--let me just ask you this, in 1942 was there a cure for syphilis?
Speaker 2: No, now see up at--I had been--that was Tuskegee [Alabama] where they had, you know, getting that cure for syphilis and all that.
Speaker 1: Well, they did an experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male].
Speaker 2: You remember, you haven't heard about that?
Speaker 1: They did the experiment.  They gave the men who signed up for this syphilis but then they didn't treat them, they just documented their decline, deterioration (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Tuskegee, yeah, you know about that.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, yeah.  Ms. Evers [sic. Eunice Rivers Laurie] was a nurse and there's a play called 'Miss Evers' Boys' [David Feldshuh] about the men that were given syphilis or weren't treated for it over the course of many years at Tuskegee hospital.
Speaker 2: 'Cause when I started to--
Speaker 1: A U.S. government sponsored program that had nothing to do with the university, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they had a lot of them at the VA hospital [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], because when I went there and was teaching at Tuskegee that's where this ol' gal wanted me there.  And I wanted to teach and, therefore, I started over there helping her.  And the Tuskegee University gal said, "We have a vacancy we need you to teach principles of public health," and that's why I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] over to the other university.
Speaker 1: So, you went from Fort Huachuca to Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, honey.  Fort Huachuca, this was--
Speaker 1: Well, this was--help me out now, just guide me.  We had you at--okay, we had you--
Speaker 2: Fort Huachuca was where I went during the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Yes, mam.  I want to stay with the war right now and then we'll get you later, you know, the other place later.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: But you're at Fort Huachuca--
Speaker 2: Arizona.
Speaker 1: --and you said you were--the men were lining up, dealing with these prostitutes--
Speaker 2: With those prostitutes, the women from--
Speaker 1: --from Mexico--
Speaker 2: Mexico.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were contracting venereal disease, other disease.
Speaker 2: Yes, there were just--
Speaker 1: And you were giving them shots--
Speaker 2: Yes (makes sound).
Speaker 1: --but you were angry about the fact that they were--
Speaker 2: I was shooting them, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were giving them--you were giving them pretty tough shots (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 545077
Speaker 1: So you said the director there or the commander got rid of you because he didn't like your--?
Speaker 2: No, he wanted the--he claims that the women were there to be prostitutes and I told him, "Like hell.  You don't assign me to none of these damn people--men to see them at night."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they're--so you're saying the commander expected you all to service the men?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: This is a white commander?
Speaker 2: No, this was all black.
Speaker 1: All right now, see, you gotta help me out and tell me, see.
Speaker 2: This was all black.
Speaker 1: All right, this is a black unit in--at Fort Huachuca [Arizona].
Speaker 2: Yes, Fort Huachuca, and--
Speaker 1: Well, who was the commander, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Buffaloes, you heard of the Buffalo Soldiers and all?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Buffalo Soldiers, right, 10th Cavalry [10th Cavalry Regiment], 9th Cavalry [9th Cavalry Regiment], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all down there, sure, sure.  We were all there at Fort Huachuca and across from and all that.  Yes.
Speaker 1: So who was the commander there, what was his name?
Speaker 2: The commanding officer of the hospital and all that, he was from Chicago.
Speaker 1: What was his name? I'm sorry, just trying--
Speaker 2: Oh, shoot, I forgot his ol' name now, Boswell [ph.], Boswell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Colonel Boswell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened, did he get you transferred or get you--?
Speaker 2: Yes, because when he wanted us to come up--see I had danced with [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas there in the officers' club, you know, and everything.  And go to the officers' club to eat and everything, and so therefore, when he started that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's where you danced with Fayard Nicholas--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Fort Huachuca?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was my patient.  And then when he--
Speaker 1: What was wrong with him?
Speaker 2: He had a real bad cold and was having a breathing problem and I nursed him.  And so when he went back, you know, to the group that was there to entertain that's when he said, "Come on Miss Burns [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell], Lieutenant Burns let's dance.  I'm okay now, I got to dance with you."  And I danced with him, and he just had a fit.  And honey, I bounced down on the floor and bopped back up and just kept dancing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fayard Nicholas, yeah, he just died, you know, last year.
Speaker 1: Well, just a word about the dancing, some of the dancing in those days--
Speaker 2: Was out of sight.
Speaker 1: --the lindy hop and some of those other dances--
Speaker 2: Yes, everything. I was doing everything.
Speaker 1: --were very athletic dances, you had to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was doing everything.  Amen.  I used to dance with these ratty little, dollar board shoes out in a night (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were a lieutenant, you were an officer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, you go in as officer, yes.
Speaker 1: So, what was your official title, you were a lieutenant of the what, what do they call you?
Speaker 2: First lieutenant of the Army Nurse Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, of the U.S. Army Nurse Corps?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so this colonel--
Speaker 2: I went in as second lieutenant and then was in, you know, and then promoted to first lieutenant, you know, like when you go in and then few months later, (makes sound) you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, how were things for women in those days as a officer, could you give an order to a white enlisted man? Could you--would they let you do that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it was segregated, segregated.  You didn't have any white and black mixture then.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you give an order to a black enlisted man, you tell him what to do?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, you took care of them and you told them what you wanted done and all that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did any of them resent that or--?
Speaker 2: It was the black segment and the segment over there.  And you just ruled and did whatever, you know, the plans and everything.
Speaker 1: Now, did the men resent taking orders from a black woman, or from a woman?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them did and some of them oh, no, they were just thrilled.  And then we going out seeing other women on the street, that wouldn't make no difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as long as it was a woman they didn't care.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, how long were you at Fort Huachuca before they--Boswell had you--
Speaker 2: Sent me out--before they got me out?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't have the exact dates now.  I guess I was there about almost a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say almost a year.
Story_ID: 545078
Speaker 1: So this takes us to 1943 at least, right?
Speaker 2: I'm going now to the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you left Arizona [Fort Huachuca] and went to the South Pacific?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to California, you know, to get--you know to get on the ships and things, you know.  See, we had a convoy of ships, are you familiar with that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, convoys, right, I know what a convoy is.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, okay.  And I was at the name of the state was there in--I was trying to think of the name, California.  Anyway, it was the stock area where all the ships and things--
Speaker 1: Did you leave out of San Diego [California] or Long Beach [California]?
Speaker 2: No. No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I did know the name when I was talking all this, reviewing it and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not San Francisco [California] or--? Okay.
Speaker 2: No, not San Francisco, this was another one, another place where they had--that's where you did your practice and everything for getting on the ship and how you would come down that ship and everything.  Oh, dear, that was in California.  I have it written down, I don't have none of that here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's where all your ships and all went out.
Speaker 1: So, so you went on a ship.  This was a--what was the name of your unit, do you remember the name of your unit?
Speaker 2: We were the 268th Station Hospital [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea], 268th Station Hospital.
Speaker 1: And you were on your way to where in the South Pacific?
Speaker 2: To the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you go first in the South Pacific?
Speaker 2: Sydney.
Speaker 1: Okay, Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the voyage like, had you ever been on a ship before at sea?
Speaker 2: No.  And they picked up the sounds so therefore we had to all several of the ships were, you know, bombed, and that's why we had to zigzag and everything.  Yes, 'cause they picked up the sound and that's why they were bringing a lot of the--the enemy was bringing a lot of the ships down into the ocean, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were using sonar I guess to pick up the sound, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: U-boats and the--
Speaker 2: And we had to zigzag, yes indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you like being out at sea?
Speaker 2: Did I like?
Speaker 1: Yeah, like crossing the ocean?
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to get where we were going so I could get out of here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Sydney, Australia first?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's where we landed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Zigzagged and landed in Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 1: Now, what was that like?
Speaker 2: That was just something new for you, you know.  You get out of the ship and get into where they have Sydney where they had the place for the nurses.  And then they would say that the, the others will be stationed here and they'll contact you when they gonna move because you going up to another area really, New Guinea.  But you're gonna be here until we get things set up and outlined and all to ship you up there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how were you--
Speaker 2: And so then we left Sydney and went to Brisbane [Australia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From Sydney to Brisbane is where they had all the nurses.
Story_ID: 545079
Speaker 1: How were you treated in Australia?  Did, did you have much (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Australians treat you nice but a lot of the white Americans were just ornery and they were just--and I was just as ornery with them.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories you can tell us about how you were treated?
Speaker 2: They didn't want us to go to the restaurants and all.  And they thought that we better stay back over in there in the--and they had the soldiers in the red light district and where the water was floating and carrying on.  And a lot of the--
Speaker 1: You said, where the water was floating?  I mean, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mud and all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And several--and see and we joined--several of the girls with me joined the--what do we have here with the, with the women, a club for women and all.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  A black women's club?
Speaker 2: No, this all just a club, period. What do you call the--
Speaker 1: Was this the officers' club?
Speaker 2: What do you call the blood people, where they take your blood and collect your blood and all?
Speaker 1: The clinic?
Speaker 2: No, not the clinic.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The Red Cross.
Speaker 2: The Red Cross? Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 1: The Red Cross, shoot.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I'm sorry (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Red Cross and that's what I joined there, and I had several of the girls who joined it with me.  And we saw to them stop being mean to these black people and black soldiers.  And the soldiers in the red light district we want them move out of there.  And a lot of the Red Cross women of the place who are not Americans, you see, they were Australians and all, and they said, okay.  And they moved them out of the red light district and all that, and they opened up the restaurants to them, because the Americans had said, "They can't come and eat in the restaurants."  And we said, "Like hell, we're going in, we're officers and we want it open."  And they did.  And I was the one who did all of this and several--three other girls of our unit with me went right on, "Come on Prudence [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell], we'll follow you.  We'll go with you."  And we had the restaurants open.  And when they would take the little ship and go over to another place where they had some interesting things on animals and all of that.  And they weren't gonna let us go and so they said, oh, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The sightseeing tours?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Was it sightseeing tours?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they said, "What are you talking about? Lieutenant Burns is going and her girls with her."  Yes, and we pulled on out and went all to those different places too and everything.  And in the book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell], I have you sitting up there, the ones who traveled with me, you know, in the book.  That we would move around and I would move, and we, we blasted the restaurants and they opened up for our enlisted men to eat and moved them out of that red light district, and then let them into a nice place.  And we let them go into the restaurants and eat just like we are doing.  And I mean blasted. And the other three girls said, "Okay, Prudence, we will work with you."  And the red--they--what do we call it?
Speaker 2: The Red Cross.
Speaker 1: Red Cross, yes.  And you ought to see my pins and everything, I have a whole slew of them there in my drawer that I had from all these different countries where I've been and working with them, the Red Cross, yes.  And I mean we really got them together 'cause, see, I left, left Kansas City [Missouri] where I was with the Red Cross and went to the [U.S. military] service and everything.  And that's how I told these girls, we will tell them to open up this place to these men.  They are still soldiers, and they did--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --right in Australia.
Story_ID: 545080
Speaker 1: How long were you in Australia?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think we were there a few months because they were building for us up in New Guinea.  And they were building and, see, and we had to stay there.  And I met several of the white girls who just stayed with me, you know, and they said, "Well, Prudence [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell], we will do a lot of this."  And I still hear from some of the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and knew me there.
Speaker 1: The, the Australians you're talking about?
Speaker 2: No, no, the American girls that live here, live in the United States.  And, 'course, I just heard from the Australian family yesterday or day before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I still hear from them.
Speaker 1: So, what was New Guinea like, when they shipped you to New Guinea?
Speaker 2: New Guinea was outrageous because they really--the Aboriginals and all lived there, you know, in that area.  And that's where the women just wore a grass skirt and nothing up above anything and the men with the strip things over them and everything.
Speaker 1: Just a loincloth, you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.  And they would dive into the ocean and get the fish for their wives and all.  We visited their place to see how they lived and everything, too.  And I have the pictures all in the book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell].
Speaker 1: Okay, how did you get along with the people in New Guinea?
Speaker 2: How did we get along?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No, no, we couldn't bother with them.  'Cause they, they didn't want you--they would just wave to you.  They didn't speak English and all that.  And they didn't, didn't socialize, you know, 'cause you're just stationed over here because of the war.  And they were over there with their families--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and the kids, and all that you saw in the book.  Yes.  And you didn't want nothing over there and you didn't wanna eat anything over there, but some of the ol' soldiers were over in there, in and out and seeing what and all.  You'd see some of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you couldn't contain the soldiers, they were gonna (laughter) explore anyway?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, well, was there anything remarkable that happened in New Guinea when you were there that you--did you see soldiers who were wounded come back in from the--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We, see we nursed the--we were the 268th Station Hospital [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea] and we nursed some of the black soldiers and some of the other units over there and around.  And that's where they sent me to teach a group of the unit and all in what they were supposed to do, first aid and all that.  They sent me and I let my other girls with me come and speak, each one of them, to them but I was in charge, you see, of it.  And those boys would bring fish over there for me to cook and eat.  They had their parents sending them whiskey and all that, and they would bring just things of whiskey over there.  I say, "I'm not drinking all that stuff.  Well, you just give it to the guys, you know."  And they were--their families was sending them whiskey and loaves of bread and everything, the black ones from all over, from all over the United States.
Speaker 1: That is--
Speaker 2: And they would, and they would--and I was teaching them--I showed you the picture, I was teaching them how to do first aid and everything.  Their commanding officer had wanted an instructor and my commanding officer sent me.  And I set it up.
Speaker 1: Sent you where?
Speaker 2: Over there to teach them.
Speaker 1: Over where to teach?
Speaker 2: In Austra- I mean, in, in New Guinea.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was this like a white group or a black group?
Speaker 2: No, black, everything was segregated.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, but occasionally, though.
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to keep track of it 'cause sometimes, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was all segregated during World War II [WWII] and all that, they had separate things, yes, everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yes, New Guinea and all those places.  The whole World War II was segregated.
Story_ID: 545081
Speaker 1: What kind of work was the soldiers doing in New Guinea?
Speaker 2: They were troopers that were doing a whole lot of the moving around and, and soldiers, you know, who would do the fighting and everything, you know too, of the groups coming down from the other country that was trying to get in and all, see.  That's what they--and we were nursing the people that were sent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered if they had a specific job over there, you know, 'cause I know a lot of the blacks were in the Quartermaster Corps [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And some were in other units, so I just wondered if you had any idea.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: What were they doing primarily?
Speaker 2: They were there as troopers to do invasion whenever these people coming in, whenever any of the other [U.S.] Army enemies coming in and all, and their troops to try to kill and all, it was just a fight right and left--
Speaker 1: All right. Did you have to--
Speaker 2: --'cause they were trying to make the invasion, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you ever encounter any Japanese soldiers?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  See, they were the ones that was trying to get in, and, you know, they had done a whole lot of them up in the Philippines.  They had gotten into the Philippines and had done a whole to them.  And you see, and we left there and went to the Philippines to do all of that nursing and everything, of our group and everything too.  You know, we had the segregated hospital unit and troopers and everything too, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in New Guinea and in the Philippines too you said at one point?
Speaker 2: New Guinea?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you went from Australia to New Guinea then you went to the Philippines too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we came back after we got--the war [World War II, WWII] ending and all, we went to the Philippines.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is what--?
Speaker 2: That was MacArthur, you know, MacArthur?  You've heard of him?
Speaker 1: Douglas MacArthur.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: Yes, see, he was in charge of that whole thing over there.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet MacArthur?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was he like, what was your impression of him?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know how you have a group and all, and he's just glad to see you and all, and shaking hands and all that.
Speaker 1: Was he smoking his pipe?
Speaker 2: Yes, and all.
Speaker 1: I know they always showed pictures of him with a pipe.
Speaker 2: Just doing everything he wanted to do.
Speaker 1: How did you--now did you follow via the radio or the newspaper the struggle of the other black soldiers and sailors in the Army against segregation?
Speaker 2: I didn't know all of that then because we were going through a whole lot ourselves of things.  So all of this came after the war of what a lot of them--problems a lot of them had.  This was after the war.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't really--at the time, you weren't thinking--you didn't know what the other people were contending with?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause, see didn't--we knew what our groups and all that was--that was over where we were, what they were going through, nothing else.
Story_ID: 545082
Speaker 1: First thing I wanna do is ask you about Eleanor Roosevelt.  Now, you said you met her at one point, was this before you went ou- were shipped out [during World War II, WWII] or afterwards?
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were the circumstances?  Just tell us what happened and what were the circumstances that you met Eleanor Roosevelt (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was meeting with the groups and that's when we met with her.
Speaker 1: Was this in the United States, I'm sorry.  Is this in the states, in the United States?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's where I met her in the states. This is--
Speaker 1: Was it in Arizona or in California?
Speaker 2: I was trying to think.  I just really don't remember now because I've got to see when we met with the ones--let's see now.  He was killed while we were in--
Speaker 1: You mean when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died, you mean?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know it was in '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because Truman [President Harry S. Truman] relieved him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was vice president.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I was trying to think where I saw this woman.  This was before we went in all of this.  Whether she was talking to us in Kansas City [Missouri] with our group of women who were head of our different organizations, that's the way that was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when--
Speaker 1: So this is when you were in nursing school?
Speaker 2: Yes, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  Well, what did she say, what was your impression of Mrs. Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: She--I was trying to think now.  I was trying to think did she come to this group that we had with the women who were in charge of us, I mean, you know, our organizations.  So, now, I might have just--I just don't recall now, it's just so fuzzy and so mixed up.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what she said?
Speaker 2: No, I am trying to think was this when they had her talking and we were listening to this on tel- on the radio or what?  I just really don't know now, but it was something involved with her on the radio or something.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And all, I just--
Speaker 1: So, did you get a chance to shake her hand yourself?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She just addressed a group that you were?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and you said you met--you got a chance to hear or meet Mrs.--
Speaker 2: I think, I think we just heard her.
Story_ID: 545083
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about Mrs. Bethune?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I met Mrs. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mary McLeod Bethune?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I met her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, she had--she came to--where was Ms. Bethune?  You know, she had a university.
Speaker 1: Right, Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], well it's Cookman now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, when I was teaching in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I knew the girls who was there at her school, and that's when we all got together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's after the war [World War II, WWII] or was that before the war?
Speaker 2: That's after the war.
Speaker 1: Okay, after the war.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is just all just a big thing now.  And with me, to be specific, it's really difficult, it's really.
Story_ID: 545084
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman].  Now thi- in '45 [1945] you had attained the rank of captain [during World War II, WWII], you say?  Was it, was it--?  What was it?
Speaker 2: They had sent the orders in and he rescinded.
Speaker 1: Well, was that true though, tell us was that true?
Speaker 2: Truman.
Speaker 1: No, you had attained the rank of--
Speaker 2: Of captain.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'm just trying to get you to say it. Okay, all right. And--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we had gotten the orders and all and everything.  And they were getting ready to give us the captain to be put in and everything and he rescinded and said this--he just rescinded everything.  And they took back the captain things and all.
Speaker 1: The bars and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he rescinded.
Speaker 1: Now, was this done to everybody or just to blacks only (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, this was our unit.
Speaker 1: Oh, for your unit.
Speaker 2: Our 268th Station Hospital [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea] unit and the nurses of that unit.
Speaker 1: So why do you think he--
Speaker 2: And there were several of us that had gotten a promotion, and I don't know whether all the others but I know there were three of us who had been promoted to captain.  And that was the one who was head of the girl--of the unit and I was the assistant to the unit, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was the chief nurse and I was the assistant chief nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes and that's when we got the promotion, and see, and that's when he rescinded.
Speaker 1: So I take it you were not very fond of Harry Truman.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you see I knew him all before going in, with the haberdasher [Truman and Jacobson Haberdashery, Kansas City, Missouri] and everything down from our hospital [General Hospital No. 2, Kansas City, Missouri] in the red light district of the white women and everything.  And then here he was with the guy who was in charge of the mayor and all that and making us come to the voting thing.  Get us up at five o'clock in the morning and everything, and he was--I said, I just can't stand these ol' bastards.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you get out of the service?  How did you leave the service?
Speaker 2: I didn't get out of the service, I was ref- transferred to the [U.S.] Army Nurse Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were transferred to the Army Nurse Corps?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I belonged to.  And, you know, they still meet and everything, you know.
Speaker 1: Now this is nineteen six--I mean, '45 [1945]?  This is in '45?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 545085
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to come back to the states in '45 [1945]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We came back to the states.  Yeah, we got back right after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can kind of remember 'cause it was kind of late.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what did you do when you got back?
Speaker 2: I was trying to think.
Speaker 1: Is that when you were stationed at Tuskegee [Alabama] or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, I had married, that--here.
Speaker 1: Oh, now this is a story; we can't go pass that.  Now, you got married in the Pacific, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the Philippines.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened, tell us the story about how you got married?
Speaker 2: Well, the war [World War II, WWII] had ended and we were gonna be--we were gonna come back to the states.  And that's when we had the marriage before.  He wanted that we get married there and then I come on to the United States.
Speaker 1: And who was this gentleman?
Speaker 2: Lowell H. Burrell, Lowell Herndon Burrell [Lowell Burrell].
Speaker 1: Lowell Herdon Burrell.
Speaker 2: Herndon Burrell.	Yes, and that's how I was in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Now, is he a native of Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and he was in--what unit was he in?  Was he in the--
Speaker 2: He was the administrator with our unit, our 268th Station Hospital [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea].  He was one of the administrators.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask a question you might think odd but--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Was he related to [HistoryMaker] Charles Burrell, the musician, by any chance?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause we interviewed Charles Burrell in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where he is now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Burrell, he plays with the symphony and he also plays jazz, plays the bass.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Yes, I seen him on television.  Yeah, I know him, he knows me too.  Yeah, see, they're all from, from Paducah, Kentucky; that's where all their family is from.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I know all of them and the--all of them when they were first here, all the relatives here and everything, yes.  So many of the relatives were here and have died here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles-
Speaker 2: And Hugh Burrell, you know, you heard of him?  You ever heard of Hugh Burrell with the Blue Pigs here in Detroit that had a band and everything?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the family, his uncles and all of them.  Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is starting to make sense now.  The Charles Burrell I'm talking about with to Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] and played the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were all here.  Yes, yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you married Lowell Herndon Burrell--
Speaker 2: Herndon Burrell.
Speaker 1: --and I believe you married him while in--what, where were you?
Speaker 2: In the Philippines.
Speaker 1: In the Philippines--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: He was the medical administrator with us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of our hospital unit.
Story_ID: 545086
Speaker 1: And I, I believe that you carry an artifact around with you that commemorates that occasion (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there is.  There it is.
Speaker 1: And now is the time to show it I think.
Speaker 2: You want me to show it to you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just reach over.  And now, this is--it has a special significance.  And you carry this around in your purse is what I've been told.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you show it when you speak, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, let's see this.
Speaker 2: You wanna see it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did you see me take it out of the purse?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's got it on camera here, we're--.  Maybe you can explain to us what this is.
Speaker 2: A Filipino made it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the American girls with us designed it, and the Filipino made it.  Uh-oh, that's all right.
Speaker 1: So what is it?  Now, what are we looking at here?  This is--well that's--that looks pretty well designed there too, yeah.
Speaker 2: I've got to get it together here.  I have to get it together for you.  See.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.  And that's the top.
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I guess I have to say it but this is a wedding gown, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is it made out of?
Speaker 2: Out of a parachute--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --material, see.
Speaker 1: So that's ingenuity I'd say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, can you see it?  That's enough, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes mam.
Speaker 2: And you see, and I didn't bring my ring that cost fifty cents and it's pure gold with Philippines written on it, my wedding ring.
Speaker 1: So the ring only cost fifty cents in the Philippines?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Pure gold?
Speaker 2: Fifty cents, pure gold.  You ought to see it and you'll see that it's still just like it just came out.  Well, that was during the war [World War II, WWII] where the people were just getting rid of whatever they could.  I have tablecloths and everything down there in the bottom part of my drawer, for serving and everything from the Philippines.  Yes indeed, napkins and everything that are just beautiful, and I don't know what I'm gonna do with all that stuff now 'cause I don't really do a lot of entertaining anymore.  You finished with this, young man?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: And you see how that fits into a purse?
Speaker 1: Folds up pretty nice just like a parachute should.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Story_ID: 545087
Speaker 1: When you got back to the states, then--you got back to the states in '45 [1945], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you didn't--
Speaker 2: And came to Detro- we went home--I went home, to my home in Illinois.  And then my mother [Mary Nickles Burns] and one of my nieces with her, they came with me on the train here to Detroit [Michigan], you see, because we had sent money in for them to get the house that we were going to buy, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: And we had his mother to get the house for us.  And I came in and then after--and so she had to stay there, had to live in the house.  And then she was gone take over and she got mad, and we were paying on it and everything.  And she took the money 'cause I was--I had been sent down as a public health nurse down, down in southern part of Michigan, I mean, down from here.
Speaker 1: Monroe [Michigan] or--?
Speaker 2: Not Monroe.
Speaker 1: Not Battle Creek [Michigan]? You were talking about--
Speaker 2: No, no.  See, I'd been to Battle Creek.  I hadn't gone to Battle Creek then.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you said you lost your things at Fort Custer [Fort Custer Training Center, Michigan], I don't know if you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I lost all, you know, all my things but when I came here, you see, he hadn't gotten in.  They hadn't gotten in yet, and we had sent the money for the house to be bought and he had had his mother to go and get the house and make the payment and everything.  And so when I came I got everything set up.  You see, I had to come by train and my mother came with me, and so I had gotten that place all set up and everything.  And his mother, I was giving her the money to go and make the payment on it and so, therefore, she had gone and told him to redo on us, and put us out and all.  And that's why I had to go to the real estate people and everything.  And the money I had been giving her, she hadn't been using, and I had to do that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I had gotten mad with the public health nursing.
Speaker 1: So, you're saying that she was spending the money on something else instead of paying the mortgage on the house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, instead of making the payments on the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so he made contact with me, and so I got the money there to him and told him that, "I don't want her bringing anything here and that I will see that all the money comes myself."  And that's the way I did that, just--because, you see, we weren't here when all of this started.  But then when I got back here--when I got here then I had to really get all of this straightened out 'cause that's what she had done to us.  And then when she had gotten a picture and everything, I was too black.
Speaker 1: So she thought that you were too dark for him [Burrell's husband, Lowell Burrell]?  Is that what--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is something you don't hear as much now days but in those days it was--
Speaker 2: No, but they still think it, but they don't discuss it like they did then.  It didn't make them any difference to discuss it then.
Speaker 1: Well, how did he feel about that, and how did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know it made him mad at his mother doing this and everything.  And that's why he upped and goes back in the service.  Get away, we'll just get away from them.
Speaker 1: So, so you both reenlisted?
Speaker 2: He reenlisted.
Speaker 1: He reenlisted, all right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, see, I was in the Reserve [U.S. Army Reserve].  Yes, and he reenlisted.  And that's how we ended up at Fort--at all the difference places, Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and Pacific Lutheran University [Tacoma, Washington] and then Germany, and then back, and all of that.  And that's where I have done all of my nursing and working and doing different things, because we left here.  And then in 1962 or '3 [1963] is when we were back in Germany and then that's when he went into the retirement, and we came here in 1960--'60 [1960] something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's how we've been here back here ever since--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you see.  And that's when he died, you know, here and everything.
Story_ID: 545088
Speaker 1: Now you told a story before we started doing the interview about an incident that occurred out in California I think where you were teaching some nurses and the president of the school didn't want you to teach them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was Pacific Lutheran University [Tacoma, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when the president came.
Speaker 1: John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], right?
Speaker 2: John F. Kennedy, and that's when I was the only black instructor there, which made that, that professor who was in charge of that university mad.  And he would never speak to me, he would run the other way 'cause he didn't want no black instructors there.  And I was the only black instructor there.  And it was because the head of the nursing services, she had met me and she said, "And I want you to come and help me and teach these students."  And I taught and, man, those students went to the state board and made the highest scores in my class.  And they, oh, they just raved, yes indeed.  That's what God has done with me.
Story_ID: 545089
Speaker 1: When you came back to Detroit [Michigan] in the '60s [1960s] what did you do here in Detroit?
Speaker 2: I came back and then I became a healthcare analyst for the state.  And he [Burrell's husband, Lowell Burrell] was working for the VA downtown [Allen Park Veterans Administration Medical Center, Allen Park, Michigan], he was working at the VA.  And I was with, with that group when we came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so you were a healthcare analyst with the VA here, the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]?
Speaker 2: No, no, healthcare analyst.  That was with the state.
Speaker 1: Oh, for the state, for the state, yeah, for the State of Michigan.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and so
Speaker 2: You see--
Speaker 1: Did you have to travel the whole state?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, but when he went back in the service, we were at Fort Custer [Fort Custer Training Center, Michigan].  Did you get that?  When he went back in the service from here?
Speaker 1: No, what year was that or when did that, did that--?
Speaker 2: That was 19 what?  When did I finish University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota School of Public Health, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 1: That was back in the--I don't know 'cause you didn't--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You finished when you came back from the war [World War II, WWII], right?  So is that in the '50s [1950s] that you finished or?
Speaker 2: I--let's see, I was trying to think when I finished University of Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Let's see here.
Speaker 2: You see, with me I been through so many different things.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't have a note on it here but--
Speaker 2: We went to Fort Custer in 19 what, '50 [1950], 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went back to the service and we were at Fort Custer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I went back to University of Minnesota and got my degree.  Now, you got it?  Now, you see it?
Speaker 1: Okay, right, yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--did you work for the State of Michigan until you retired?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 545090
Speaker 1: Did you teach in the Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District], too?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have a note here that you taught in the public schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I was in several, too.  Did you see the schools?
Speaker 1: No, what schools did you teach at?
Speaker 2: Oh, wait a minute.  One was--it's still, it's still operating.
Speaker 1: Did you teach at kind of a pre-nursing course or preparatory course for nursing?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, yes that's what I do.  And that was at--I didn't write the schools in there?
Speaker 1: Well, they may be in your book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell].  They're probably in your book.  Okay, but you taught at several different schools then.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was this on the high school level, two high schools or?
Speaker 2: Yes, one was elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--oh, yeah, both of them were elementary.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Because the last one, reason I stopped teaching was because the last one had integrated, it was all segregated and they had integrated, and they were mad because they had black students coming in there.  And I was teaching remedial math at Goodale [Goodale Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--but that was after the other school.  Wait a minute, Goodale was the second school, Goodale.  Now the, the first school was a black school.  Oh, I can't think of the name of it now.
Speaker 1: Don't worry 'bout it right now, don't worry 'bout it right now 'cause we can--
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Goodale was where they were changing it into integrated, and the whites didn't like it at all.  And I blasted the hell out of them who were there, and told them to go to hell.  They wanted me to teach math and I left, and I went to Germany to visit (laughter).
Story_ID: 545091
Speaker 1: But you said earlier that you finished your degree from University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota School of Public Health, Minneapolis, Minnesota] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and when did you do that, was that in the '60s [1960s] or in the--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: So that was in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: I finished University of Minnesota in 1950 what--I finished University of Minnesota 'cause see I had been going to University of Minnesota.  You see that AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?
Speaker 1: Well, it's in your book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, number two is when I finished with Sister Kenny [Elizabeth Kenny], American nursing; 1943, station hospital [268th Station Hospital] in the South Pacific [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea]; Manila [Philippines], 1945 wedding, and then I married, and then I was at Ecorse [Michigan] and Wyandotte [Michigan] where I opened up nursing.  And, see, where I got all of this listed here.  And went back to Fort Custer [Fort Custer Training Center, Michigan] and Battle Creek [Michigan], 1951, University of Minnesota is when I graduated from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951], I graduated from University of Minnesota and went to Aberdeen Proving Grounds [Aberdeen Proving Ground, Aberdeen, Maryland] in--and that was over from Washington, D.C., Maryland, Aberdeen Proving Grounds.  You ever heard of that?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Aberdeen Proving Grounds and when I left there I went to Hanau, Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in--when did you go to Hanau?
Speaker 2: When I left 1952 and I went to--graduated Aberdeen Proving Ground, so that was in 1950 something.
Story_ID: 545092
Speaker 1: How did you get the idea for your book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell]?
Speaker 2: I was, was with the state as a healthcare analyst sitting in the office and I said, I think I'll write a book about my life and let the people know what I have been through, and that's when I started writing.  And that was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I was a healthcare analyst with the state going all over the state, had a state car, driving a state car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a black male RN [registered nurse], and he was outrageous with his ol' crazy butt self, and me.  We were the only two blacks with the whole unit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--what would you do as--?
Speaker 2: We were to check these places where they had patients that they took care of, in the various places where they had for them to come and get treatments and treatment and everything.
Speaker 1: These are clinics, nursing homes and such?
Speaker 2: Yes, nursing homes and clinics and all, yes.
Speaker 1: So you'd either make a recommendation that they were all right or some recommendation for them to change something?
Speaker 2: Yes, and all and whatever.  Yes, and this was all over the State of Michigan, which a lot of them are closed now.  And they have lot of [U.S.] Army men, you know, and women too, you know, in these places.  And up at Fort Custer, Michigan [Fort Custer Training Center, Michigan] and Battle Creek, Michigan, yes.  Yeah, the [U.S.] Army Nurse Corps, I mean, not Army Nurse Corps--what do you call it--what do they call the Army hospitals?
Speaker 1: The VA hospitals [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]?
Speaker 2: VA hospitals and all.
Speaker 1: VA hospitals, too.
Speaker 2: That's what all this was about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So the healthcare analyst--okay, you covered VA hospitals, nursing homes, clinics all over the state (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, all over the whole State of Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 545093
Speaker 1: So you conceived of the idea for the book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell] in the 1980s and so, so it was finally published?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how's the reaction to the book been, how have people reacted to the book?
Speaker 2: My book is all over the world.  And they--and I have thousands and thousands of the book have gone and they been contacting me from Hollywood about doing the movie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they have the books and all.  And that ol' heifer that has the women; she never did anything about my book.  The one with the women, you know her.  And now she's getting all these students in Africa things and everything.
Speaker 1: Oh, Oprah Winfrey.
Speaker 2: Yes, Oprah.  And I remember when Oprah was pregnant and came to her father [Vernon Winfrey] there in Paducah, Kentucky and everything.  I remember all of that; I was there then too.  Oprah, and when they sent her my book--one of the white girls sent her my book--and she's never done anything.  And somebody else sent another book to her and she just never said nothing about me, never, never done anything about that book.  She's talked to others of course, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 545094
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it over again?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would stop cussing people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Of the black community today?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community of Detroit [Michigan] and for the black community nationally?
Speaker 2: That they think in terms of people as human beings regardless to color.  And treat them as human beings and all of this wherever if they have any difference.  I don't really involve too much differences now, because I have been invited to speak in different places and I've had several whites that have had me to come where they didn't have anyone else speaking but me.  And there is a big store here that the guy is--what do you call the ones who is attorney and all--of this school, and they send and buy all over the world and send it all around.  You ever heard of them here in Michigan?
Speaker 1: I don't know--I'm not sure what you're talking about.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, you're not from here that's right.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And they have had me to come and speak--his wife is a nurse and the televisions have had me to come and speak.  Both of your--the papers here people have had me to come, you know, the regular newspapers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the news.
Speaker 2: They've had me at their offices to come and speak.  And this particular office where they had me to come and speak, they have some of everything.  It's a regular--with European and with all of the different countries, and all.  And they've had me as a speaker, and they just send me everything.
Story_ID: 545095
Speaker 1: Now do you--do you have a--when you look back on everything you've done to this point, do you--what today in 2007 would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  That I have been, I have been checked, interviewed and talked with a lot of people that really think much of me, and they have done a whole lot to make me really outstanding throughout the world.  And I still hear from people throughout the different world.  From Germany and from Australia, all the different areas, they are still writing to me.  And I have worked in all those different countries.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they've been here to visit, and one will be here--was here last year at my birthday and will be back again this year from Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 545096
Speaker 1: Now, who, who is part of your family now?  Do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't have any children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now I am nursing my brother who is in the rehab house just down here off of Jefferson [Avenue] where they have a lot of patients that need care, and taking care of them, and feeding them, food for them and everything, bathing and everything.  And that's where my brother is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is he the last member of your family?
Speaker 2: Do what?
Speaker 1: Is he the last surviving member of your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because my sister [Inez Talley] just died and so there's just the three of us left, two brothers [Allie Burns and Lionel Burns] and myself, three of us out of the eight, eight or nine that she had.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything I have not asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask you my last question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.  I don't think--I have talked so until I have talked about everything.
Story_ID: 545097
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person that tried to treat people right and as I would like for them to treat me.  And I would like for them to overlook my cursing and think in terms of that I still think a lot of them and all, that I have been in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for spending the time with us.
Story_ID: 545098
Speaker 1: That's Prudence Burns Burrell [HistoryMaker Prudence Burrell].  I was an Army nurse [U.S. Army Nurse Corps].
Speaker 2: Was it the 1940s?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I'm now in the Reserve [U.S. Army Reserve], Army Nurse Corps.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, but right at this point, at this juncture in this uniform are you a lieutenant?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: All right, first lieutenant?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Those are the soldiers that were working in different areas.  And I had been teaching them so they had me to come and lecture to them, and that's why that picture was taken.  And their parents sent me so many gifts after teaching their sons and even sent me whiskey and loaves of bread.
Speaker 1: That says Sydney, Australia, the opera house [Sydney Opera House].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the opera house.
Speaker 1: Looks like the '60s [1960s], right.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's the opera house.
Speaker 1: Did you go back to Sydney to see (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When I went back to visit, and that was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s], okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause they had just opened it up, that was new.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: All the Kansas City General Hospital No. 2 graduates who had gone into the service.  All the graduates from Kanas City General Hospital No. 2 [Kansas City, Missouri], gone into the service.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I was teaching the nurses how to operate that machine at the university when I was teaching there at Pacific Lutheran University [Tacoma, Washington].  And I was--those were two students and I was one of the instructors.  And I was the one and only Afro-American instructor that made the head doctor of the university angry.  He didn't want any blacks in there.
Speaker 1: And that is the very same person that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] hugged (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, John F. Kennedy hugged me.
Speaker 1: Oh, I now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: And that's at the school in San Francisco, that I was teaching those students, future nurses club.  And I had the future nurses club pins that I was gonna give them.  And one of the male students said, "I'm not gonna come there where they have just the nurses."  I said, "Well, I'm gonna have male nurses coming too," and that's why that little boy there came in at the high school in San Francisco, California.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: I was stationed in Hanau, Germany as a nurse and they had the summer sessions, they said that we could visit the other countries.  And that's when I went with some of the other students, right there, and that's where I went to visit there.
Speaker 2: So you were at Cairo, Egypt?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, at Giza.
Speaker 1: Did I say?
Speaker 2: Giza Plateau [Giza, Egypt], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did I--
Speaker 2: I'm just asking. Giza Plateau.
Speaker 1: And that was in Cairo, Egypt.
Speaker 2: About what year is this, do you think?  Fifties [1950s] or '60s [1960s] or what?
Speaker 1: I would say that was in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That's President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] who was the--in charge of the sessions that they had, and they had, had me as one of the speakers from the nursing area.  And, boy, he was thrilled to see me.  You can see where he's shaking my hand and all, and he was so thrilled that this Army nurse, ex-Army nurse had come to speak.  And that was at the sessions that they have of the veterans and all coming in from different countries and different areas.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That's the book ['Hathaway,' Prudence Burns Burrell] that I had written when I was with the healthcare analyst with the state [Michigan], and I would go in my office and sit until we were ready to go to another area and check the different facilities.  And I decided that I would write my life so that people would know some of the things that I had been through and what I had done myself during my lifetime.  And that is what that is.  And Hathaway is my middle name, and I had used Loretta Young and had used Loretta because I had admired her as a movie gal.  But they said, "Put your full name, don't be using anybody else's name."  And that's when I brought into my Hathaway that's in the Bible and all, where I was named when I was born, Prudence Hathaway Burns.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of being in the Army.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Somebody being operated on looks like.
Speaker 1: That is up in Milne Bay, New Guinea [Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea] and that was our hospital unit and that was my unit, and those two girls were from the surgical place where they had done some surgery on him.  And that's why they came in order to check him to see how he was doing and had me to show, because that's my ward that I had up in New Guinea.  And I went in, and those two girls now are dead already.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: And that is the nurses that were assigned to the schools up in Washington, and they had asked me to come and join them.  And I was the only Afro-American you see.  And we were all nurses up there in the area of that place of--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, how bout you and the koala?
Speaker 1: That's a koala bear, holding the koala bear.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's where you're looking at the birds in that area over there.  And this is a group of--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's one of the--
Speaker 2: Kangaroo or a wallaby (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) wallaby walking down there with them.  And that was in Australia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When were you there?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was this the same trip where we saw the opera house?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had gone to visit.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: I had been stationed there and this was after my--after the war [World War II, WWII] when I went back to visit is what you see now.
Speaker 2: Those girls are now teachers, one's a teacher and another one's a nurse.  And that's their mother who is a nurse.  And that's when they were born then when I went back there to visit in 1970 some odd.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So the mother was one of your students?
Speaker 2: No, no, that was just of a family that I knew there.  That I got there to see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's when they were saluting 'cause they saw how we did.  And those are children that lived there, and that's their mother that you see walking there with them and all.
Speaker 1: And that's the mother with them and was telling them to look at those girls coming here visiting.  That's the families that lived up in Milne Bay, New Guinea.
Speaker 2: Did you know his mother?
Speaker 1: His mother and all, I taught at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] before when he [Lionel Richie] was a little boy and I used to bathe him and change his clothes, when he was a baby boy when I taught at Tuskegee.  And now he's a singer so he sees me quite often whenever he's around and he was just here and announced me at the--a place where he was singing and wanted all the people to see Prudence Burrell.  My little ol' godmother, he stated.  "She's been since I was little boy," he announced.  And that was just about several months ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: And he wanted me to bring that and put in his magazine where he puts a lot of people and all.  He's from California, have you met him?
Speaker 2: (Unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
