Story_ID: 278454
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Wayne Baker Brooks, W-A-Y-N-E, B-A-K-E-R, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have any nicknames or anything that you are called?
Speaker 2: A band back in the '90s [1990s] used to call me Big Daddy.  (Laughter)  I just go by Wayne, I like Wayne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just Plain Wayne, Insane Wayne, whatever they want to call me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  04/30/1970 [April 30, 1970], in Chicago, Illinois, Cook County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Musician.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you're a blues musician basically, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 17, 2005 [sic. August 16, 2005].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at [The] HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 278455
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they make me ask everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm a vegetarian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But is there a favorite food in that context?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, like, I guess vegetables (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, blue is my favorite color. Love blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't get to vacation that much.  But I do like New Orleans [Louisiana], Memphis [Tennessee], and Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have to think about it, because it probably just rolls out naturally.  When I'm on stage, it probably just rolls out.  But not really.  I mean, let's see--not really.  That's, I got to think about that one.  I have to think about that one.
Story_ID: 278456
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, Jeannine M. Baker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What does the M stand for?
Speaker 2: Marie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 26, 1941, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that her, I think her great-grandmother is from Portugal.  Her great-grandfather was a shoemaker in Portugal.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they came to--
Speaker 2: I wish I knew, I wish I knew.  We're trying to find out all that information right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you know they were from Portugal?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her father [Joseph Broussard]--my, her mother [Lorraine Broussard Owens] was part Portuguese, and her father was Creole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, her mother was part Portuguese?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the other part?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, probably European.
Speaker 1: Okay, some other European group other than Portuguese?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But Creole, I guess; it's black and French.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So her father was black and French (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black and French, Broussard.
Speaker 1: And her mother was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was European?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, her father's name was Broussard?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was from Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about your grandfather and grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, because you know, they separated when my mom and the others were little.  So, she really don't know.  She's trying to find out right now.  She's like sixty-five or sixty-six, and she's--sixty-four, and she's trying to find out now.  So when she knows, I will know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she's doing some research on them.  Did she have any stories about growing up?  Did she grow up in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, she grew up in Chicago all her life.  She's been here all her life.  There're not too many stories from my mom's side, it's mostly from my dad.  My dad was the one who would, you know, tell us stories about, you know, Louisiana and his mom [Lillie Baker] and dad [Lee Baker, Sr.] and his, you know, grandfather.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to get to him.  I just wanted to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but my mom, she, you know, she never spoke of our grandfather much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when she did, it was like, you know, "I don't know who he is."
Story_ID: 278457
Speaker 1: What neighborhood was she [Brooks' mother, Jeannine Broussard Baker] raised in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, man; I'm really not sure.  I would love to know this, stuff. I'm glad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what school did she go to?  Did she ever tell you what school she went to?
Speaker 2: No.  All I know is my mom used to--you know, she used to work for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service].  And she was a nurse; she would tell us stories about when she was a nurse.  But my mom worked hard all her life.  Man, she, I mean, you know she--growing up, we barely saw my mom that much, because she would be at work all the time.  And Dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] would like babysit us during the day, and then he would go off to work at night.  So, my mom, she was the staple.  She, you know, she worked.  She would make sure that we were fed, you know, and clothed, with six children in the house.  You know, while Dad was out of town working or something like that, she was pretty much, you know, working a lot.  So it's hard to--by the time she came home, we would finish our homework, you know, and have to go to sleep.  You know, so it wasn't--she would cook, you know, and we would eat.  And there wasn't much she would share, except for what when on at the job.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know where she went to school?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't think she graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But if she worked for the IRS and was a nurse.  So, she had education from somewhere, I mean, you know, to be able to function in those capacities.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  I think it was more of, you know, she came in as an apprentice or whatever, and moved up.  But I have no clue, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she didn't have any stories about any of that, any of her growing-up days?  Does she have a story about how she met your father?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her best friend, Barbara [ph.], used to talk about this great guitar player that played on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] a lot, and that she wanted to take her out.  And Mom didn't go out.  She didn't drink.  She, you know, used to smoke, but she didn't drink.  And she went to go see this guy, and they were introduced each other.  And it was back in, I think 1959.  And she went to go see him as Guitar Junior, and they met.  And my dad asked her if she wanted something to drink, and she was like, "Oh, no, I don't drink."  And he was like, "Well, how about a Coca-Cola?"  He, you know, kept pressing, you know, that he wanted to, you know, spend his time with her at that moment.  And she was like, you know, blowing him off at first.  And then eventually, you know, they went out dating.  They met at one of his shows.
Story_ID: 278458
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lee Baker, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he's popularly known as?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Brooks.
Speaker 1: Lonnie Brooks, right.  Okay.  So, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 18, 1933.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know he used to mention his mother's [Lillie Baker] father was a banjo player.  I think his name was Henry Jackson, I believe, if I'm mistaken.  I have all that information there.  But he used to play banjo.  My dad's dad [Lee Baker, Sr.] was a sharecropper, and him and my grandmother met.  He was born in 1911, my grandfather, 1911 in Louisiana, in Dubuisson, the same town as my dad.  And my grandmother was born in 1918.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what was the name of the town?
Speaker 2: Dubuisson, D-U-B-U-I-S-S-ON.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  And so, now there's some--your father, we interviewed your father, as you already know, sometime ago.  And he had a lot of stories about Henry Jackson, his grandfather.  Are there any stories that you remember that your father has told you about Henry Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of the time it's about how he turned him on to music, you know, and how he wanted to learn how to play the banjo.  But the banjo was so hard, that when his uncle--well, he had his uncle come around, and he would play guitar.  So, he would learn how to play the guitar instead of the banjo.  But his grandfather would introduce him to it, to music, to that sound, to that banjo sound.
Speaker 1: Now if I'm not mistaken, now this grandfather, he was a strong man or something, too, right in shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about what you know about that?
Speaker 2: Well, my granddaddy, I remember my granddaddy.  You know, I actually probably met him when I was a baby.  The second time I was grown; I was probably like twenty years old.  And then the third time was seeing him at the hospital while he was passing.  But I was there for probably like two weeks.  And he was strong.  And he was funny.  He could tell a joke in a minute, and he would trick you in a minute.  You know, he was funny, you know, but he was also strong.  Yeah, he was a hard worker, worked all his life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I think he used to take your father around with him to play, when he would play gigs and so forth, you know, on the weekends.
Speaker 2: I don't remember my dad telling me that, but I remember my dad telling me that they would be on the porch playing.  And he would playing songs and, you know, on holidays, you know, he'd get the jug out and start playing around.  (Laughter) And you know, my grandma was like, "Oh, that's devil's music," and all this.  She didn't really want my dad to be into the music, you know, at all, because if it wasn't gospel, it wasn't nothing.  And you know, my dad would secretly, you know, learn how to play the guitar without my mom or my grandma knowing.  So, I don't know.  My great-grandfather is the, I call him the root; he's the root.  My dad's the tree, and me and my brother [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks] are the branches.
Story_ID: 278459
Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most, what parts (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably both.  You know, because my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] is more laid back, you know, and quiet, in the cut, helpful.  My dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] is more outgoing, you know.  So, I'm like kind of both.  I was, I was really shy; I was more like my mom before I started playing music.  When I started playing music, that's when my dad started coming out of me.
Story_ID: 278460
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest is--yeah, being--I think probably at the age of three, you know, watching my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] play guitar.  That's probably the earliest.  Then I used to--you know, my dad used to be like, you know, the housewife.  (Laughter) When my mom [Jeannine Broussard Baker] would go out and work, he'd be there, you know, because he was a musician and he played at night.  So, he would take care of us.  So we would be at the house, you know, right along with him, you know, before Head Start.  So you know, he would be playing, writing songs, and watching us.  You know, he's got his Albert King going, got his Bobby Bland going, you know, whatever song he was learning or whatever song he was writing.  You know, that's my earliest memory.  That's what, that's what probably the first that comes to mind, is him taking care of us, and listening to him play.
Story_ID: 278461
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood and tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as I remember, we were on 50th [Place] and Forrestville [Avenue].  So it was like 546 East 50th Place, which is by Provident Hospital [John Sengstacke Health Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And where the residential building is for the doctors, where they stay, the residents, that's where our building was.  So, I remember being in the neighborhood.  You know, it was lot of vacant lots, so we'd play a lot of softball and baseball, and strikeout on the building.  But if you go like to Lawrence, and if you go north a block--
Speaker 1: St. Lawrence [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, St. Lawrence.  If you go north a block, and then if you would like go east on that block, there was this alley in between these buildings.  It was like a short alley where everybody hung out, as far as playing music, doing you know, like juggling tricks.  I mean just all kind of--I mean it was just like a party like every weekend at that alley.  It was like right around the corner.  And they would have like a little mini-parade, you know, coming down the block to celebrate, you know, celebrate that alley.  But there was a lot of blues going on, and there was a lot of R&B going on.  But it was mostly blues.
Speaker 1: You mean people would play live there?
Speaker 2: People--I mean it was like a party from one end of the--you know, there'd be somebody jamming.  There'd be like four or five guys jamming, you know, sitting down jamming.  And then on the, like probably at the other end you probably had somebody playing music--records, you know, radio, or whatever.  But it was like, it was like probably sixty or seventy people there, you know, probably hundreds during the week, weekday, I mean weekend. But you know, that's one of my earliest memories about the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this went on like just on the weekends?  Or--
Speaker 2: I think it was, yeah, I think it was just the weekends.  I think it was mostly like early--and it would start early.  It would be like, you know, early Saturday.  You know, early Saturday morning you wake up and everybody's out there just jamming and partying.
Speaker 1: So, were there a lot of musicians who lived in the neighborhood?  Was that it?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you, I couldn't tell you.  I didn't know any of them, except for the people that, you know, lived on my block.  So, it was like a mixture of a lot of neighborhoods coming into this one alley.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] play in these--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't even think he remembers that.  Yeah, I really don't.  I know [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] would probably remember that.  But man, you're bringing back memories, boy, that I hadn't even thought about in ages.
Speaker 1: Well, was anybody famous out there?  Or just people who--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't know, man.  I was a kid, like four or five, six or seven, you know probably up--.  We moved from there when I was probably like ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was mostly the blues being played?
Speaker 2: Mostly blues, R&B, you know, whatever was going on at that time in the '70s [1970s], you know.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, right at--it would be right at--you say between St. Lawrence and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay, so St. Lawrence--all right, Forrestville, St. Lawrence, and then 50th.  So it would be 50th, in between 50th and St. Lawrence.  And I can't remember what block that was.  But it would be like that alley going north and south.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember it well.  I remember the parades, and I remember they had animals.  You know, it was like a parade.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, now wait a minute.  This is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: So, every weekend they would have--
Speaker 2: Just about every weekend in the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 278462
Speaker 1: And there'd be--now you're not talking about one of our, you know, typical Chicago [Illinois]--I mean--
Speaker 2: Not the Bud Billiken Parade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We have the Bud Billiken Day Parade and that sort of thing.  But a parade--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, this is like 50th.  This is like 50th Street, and like I said, St. Lawrence [Avenue].  I mean, Bud Billiken was on [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm talking about this--you know, that's like a few blocks away.  You would have to walk far enough to come to this one alley, you know.  But this was like every weekend.
Speaker 1: Would you have like drum and bugle corps, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Drums, I mean all kind of stuff, all kind of stuff.  It was just like a big party.  (Laughter) I was four or five years old, it was intriguing.  I would go to the store and buy candy and, you know, dance around.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] was like, you know, right across the street from us.  So, you know, we would see the Bud Billiken Parade.  And I remember one year we saw Prince there at Washington Park.  Is that just the neighborhood, or is it just as a kid, you're asking me?
Speaker 1: Well, it's not just restricted to the neighborhood, but--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds of growing up, I mean it could be any--
Speaker 2: You know, I went to festivals with my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], the ChicagoFest, you know, on Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois].  My dad took us to quite a few places where he would play, you know, like the Mill Run [Playhouse, Niles, Illinois].  I remember a festival downtown somewhere that had like Koko Taylor, Luther Allison, and [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Brooks, at the Limelight [Excalibur/Vision, Chicago, Illinois], and a private party for Mayor [Harold] Washington.  You know, it was Buddy Guy, Junior Wells, and Koko Taylor opening up for Lonnie Brooks, and you know, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So, you'd have been about thirteen then, right, when that was going on?
Speaker 2: Probably a little younger, probably twelve or eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Chicago--you know, the Chicago Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival], the Wise Fools, Wise Fools Pub [Chicago, Illinois], you know, I remember going there a couple of times.  I remember actually doing a commercial there with my dad playing the drums, and [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] was playing the guitar.  You know, I think it was for NBC.  You know, my memories were more of school and music.  You know, school, you know, we would have the required classes.  I went to Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois], which was on King Drive as well.  But as far as, you know, sights and sounds around the house, it was mostly Dad and his music.
Story_ID: 278463
Speaker 1: Now you were saying off-camera before we started that you didn't know it at the time that a lot of--you started to realize that a lot of the people that were your father's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] friends were making records, and they were, you know, important musicians.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like [HistoryMaker] Eddy Clearwater.  He would come over, you know, after he'd just got done pressing a record.  He would come over to the house, "Lonnie, listen to this."  And you know, I would be right there, and I was like eleven or twelve.  And you know, Hubert Sumlin would come by the house, Koko [Taylor].  Who else?  Wayne Bennett, Bobby Bland.  Who else?  So, there were quite a few people that, you know, that I probably should mention.  But those are the ones that stick out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were growing up, you had, you had access to all these blues musicians.  Now, were there any other kinds of musicians that were friends of your father's that came by?  Or was it all blues?
Speaker 2: It was pretty much all blues, yeah, pretty much all blues.
Speaker 1: So you were getting, would you say that you were getting sort of an education in who the blues musicians were, from just being around your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much.  You know, he was the one that introduced me to all the blues, period.  You know, I would listen to, you know, the radio as a kid, you know.  It would be Parliament [Funkadelic], you know, Earth Wind and Fire, the Rolling Stones, you know, Bob Dylan, you know, on the radio.  And James Brown of course, and Chuck Berry.  Those were the popular songs on the radio, you know, that I would listen to.  But when it came down to blues, you know, I would listen to, you know like my dad's stuff, like Magic Sam, Albert King, [HistoryMaker] B.B. King, Otis Rush, you know.  Those were the people that I was introduced to through his catalog of music that he would listen to.  So when he was gone out on the road, you know, we would play--I remember me and [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] would play that 'Blues Deluxe' album that was recorded at the ChicagoFest that, you know, my dad took us to.  You know, I had no clue that they were recording.  You know, I was just watching my dad, you know, do his thing.  But when I, I was like, "Oh, I was there, we were there."  And we listened, you know, to Sonny Seals [Steele "Sonny" Seals], and Willie Dixon, and Muddy Waters.  That was probably the first time that I met Muddy Waters and Johnny Winter.  And that was first time that I was introduced to Muddy Waters' music, was from that 'Blues Deluxe' CD he did back in nineteen, I think, I want to say '78 [1978] or '80 [1980].
Story_ID: 278464
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young man growing up?  I mean, what were you like personality-wise, and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I used to love to play any kind of ball, which was football, basketball, baseball, strike-out.  We used to play, we'd play strike-out on the building across the street from us.  And there was always this Arab guy, we used to call him Swanee, and he would run us away all the time. (Sounds) And then everybody would break, you know, just go.  But we'd keep playing, you know, and just keep--every day, and having him chase us every day.  And you know, little kid stuff, you know, like hide-and-seek, you know, Ring Around the Rosie, you know.  But it was mostly basketball that caught my attention.  From probably eleven years old up until nineteen, I played a lot of basketball in my life.
Speaker 1: Did you play in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] or in--
Speaker 2: No, we played softball in Washington Park, right where Dyett [Walter H. Dyett High School; Walter H. Dyett High School for the Arts, Chicago, Illinois] was, right across the street.  So we would go to the camp, the day camp there and go swimming.  That was another, you know, thing that I liked to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and for those who are not familiar with Chicago [Illinois], when we talk about Washington Park, we're talking a huge park.
Speaker 2: Huge, huge.
Speaker 1: It takes up like, you know, lots of acreage with a lot of recreational--I mean Dyett School had an Olympic size pool, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly.
Speaker 1: --a big basketball court.  I mean, and people played soccer out in Washington Park.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I have never seen that; I've seen mostly softball.  And we'd have like tournaments.  We'd have different names and people would, you know, have like, you know, the name of their team and the name on their back, you know.
Speaker 1: Softball?
Speaker 2: Softball, it was mostly softball that I can remember.  You know, like I said, it was across the street from Provident [Hospital; John Sengstake Health Center, Chicago, Illinois], so it would be that space between Dyett and the easement on 51st Street.  And you know, we'd play right there.
Speaker 1: We're talking a park the size of say Central Park in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a huge park.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It goes on and on for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I remember Washington Park well.  That's where all the festivities would end after the Bud Billiken Parade.  Everybody would end up in Washington Park.  But mostly, you know, I played basketball.
Story_ID: 278465
Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now this is a Catholic school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where is Corpus Christi?
Speaker 2: 49th [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  How did you like Corpus Christi?
Speaker 2: I liked it.  It was very small, it was a private school.  You know, my brothers, my brother--Denise [Baker] and my brothers Russell [Baker] and [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] went there.  So, pretty much everybody knew the Bakers, the Baker Brooks, you know.  But you know, it was a decent school.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject or teacher?
Speaker 2: Mr. Allen [ph.], that was my eighth grade teacher.  And it was math at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you--so you liked math in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And why was Mr. Allen your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Because he was, he was the coolest teacher there, but he was also, you know, he was a disciplinarian as well.  You know, he didn't take no mess, but if you did good, he was cool.  That's why.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you play an instrument in grade school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I remember messing around with the flute, and I didn't like it.  You know, it was like, you know, picking which instrument you wanted, and I ended up with the flute.  And I didn't like it, so--
Speaker 1: It's kind of, unlike playing the guitar (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 278466
Speaker 1: --I loved, well, I loved to play the drums.  I used to bang on--as a kid, you know, my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] would write songs.  And he would have me on pots and pans with spoons and boxes.  And he would, you know, tell me what beat to play.  So, I would play that beat on the boxes and pots and pans.  And he would have my brother [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] play bass lines on the guitar.  So, while he was writing songs--these were demos like what he would send to, you know, record companies and stuff, reels.  And he would say, you know, "Stay right there.  You know, don't move, you know, just keep it right there.  Tell Ronnie don't move, you know."  And he'd like, you know, be singing and playing.  And you know, he'd come with up these lyrics and then he's like, "All right, I want y'all to change it up a little bit."  So he'd teach us the change, and then he'd tell us to go back to the beginning, you know, and then when you get to this part, change.  That's pretty much--you know the drums is what really caught my ear in all music.  You know, I used to love the drums.  I used to always want a good set of drums.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you, how old were you before you actually got a real instrument to play?  I mean a set of drums or a guitar?
Speaker 1: Well, my dad got me, he got me like a half set.  I mean it was like, you know, bass drums, a snare with no snare in it (laughter), a tom and a floor tom.  And I would bang on the bass drum and the floor tom the most, and the one cymbal.  So I was trying to make music, and there wasn't enough to make music, but I was trying.  And then when I turned twenty, that's when I first got my guitar.
Speaker 2: Now that long?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That long, okay.
Speaker 1: But I would--
Speaker 2: Had you--
Speaker 1: I would play my dad's guitars.  You know, I would mess around--when I first got my own guitar I was twenty.
Speaker 2: Now when did you start learning how to play the guitar, do you remember?
Speaker 1: Nineteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you hadn't had any lessons on the guitar until you were nineteen?
Speaker 1: No.  I went to, I went to a class, a private instructor for like one week.
Speaker 2: And that was it?
Speaker 1: That was it.  Yeah, I just, you know, I was like--you know, it was expensive, and I felt that, you know, that I could teach myself.  And I did.
Speaker 2: Now your father, he talks about a similar kind of case, where he was kind of informally taught.  And he used to practice--there was a Clifton Chenier who discovered him?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, Clifton Chenier discovered him on his porch.  He was banging around, and you know, this Cadillac pulled up and it was Clifton.  And he was there for a while listening.  And you know, he was like, "Who you play with?"  You know, and he was like, "Nobody."  "Why don't you come and play for me?"  "I can't play."  "Oh, you can play."  And he ended up joining his band, and he showed him everything.  But I pretty much, I took tapes.  At the time, it was tapes.  And I would have a tape recorder, and whoever I liked at the time--you know it would be Muddy Waters, [HistoryMaker] B.B. King, Freddie King, Albert King, Albert Collins--whoever it was, you know, I would be on for eighteen hours a day with that tape recorder.  I would start off with one, you know, the intro, and I'd keep rewinding that until I got it.  You know, I would get headphones and put it up to my guitar so I could see if I'm playing the right chord or note, or.  But I pretty much taught myself, man, and I dug in for eighteen hours a day for a long time, for a long time.
Story_ID: 278467
Speaker 1: Now, the popular music in that generation was funk, I would guess.  I mean that was the heyday for funk music, you know. And disco, I mean disco and funk--
Speaker 2: In '89 [1989] when I graduated?
Speaker 1: No, not then.  I'm talking about when you were a kid.  I'm going--I'm still in grade school [Corpus Christi School, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm talking about when you were in grade school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I mean when you were growing up, you know.  But you heard a lot of blues that most people, a lot of people didn't hear, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: --at your age.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Did you ever, did you take note of that then?  I mean did you ever think about that then, I mean that you would hear music that other kids didn't?
Speaker 2: Actually, man, I remember in the second grade, and you know, my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks]--I think was that second grade?  Yeah, I think it was second, maybe third grade.  And my dad had just released 'Bayou Lightning.'  And I remember taking that to class and showing everybody.  And they used to have, you know, like a record player, you know.  So I would bring that, and the Sugarhill Gang to class.  And I was--because I would bring records like to class to play, I was like the one that would like, you know, discipline the kids.  Like, "All right, y'all be quiet, or we won't be listening to the Sugarhill Gang."  You know, or "We won't listen to my dad," you know.  Or, you know--so the teacher would literally like, "[HistoryMaker] Wayne [Baker Brooks], you better get them to shut up, if they want to listen to, you know, to the record player."  You know, and I remember playing these albums as a kid in the second grade for these children, man, that had no clue who Lonnie Brooks was.  But they knew then who he was, and they liked the music.  Then right along, I would play Sugarhill, "Hip, hop, the hippy to the hippity, hip hop, the hop, you don't stop."  And they would love that.  I would play it four or five times a day, and I would keep the whole class quiet just for that, just for that.  (Laughter)  But you know, grade school, you know, I was pretty much proud of my dad in grade school.  I would bring, like I said, I would bring the albums, you know.  I wasn't really musically inclined at the time, but you know, I would, you know, listen or bring records and play records and play the CD, I mean radio player.  So, that's pretty much my childhood, as far as music.  We used to take music classes, but it was mostly singing.
Speaker 1: In grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was mostly singing, and it was mostly, you know, choir stuff, you know, no funk.  Like, you know, I would listen--like I said, you know, I would listen to Parliament [Funkadelic], Earth Wind and Fire, James Brown, whatever was popular on the radio at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--so when you were growing up, did you have--we know now--I mean Chicago [Illinois] is the center for the blues.  There's probably more blues musicians in Chicago now than anyplace in the country, you know, that actually live here and work out of here and make records here, and then tour all over the world from here.  But did you have any sense at the time that you were kind of experiencing something unique, you know, by being exposed to all of that here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: In grade school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you have any sense of--because I know you had to be different from other kids.  Because a lot of kids now, it causes, I guess some--I mean a lot of musicians and older people that know about blues and jazz and other forms of music feel like there's a loss in terms of the other generation, because they really don't want to hear anything but rap, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In those days, you know, a lot of kids, you know, just listened to disco or funk music.  They didn't have a sense of necessarily what blues was about.  I mean some did, but you know, I think it's even worse, you know, in terms of music education.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think that as a kid I was more into that thinking.  It was more of--you know, my dad can play the guitar.  That's what it was more about, and being proud of him.  I think that's what it was more about.  I didn't, I didn't realize what was going on as a kid.  That's why I'm like--you're asking me these questions, and I'm like, wow, you know, I should have been more prepared.  But you know, as a kid, you don't think about stuff like that.
Story_ID: 278468
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, I mean, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Mendel Catholic [High School, Chicago, Illinois] for one year, 1985.  Well, 1984 to 1985.  And then transferred out of Mendel Catholic  to Percy L. Julian [High School, Chicago, Illinois] in my sophomore year, and that's where I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went from Catholic school to public school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you, how did you like Julian?  Was that, did you like it better or less than Mendel?
Speaker 2: I liked it more, because of the girls.  (Laughter) Mendel was an all-boys school.  (Laughter) I got to be honest.  I liked it more, plus it was right down the street.  You know, it was like right down the street from where we lived.  It was co-ed.  A lot of my friends, you know, a lot of my friends didn't go to Catholic school or go to Mendel.  You know, they went to Julian or Morgan Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So you know, I got a chance to, you know, hang out with more of my friends in that time period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And play some basketball and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there until '88 [1988], 1988?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was 1988.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in--did you play basketball on a team or anything?  Or did you just--
Speaker 2: I tried, I tried out for Mendel Catholic, and didn't make it.  But I was actually a freshman.  But I tried out for the varsity, you know.  I just, I wanted, you know, I told the coach I wanted to play.  And after I didn't make it, I tried out for Percy L. Julian.  And I was a sophomore playing, but I got hurt.  And my junior year--
Speaker 1: What did you hurt?
Speaker 2: My ankle.  I broke the same ankle twice in two years.  So in my sophomore year I got hurt, in my junior year I got hurt, and in my senior year I just said forget it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, did you run for class office, or were you involved in any clubs in high school, or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So what did you do with most of your spare time in high school?
Speaker 2: I played basketball, you know, when I was able to walk.  But it wasn't for the team, you know.  I used to have a little frat in high school, you know, buddies.  We'd go to a lot of games.  You know, a lot of my friends were, you know, on the sports teams, you know, basketball and football.  So you know, we would go to all the games and parties, you know, house parties.  But you know, nothing musical.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were in high school, did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, to be honest, I couldn't wait to get out of school; I couldn't wait, I couldn't wait.  I wanted to do something, you know, with my--you know, like roofing, I did roofing.  And after I graduated I did carpentry, you know, and cutting down trees and stuff.  You know, I wanted to go to college, but I knew that, you know, I would struggle.
Speaker 1: Now did you have, did you struggle in high school?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: A little bit.  You know, my favorite, my favorite high school class was English.  I got, you know, A's and Bs in English.  And you know science was, you know, a nice class for me, I liked science.  But everything else--math got harder for me.  Everything else, it was like, you know, I struggled with it.  I was, you know, I was an honor roll student in Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois].  In high school, stuff just got real, real hard for me.
Story_ID: 278469
Speaker 1: Now what, what did you--did you project when you were in high school that--well, you said you didn't think you were going to go to college.  Now you kind of wanted to, but you didn't--
Speaker 2: I wanted to, but I, you know, I always thought that I was going to go to college off of a basketball scholarship.  That's what I always thought, but it didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were on the verge of graduation [from Percy L. Julian High School, Chicago, Illinois], what did you think that you would do for a living?
Speaker 2: I had no clue, man.  I just wanted to work. And that's one thing about me, I don't mind working.  I love to work, you know, especially with the profession that I'm in now.  I'd work three hundred sixty-five days a year and not complain, not one bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you say you had some training in roofing, you said?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my sister's husband, the family had like a roofing company, a construction company.  And you know, my sister introduced me to them, and it was like, you know, they needed the help.  So that's pretty much what I did.  It was more flat roofs, you know, with the tar and all of that smelly stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But at the same time around--I guess around that time, you bought the guitar, right?  About the same time?
Speaker 2: No, that was--
Speaker 1: You were eighteen?
Speaker 2: No, that was before.
Speaker 1: That was before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said, I got my, I think I got my first guitar at the age of twenty.  I started playing guitar--well, I started messing around, traveling with my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] in 1988, probably like in November.  So it was like from the time I graduated, I jumped into doing roofing and construction and cutting trees.  And then when wintertime came, I had no work.  So, I started traveling around with my dad from November until today.  I'm still with him today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, so was it hard to learn the guitar?  So you said it wasn't really hard to learn the guitar once you got it?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, it was hard.  Don't get me--. (Laughter) It was hard.  It was eighteen hours a day hard.  (Laughter) But it flowed more naturally than the drums did.  You know, drums--when I finally got on a real set it was like, you know, I didn't get that.  And I would try to do the same--I would--my learning habits came from trying to learn drums.  So I would listen to the tape and try to play the drums, you know, and rewind it and do the same thing.  And, you know, I had a hard time.  But with the guitar, it flowed.  Because I remember when I finally told my dad that I wanted to play guitar, I was like nineteen.  And we were on our way home from a gig.  And I do believe it was B.L.U.E.S., Etc. [Chicago, Illinois] right off of Belmont [Avenue].  And I told him I wanted to play guitar.  And he was like, "All right."  You know, he was like, "Well, you're going to have to do it.  And if you do it, you're going to have to do it to your fullest."  You know, so when we got home from that ride, he was like, he gave me this Les Paul; I think it was this white Les Paul.  And he had his guitar and his main stick.  And he was like, "Do this."  And he bent--I mean he played the note, and I did it.  And he was like, "Wow," you know.  And he was like, "Well, all right, do this one."  So, he bent the note a little more.  And I did it the exact same way.  And then he said, "All right, do this one."  So he bent it and, you know, added another lick to it.  And I did it the same exact way.  And he was like, "Oh, man, you got a feel for this.  You know, you need to play guitar."  You know, and from that point on that's when--you know, I haven't put the guitar down since, man, since that point.
Speaker 1: This is like nineteen--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989].
Story_ID: 278470
Speaker 1: So for a while, you know, they would try to get me up on stage, and, you know.  Mostly my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], you know, would try to get me on stage.  And I was, you know, real shy.
Speaker 2: Now what were you doing at that point?  Were you like kind of a roadie (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was a roadie-ing. Roadie-ing
Speaker 2: Roadie, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a roadie, taking care of all of his stuff.  You know, I would, you know, take care of his luggage, you know.  We were on the road constantly back then.  So you know, I would do the laundry for him.  You know, I would just take care of my dad, you know, pretty much.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now--
Speaker 1: I didn't know what the hell I was doing, but I did what he told me to do (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's interesting.  Because, you know, some people for some reason don't have the kind of relationship in their family where they can, they can fit in like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean they really don't.  You probably have run into some who have like famous relatives--a father or somebody, or somebody else in the family that's famous for playing music.  But the person--the other relatives don't make good road companions.  For one reason or another, they're not able to be of help, and they end up causing more trouble than help.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, that's what, that's what the record company thought that I was going to do.  At first, [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] would travel, you know, with my dad.  You know, he was on the road with my dad first.  And Ronnie was more stepping out, because the guitar player that my dad--well, Ronnie was roadie-ing.  So, he would roadie for the whole band, mostly my dad and the guitar player.  So the guitar player finally left, and Ronnie took that spot.  So, Dad needed another roadie.  And I--you know, it was wintertime, and most of the work that I did was summertime stuff.  And I was like, this is a perfect opportunity to go out on the road, you know, and work with Dad.  Because I really, really wanted to do that, you know.  I really, really wanted to be on the road with Dad.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because he used to travel a lot, man.  And I was crazy about my daddy, man, I was crazy about him.  He used to take care of us as kids, you know, I remember that.  I used to love that.  We used to watch, you know, 'The Price is Right' together, you know, (laughter), anything that was, you know--and games shows that would come on TV.  And then when we'd get done watching that--you know, this was before I was, you know, going to school, you know.  And he would sit down and write music.  You know, that's my earliest--but you know, I love that.  You know, so by him being gone all the time while I was in school, I rarely saw him.  So I really, really wanted to go on the road with him at that point, it was like my opportunity.  Ronnie was stepping up, they needed somebody to help out.  And bam, that was perfect timing.
Speaker 2: Now, do you know of other sons of musicians--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in other families?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bernard Allison.  And Buddy Guy's kids, you know, Shawnna, she's a rapper and Michael [Guy], he's a producer in rap.  The Kinsey Report, you know, Donald Kinsey, Kenny Kinsey [Kenneth Kinsey].  Shemekia Copeland, Johnny Copeland's daughter.  I can go on and on.  The Kenny Neal family.
Speaker 2: Do most of the families have that kind of close relationship like that, where they can--
Speaker 1: Well, Bernard and Luther [Allison], yeah.  The Neals and the Kinseys, yeah.  Yeah, but as far as the Guys, you know, like Buddy Guy's kids, I don't know, because they're not playing blues.  You know, they're playing, you know, they do rap.  So I guess it would be hard for--I mean they probably can relate, but it would be hard for them to be able to bond musically on the road.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: With us, it's we're trying to do what Dad does, you know.  And its blues, blues rock, you know, blues music.  So--
Story_ID: 278471
Speaker 1: You're a roadie with your father [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks]. And this is the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], and you learned how to play the guitar?
Speaker 2: I'm learning at the same time as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did the big moment come when you actually could play in public, on stage?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, that was at FitzGerald's [Berwyn, Illinois].  That was in 1991, and I do believe it was the wintertime.  But my dad, they used to always try to get me up on stage, man.  But I was just too afraid, too shy, and too afraid that people knew that I couldn't play at the time, you know.  (Laughter) But my dad was trying to encourage me.  He was like, you know, I know what he was trying to do.  He was trying to get me used to being on stage.  But that moment, man, I'll never forget it.  He called me up on 'Sweet Home Chicago.'  And people, you know, at the club, they were all sitting down.  And he was like, you know, "I got another son who plays.  You know, let's get him on up.  How about it for [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Baker Brooks]?"  And everybody was clapping, and I was like, "Oh, no, I'm not going out there.  It's spooky and they'll spank me."  (Laughter) And he was like, "Come on, how about it, y'all make some more noise." And they were like "Yeah" screaming.
Speaker 1: And where were you at the time?  Were you like--
Speaker 2: I was--Dad was on the stage.  And you know, at FitzGerald's, backstage is like, you know, near it.  So, you can close the door and open the door.  And I was like right in the doorframe.  And he was getting the people riled up.  And finally I was like "All right."  You know, and I went out there, man.  And I mean the people literally got up out of their chairs and rushed to the stage at that moment.  And I mean it got wild all of a sudden.  It was just, you know, people were like just going nuts.  And I'm sitting up there playing rhythm, and then he was like, "All right, solo."  You know, so it was my time to solo.  And I did my solo, man, and those people--man, I can see those people's hair just stand up on top of their heads.  And it was just that rush--just knowing that somebody was going berserk for what you do, for what you just did--going crazy.  That rush went through me, man.  It was something I'm still trying to get.  I'm still trying to get that rush.  Even though, you know, I get the same reaction, but it's not like that first one.  It's never like that first one, man.  That first one, that's what sucked me into this music full-time, was that right there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long was it before you got on stage again?  I mean did the next time--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was (laughter), oh man, I--I'm telling you, man.  They had to like stop me.  They were like, "No, you can't--not today."  You know, it was like every day I wanted it, man.  I wanted to get out there and do the same thing.  'Sweet Home Chicago' was the first song that I ever learned, and that was the first song that I ever played in front of anybody.  And that was, that was it right there, man.  That was it.  That was the turning point.  I was like, I'm doing this full-time for the rest, until the day I die.
Story_ID: 278472
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start writing music?
Speaker 2: I started writing music probably in '93 [1993], probably like 1993, sometime in '93 [1993].  Actually, it was a [HistoryMaker] B.B. King tour that we were on.  It was B.B. headlining, of course, it was his music tour with Buddy Guy, Eric Johnson, [HistoryMaker] Lonnie Brooks, Koko Taylor, and Junior Wells.  And I was on the bus with Junior Wells, Koko, and my dad, you know, all through the tour.  You know, it was like forty-five days.  And you know, hanging out with Junior, I learned so much, Junior Wells.  You learn so much musically in those forty-five days that--you know, at that moment--that I'd learned in--you know, I mean at, before rather that time that I learned before, prior.  And--
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you learn from Junior Wells?
Speaker 2: Timing, you know, how to set your own time.  And he would say--you know, the one thing that helps me out to this day is that you never pat your foot like that, you know, the way you're going... like this (gestures).  He said always use your heel, because you'll never get off time, and you're never tired, you won't tire out.
Speaker 1: That's easier than patting it the other way, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's one of the major things that stick in my head right now.  Then he taught me how to do 'Messin' with the Kid.'
Speaker 1: So, you were heel-toe?  Heel-toe rather than--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean toe-heel--
Speaker 2: Toe-heel--
Speaker 1: --rather than--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --heel-toe.
Speaker 2: Yeah. You would go like mm, mm, mm, (gestures), instead of like (gestures).
Speaker 1: Now, patting the foot, foot patting is something that I think a lot of black people just do, that--maybe people period do it.  But I know when I was, when I was in the band in high school, there were only like two or three other black people in the band.  The rest of them were white people, and the white people didn't seem to have a problem patting their foot while they played.  But all the black musicians--and I played clarinet, you know, (laughter) but I'd be patting my foot.  And the band director said, "Hey, stop patting your foot," you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) "You're supposed to have timing internally," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess so, because they didn't play like that.  They played--they sat up straight and they just, you know, played.  But I always felt I had to pat my foot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Man, I would do that so much that my calves and my--what do you call it--would get so tired.  And he was like, "Man, just... you know, you'll always stay on time every time."
Speaker 1: If you just--?
Speaker 2: If you pat your heel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pat your heel.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And you know, you'll never get tired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, does it help keep you on beat and everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That helps out to this day.  'Messin' with the Kid,' he [Junior Wells] showed me 'Messin' with the Kid.'
Speaker 1: Now, what is that?  What's 'Messin' with the Kid'?
Speaker 2: That's his song.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's his song, it's one of his signature songs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He taught me that himself, you know.  Because I would listen to it and, you know, I would try to emulate what Buddy was doing, what Buddy Guy was doing on it, and it just wasn't coming out.  He was like, "Naw, man, you got to do it this way."  You know, he would take it and, you know, break it down for me.  Because, you know, that's what the band was playing at the time, you know, on the tour.  You know, and I was like, "Man, why don't you show me, you know, if I'm playing it correctly."  About six minutes later, you know, I had it correctly, you know.
Story_ID: 278473
Speaker 1: Also he [Junior Wells] also taught me, which I know to this day, that I use to this day, never play with lyrics.  Like if there's a song that you, you know, like to sing, like 'Messin' with the Kid,' don't play with the lyrics, changing the words up, you know, messing around with it.  Because you can be doing it on stage one day, and then by you messing around, it comes out and it's not right.  So--
Speaker 2: You know, it can--
Speaker 1: Alter.
Speaker 2: Alter the song?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's, well, that's something that--you know, I mean, as a listener of blues, a lot of blues songs kind of do change up from album to album, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Because John Lee Hooker used to change name titles all the time.  It'd be the same song, but a different chorus.  I mean it'd be the same song, with different words in the chorus all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So you say that's not a good idea--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know--
Speaker 2: --to do that on stage?
Speaker 1: You know, I think it was more of like, don't play with the original.  Don't mess with it, don't play with it.  Don't mess around with it.  I mean, you know, not on stage, you know.  When you're off-stage, don't mess with it, because you'll get used to it.  And then when you get on stage, then it'll comes out, it'll come out like you were playing with it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, why did he think that was a bad idea?  Because--
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't know.  Because I think he wanted to, you know, let you know how strong that song is, not to be messed with I guess.
Speaker 2: Kind of to preserve the integrity of the song--
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and whoever wrote it--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  There are some things I've--we were talking about Taj Mahal before.  And we were saying one of this favorite songs was 'Fishin' Blues.'  You know, sometimes he'd change the way--. (Laughter) I think it's a traditional song.  I don't think it has an author, but it--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's probably in a non-public domain [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And sometimes he'll, you know, alter some of the--
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, you know, a lot of blues artists, you know, do that.  I mean, you know, I don't think there's anything wrong with it.  You know, I would change the lyrics, but when I say play with the lyrics, I mean, like, you know, some people would add cuss words and try to make it funny when they're saying it, when they're playing around with it.  And at the time, you know, somebody, you know, was messing around with the song.  And it's like, don't do that.  (Laughter) Because if you do that, you'll mess up the lyrics for real when you're on stage.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now can you give us an example of what that's messed with, that maybe loses its--
Speaker 1: Like, like, I think he was directing it towards a drummer which was a white guy, you know, a biker looking dude with tattoos all over him, with long blonde hair.  And he would, you know, like, "Oh, baby, you don't have to go," and he'd be like, (singing), "Oh, babeee, you don't have to goooo--," you know, stuff like that.  You know, like don't play with that song like that, you know.
Speaker 2: He was actually singing it wrong, had the wrong--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he would add lyrics.
Speaker 2: --emphasis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would change the lyrics, you know, like the slang, into like the real terminology of what it, you know, should have been.  So--
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  Actually try to translate it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --for people on some level?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: From its original syntax--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --to something that...  Now, it's interesting that you should mention that.  Because the other day on public radio, Bill Maher was on.  And he's got a new album where he says he's translating rap music for suburban white people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you hear that?
Speaker 1: I saw that, I saw that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Where he says, "Don't--," you know, instead of saying what the original said, he said something like, "Dear, we'll not be dining out tonight; we'll be having intercourse."
Speaker 1: Right.  (Laughter) Yeah, I saw that, I saw that on HBO.  That was funny.
Story_ID: 278474
Speaker 1: Some of these songs, I mean people--some of the songs by people like--didn't Taj Mahal, and I'm sure other blues musicians often go back and get the old songs and sing them, you know, with the original lyrics?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Yeah, well, I mean, you know, if you listen to 'Sweet Home Chicago,' the chorus is kind of different.  You know, Robert Johnson, you know, originally, you know, would sing, (singing), "Come on, baby don't you want to go back to the land of California, Sweet Home Chicago."  But then you know, a lot of people changed it, you know, "Come on baby, don't you want to go to that same old place, Sweet Home Chicago."
Speaker 1: Now, that's the song, you know, they play it constantly in the baggage claim area of [Chicago] Midway [International] Airport [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Midway.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  And when I hear it, I hear what I consider a euphemized, homogenized version of it, you know.  Because as I remember the lyrics, what I remember in my head from way back is (singing), "Come on, baby, don't you want to go, back to that live a lie city, Sweet Home Chicago?"
Speaker 2: To that what?
Speaker 1: "Live a lie" city.
Speaker 2: "Live a lie" city?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: "Sweet Home Chicago," I remember that lyric.  And I don't think that, you know, that's something the city wants necessarily in the airport.
Speaker 2: No, no, of course not.  Why was it "live a lie?"
Speaker 1: I don't know.  But that's the lyric I remember, "live a lie" city, you know.
Speaker 2: I guess Chicago [Illinois] was promising to the southerners that came up--and it wasn't what they thought it would be?
Speaker 1: I guess maybe that's what the author was trying to say, whoever came up with that.
Speaker 2: Well, Robert Johnson was the one who wrote it, originally wrote it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was "the land of California."
Speaker 1: I think those are the lyrics that Taj Mahal--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that "live a lie city" is on the Taj Mahal album, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, from the album where he's on there with the Pointer Sisters.  You know, the Pointer Sisters are with him.  And he's playing Elizabeth Cotten's music, you know, 'Freight Train,' he's playing that.  And he's got like 'Going to Chicago.'  He's got the other 'Going to Chicago' song, too, "There ain't nothing up there a monkey woman like you can do.  I'm going to Chicago, sorry but I can't take you."  Remember that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, wow, I got to check that one out.
Speaker 1: That's the kind of song I guess the city wouldn't want in the airport either, you know, "I'm going to Chicago, sorry, but I can't take you, because there ain't nothing in Chicago a monkey woman like you can do."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So that's not, that's not a, some of the blues music (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, no, that's not promotional music (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's not promotional music (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  But "the land of California," I guess that lyric meant that, you know, Chicago was this promised land, like Hollywood, you know, gorgeous--
Speaker 1: Like California was to the cowboys or something, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or the 19th century people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, you know, it evolves into the day you're in.  Yeah, you know, maybe somebody else will change that chorus, you know.
Story_ID: 278475
Speaker 1: What inspires you in terms of lyrics?  And what kind of lyrics do you--
Speaker 2: Everyday life, everyday life that, you know, stuff that I go through.  Or it can be something that I, you know, see or I heard.  But it's mostly what I feel, it's what I go through.  I can't write about what somebody else feels.  I probably could, but I never tried it, you know, unless we're writing together.  If we're writing together, then I can relate, because we're on the same page; we're talking about the same subject.  And that's the only way.  But I can't like--you know, if you came to me and said, "Man, I got this music, man, and I got this line.  Can you write it?"  I probably would be able to do it, but I wouldn't feel it as much as I would if I'm writing my own stuff that I go through.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you perform, do you perform most of your own music?
Speaker 2: Yes, on my show, yes.  Even on my dad's [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] show I do probably two of my own songs, and I do one instrumental that, you know, Memphis Slim did or somebody, you know.  Or I would do like a Jimmy Reed or Elmore James, you know, type stuff.  But mostly on my show, it's most of my stuff off of 'Mystery.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your father, his generation includes a lot of musicians that grew up in the Deep South.  And you know, your father's album, 'Bayou Lightning,' you know--and we discussed when he was here about how, you know, some of the different folkways of the South would come through in his music, and some of the superstitions of people, and the hopes and aspirations of people in the South, you know, as they look to, as they look at life from a different perspective than say somebody in the North would.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You probably, like, represent like one of the first generations actually to be raised in the North around blues, but writing blues out of an urban experience, a Chicago [Illinois] experience, or a Morgan Park experience, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Exactly, man.  I have one track on there that I was experimenting with in the studio, you know.  I told my producer, I was like, "Man, I want to mix Chicago blues and hip-hop together."  He was like, "What?  Get out of here."  I was like, "No, I'm serious."  I said, "I want to try it.  Let's mess with it and see what we can come up with."  And we came up with--like basically, what I wanted to do was like get the two Chicago sounds that I remember growing up.  And that was house music, which was created here in Chicago, and blues, which is--we're the capital of the blues.  So, I wanted to mesh these two sounds together and see what we came up with.  So, in my mind I'm thinking about, you know, like a hip-hop and house music beat going with some kind of blues rift.  And man, it was just an experiment, and it came out like, you know, I wanted to put more lyrics into it.  But my producer was like, "No, let's leave it like that."  So he just got me like, almost like a D.J., you know, telling people, "Clap your hands," you know, that type stuff.  But that was one of my main goals with this album, which was to put Chicago sounds that don't come together at all.  I wanted to put them together and see what it comes out to be.  And that's what it came out to be.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm curious now as to what this sounds like.  I know you don't have it, you know, we can't play the CD right now or anything, but can you hum a little bit of it for us?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Da da, da, da, da, dum, da da da da dum, da, da, da da da dum, dum, dum."  You know, you know it's just hip, and I got a D.J. on there that's scratching, you know.  (Scratching sounds)  You know, that type stuff.  And a harmonica, you know, blowing, you know, a cool blues rift.  You know, I wanted to be the first in Chicago that did this, something that nobody had ever done.  It's the capital of the blues, and I wanted to put, you know, some childhood musics that I remember growing up--going to the Mendel [Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois] parties, you know, the house, the Hot Mix 5 that I used to listen to on the radio--Farley "Funkin" Keith [Farley "Jackmaster" Funk], you know, that type stuff, you know.  And that's basically what I--you know I wanted to put those together, man.  I wanted to try it.  I wanted to be the first.  I wanted to be, you know, an innovator with that, here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 278476
Speaker 1: A lot of the blues music nowadays, you know, it's the same old thing, the same thing over and over and over.  And I just wanted to try something different.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes it's kind of a rut that people get into, in the blues.  This is the blues capital of the country, like you say, everybody's here.  But you know, you can almost go (humming), "Da da da dum."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Humming) "Da da da dum,"
Speaker 1: Or (humming) "da dum da dum da--," you know, or even slow it down.  But this one, you know, with 'Mystery,' I completely wanted to bring all my Chicago [Illinois] influences with an urbanized way of thinking, and just change it up a bit.  You know, its blues based, but it's mostly different directions that, you know--that's what a lot of people say, that they like the variety of the blues.  Everybody know I'm blues, and then I kick it up a notch.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what do you write about, in terms of experience?
Speaker 1: Women, (laughter) what I go through with women.
Speaker 2: I guess it's hard to get away from that for anybody that's writing the blues.
Speaker 1: No, it's not.  And it's hard for women to get away from men.  They write about men stuff, too.  So, you know, hey, you know, its life, man.  That's what it is, its life.  You know, you have a bad experience or you have a good experience.  It's all about life and how you make it.  So, I just write about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Any other subjects?
Speaker 1: Well, a 'Nu Kinda Blues,' that's the name of that track.  No, it's mostly about, you know, blues, I mean, you know, women.  That's, that's it.  (Laughter) Right now at this point it's just women, and how many heartaches I done had, and how many loves I done had, and how I wish it could be.
Speaker 2: I guess there's a song about meeting them, a song about--
Speaker 1: Being with them.
Speaker 2: Being with them, and there's a song about--
Speaker 1: Leaving, getting away, or quitting--or they quit me.
Speaker 2: Or met somebody else.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or they met somebody else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, well with blues, it's always talking about, you know, women, money, and alcohol anyway.  So I mean, you know, I don't, I'm not rich, so I can't talk about money; I can talk about how much I wish I had.
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of the old blues songs are about, you know--
Speaker 1: Money.
Speaker 2: --trying to get hold of some money, or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --hang on to some money.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And liquor, you know, that don't inspire me.  So I mean I can pretty much, I can write about anything.  It's just, you know, if I'm going to put something out, it's going to be something out that I feel.
Story_ID: 278477
Speaker 1: What are some of the titles of some of your--
Speaker 2: 'Exiled,' which is a ballad.  And basically I got that from being in love with someone that I called 'Exiled,' you know, who was made to leave, and how I wanted to see that person again.  "You been gone so long," you know, I just wrote the lyrics about how I wanted to be with that person again.  "And if I could, I would turn time and space around just to see you again."
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's a powerful piece.  I heard it just before our computer crashed this morning (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I heard it online.  I heard that one and the first one.
Speaker 2: 'Mystery'?
Speaker 1: 'Mystery' yeah, I heard those two.
Speaker 2: 'Mystery' is about, I wrote that with a friend of mine, Bruce McCabe, who writes hit songs for Jonny Lang.  Basically, I came with the music.  I came to him with the music, and right before we got done, the first day I was on my way back to the hotel, I was like "Man, listen to this riff, man, I need some lyrics to this."  And he took the--you know, he taped it real quick.  The next morning I came back, and he was done with all the lyrics.  And I was like, "Wow, dude."  You know, he was like, "Man, it just fit, you know."  And then 'Baby Stop,' you know, which is almost like a Motown type of groove.  It's basically saying, you know, "Stop making a fool of me."  That's, that's the chorus, you know.  "I'm walking down to the corner bar, trying to see if I can ease the pain.  Because I know the way I feel about you, I know you don't feel the same.  I got nothing but love for you, I got nothing but love for you.  Don't you treat me this way.  You know, baby, stop."  Then "It's your turn to talk to the blues.  You know, I'm tired of talking to them, it's your turn now.  I got the best hand now. I got a new woman.  There's only one room, I mean there's only room for one person in my heart," that type stuff.  "You know, it's your turn now.  I'm not talking to them no more."  What else?  '[Just Like a] Butterfly.'  I wrote 'Butterfly' in like five minutes, man.  I was at [Chicago] City Hall in Chicago [Illinois], in City Hall just meeting up with a friend of mine for lunch.  And as I walking out to the elevators, there was a security guard that was guarding like the hall, you know, for like different, probably like three different offices.  And this beautiful, beautiful, black woman--he was a white security guard.  This beautiful black woman walked by and came up to the desk, and they were just talking.  And I was waiting on the elevator.  And then he goes, "You know what?"  He grabbed her hand, "You just like a butterfly."  And the elevator doors opened and I walked in, and I was--, "Just like a butterfly."  And as they were closing the door, I slipped out and went back up to him, and she was gone.  And I was like, "Man, why did you call her a butterfly?"  He said, "Because she jumps flower to flower."  You know, he meant, you know, different guys, you know, that like her that want her to stay, you know, but she got to go.  So I'm like, "Oh, man--." I was like, "Thank you."  And I got on the elevator, man, and got in my car.  And you know I just wrote the lyrics down, man.  And I had the music in my head; I had the music in my head and I wrote it down.  And in five minutes, and I was done, before I left out of the parking lot.
Story_ID: 278478
Speaker 1: We were talking about your lyrics.  Now tell us about your style of playing the guitar.  You were talking during the break about what you try to convey with the guitar (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--yeah, you know, like I told you before, man, I was shy.  You know, and this is basically my way to speak, you know.  And sometimes it comes out wrong, and sometimes it comes out right.  But most of the time, you know, I look at it as with blues, and slow blues and, you know, Chicago [Illinois] blues.  It comes out aggressive.  It comes out like, you know, doing things that I wouldn't normally do, like, "Y'know, you're gonna hear, take that."  You know, that's my way of expressing myself.  So my style is more Chicago-based blues with, you know, aggressive attacks.  I would say it's a mixture, you know, of Albert King, Buddy Guy, [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King], and my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], and mash them together.  And I think I can safely say that's pretty much my style.
Speaker 1: That's pretty good company.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I mean, you know, those are the people that I listen to all the time, you know, and try to--you know, and Freddie King--and try to play, emulate.  But then, you know, I remember my dad and my brother [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], you know, telling me don't try to play somebody note for note, man, because, you know, they'll box you in and say, "Oh, you're trying to be like Freddie, or you're trying to be like B.B.," you know, which helped me.  Because now it's like now, all right, I'm going to come up with my own lick.  You know, if I can't emulate them, I'm going to come up my own, you know.  So I think it was for the better, you know.
Speaker 1: We were in Chattanooga [Tennessee] two weeks ago.  We were interviewing Sam Goodman [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and [HistoryMaker] Fred Cash of the Impressions.  And they were telling us how Curtis Mayfield played a certain style on his guitar.  It's a certain way you tune the guitar.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know what I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: I have no clue what--you know, he probably tuned it down, maybe, or tuned it--.  Because I know a lot of slide players, they tune--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a slide player.  And he played a slide, and he--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, so he--
Speaker 1: He had a, there's a name for that.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, so he--
Speaker 1: They call it--
Speaker 2: Probably an open G.  He had probably had like a slide.
Speaker 1: There's another name they call that particular style of tuning a guitar, and I can't think of it right now, it's on another set of notes I have.  But anyway, but it made Curtis Mayfield sound so unique, because he could--he'd tune his guitar in a way that hardly anybody else was doing it.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what a lot of famous guitarists do, you know.  And I wonder sometimes if they do it so people can like, get their style.  I wonder, you know, sometimes like that, man.  Because I know [Jimi] Hendrix would tune down.  Albert Collins would put a cable, you know, and he would tune in something like C tuning.  Muddy Waters would tune different a little bit too.  Now, I--you know, all these people, you know, sometimes it's really hard to get, you know, their sound and their style, because they tune different.
Speaker 1: Right.  The Impressions talked about how people were--when they tried to reproduce--when Curtis Mayfield was no longer with them, they had somebody trying to reproduce the beginning of 'Amen.'
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Humming) "Doo, do, doo, doo doo." And nobody could play it like that.  They couldn't figure out he played it.  They knew what he was playing, but they didn't know how to play it.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, they couldn't convey it to the next person that came and took his spot.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I feel sorry for them; I feel sorry for him (laughter).
Speaker 1: It sounded simple, but it's not, it wasn't simple.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Pop[s] Staples was the same way.  I don't know if he tuned different, but you know, it's so simple that it'll take, sometimes it'll take you months to get what he was doing.  But if you let him do it, was like, you know, real simple, you know, right there in the pocket--the right height, you know.  He came out with it.  And then here you are, you know, three months later, "Dang," (laughter) "I can't get it."
Story_ID: 278479
Speaker 1: Is it a real struggle to be unique--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very.
Speaker 1: --in a city like Chicago [Illinois] where so many blues musicians congregate--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: You've got everybody here.
Speaker 2: That's why, that's why I wanted my music to be, you know, on this CD, to be song based, so they can hear my style of songwriting more than, you know, the guitar playing.  Because, you know, with guitar players it's very easy to put somebody in a bag for their style of guitar playing.  You can't put nobody in a bag that easily with their style of songwriting.  That's why, you know, it's really hard.  Because you know, compared to nowadays--and back when, you know, blues or guitar--you know, like the '50s [1950s]--you know, I want to stay '50s [1950s], before rock and roll--I mean before blues evolved into rock and roll, you had very few distinctive guitar players--Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, all these people, you know, influenced another generation, okay.  So now these main--let's just say [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King], Muddy [Waters], you know--and then they influenced a generation, and then it's like another ten guitars, or twelve guitars.  Now, this generation influenced this generation.  So now it's like, you know, hundreds of, you know, major name guitar players.  And now that generation is influencing this generation.  Do you know what I'm saying?  So, it's hard, because it's so many people playing the same thing that this guy was playing years ago.  You know what I mean?  So, and to be unique, you would have to really, really do something out of the norm, I mean completely out of the norm, just out of the blue.
Speaker 1: So you're, where you're coming from in your career--I mean as a blues musician, you're coming out of a unique experience, having grown up in Chicago around the blues in a Chicago neighborhood, and having been influenced by funk and hip-hop.  And so that's--are there many other young blues musicians coming along these days?
Speaker 2: Not that, not that I can think of, man.  My brother [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks]--I mean younger than me?  I don't see, I really don't see--
Speaker 1: Now, you're thirty-five now, I guess? Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-five, yeah.
Story_ID: 278480
Speaker 1: I really don't see it, man.  You know, and I'm at the jams a lot, you know, and I see, you know, a ton of white guys come up and jam, you know, Buddy Guy's [Legends, Chicago, Illinois].  Or you know, they go to Kingston Mines [Chicago, Illinois] or whatever, you know.  But it's not very--because you know I guess because of hip-hop, you know, they attract the young crowd.  And if there is a black guitarist, they're playing R&B.  You know, younger than me, they would be playing R&B or rock.  I mean, all out hard rock, you know.  But as far as blues, I don't see it, man, I don't see it.  And that's why, that's pretty much why, you know, I try to do what I can to keep the blues alive.  Because I want to be able to turn, you know, a lot of our own brothers and sisters on to this music that's theirs, that's their birthright--you know, it belongs to you.  You know, and you should cherish it, you know, like people over in Europe do.  You know, they cherish it more than we do here in the United States.  And I mean this is, the blues is the basis of all American music.  And we go over there, and we're treated like stars over there, man.  Because, you know, first of all, they don't get it as much as we do here.  So I think we're kind of spoiled with it.  And we just like put it on the backburner, you know, and let it sit there for a while.  You know, we got this new fresh pot of greens, you know, on the front burner that we're cooking.  And we got this cooking, and we got cooking, and just let that sit for a while.  But over there, man, it's like, "We want more, we need more of this.  We need y'all to come out and do this, you know."  Places be packed.  People pay a hundred dollars a ticket, you know, without blinking an eye.  Here, you know, you go to a club, "Five dollars?  What?"  You know, and then, you know, our own brothers and sisters, you know, don't support it.  A few do, but I would say, you know, ninety, probably ninety-one, ninety-two percent is mostly, you know, white.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in our community, you know, we've got a, I think it would be safe to say we have a kind of survival mentality in the present time orientation, where the past is something that you, that breezes by as you're trying to go from thing to thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was talking to D.L. Hughley, man, and you know, he said something to me.  He said, "Man, we always come up with something great and we always set it aside and let other people manage it, and then we move on to something else." (Laughter) We leave it there, and just move on.
Speaker 2: I know Billy Branch, who I'm sure you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --conducts, he does these grade school sessions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Blues in Schools, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he does blues in the schools, to try to--he's like, he's considered a young man in the blues, you know, he's twenty years older than you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at least.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, we're losing a whole generation of people--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, slowly.  I mean there's still maybe, I don't know, maybe fifty real strong blues musicians in the City of Chicago [Illinois] right now, but we're losing them, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Year by year.
Speaker 1: Year by year.  Yeah, we just lost Detroit Junior.  We just lost Little Milton.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And you know, they say it comes in threes, so I'm like, you know, hoping, you know, that nobody else--I'm praying for nobody else, rather, but they say it comes in threes.  So, I, you know, my thing is, man, I'm going to keep on doing what I'm doing, you know.  And I know I have to keep writing and keep playing, and maybe you know, like--
Story_ID: 278481
Speaker 1: Another interesting story, you know.  I went to go see Aerosmith, Run-D.M.C., and Kid Rock on tour, right.  And I got a chance to, you know, talk to Steve [Steven Tyler] and Joe Perry.  And you know, it's like, "Oh, yeah, we're going to do a blues album," and you know, and everything.  And I'm like, "All right, okay, yeah, cool.  You know, that's cool, you know."  And then I'd never met Run-D.M.C. before.  This was before Jam Master Jay got killed.  And they didn't know who we were.  They didn't know who the hell we were until Joe Perry and Steven Tyler called my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] out to play.  And you know, it was like, "We're going to introduce, you know, a couple of friends of ours."  And you know, and then they announced it.  And all of a sudden you could see out of the woodwork Run-D.M.C. and them start coming around to see who this friend was.  And you know, I'm like, "All right, okay, all right, now they know.  Now what we gonna to do with?"  You know, so I went over to Jam Master Jay.  I was like, "Man, you know, I got this idea in my head that's been bugging me.  It's like how are we going to put blues and hip-hop together?"  And he looked at me, and he was like, "Yeah, man, that's interesting, man."  He gave me his, you know, gave me his card and everything.  And we was supposed to hook up, man, and two months later he was dead, right.  So I'm thinking, you know, at this time I think he was working with 50 Cent, and that's who have the voice right now.  Not 50, I'm talking about hip-hop.  And if we can somehow--this is my goal.  This is what I've been trying to do for the last five years, six years, is to somehow come up with a blues hip-hop song, where it would hit mainstream and turn our young brothers and sisters on to Muddy Waters and to Howlin' Wolf, you know, to Elmore James, you know what I mean.  To Taj Mahal, to Lonnie Brooks, to Buddy Guy, Junior Wells, you know, that's my goal.  That's my goal, to get hip-hop, get a major, major star, you know, and put this good blues and hip-hop music together and let them rap on it.  Hopefully it'll hit, and hopefully it'll turn people on.  Because this is the voice right now.  This is what people listen to.  That's what everybody's listening to, not only just blacks.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hope you can do it.  Because I think it'll do a lot to give people a sense of history--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that we desperately need.  We need a sense of history--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: --of where did, where the music came from, right?
Speaker 1: It's everywhere. Hip-hop is everywhere, man.  We just played France, Dunkirk, France, man.  And we stayed at this nice hotel.  And I was at the end of the building.  My hotel room was at the end of the building, and we could walk out and there's like this driveway and a pond.  And we went to my room, and I noticed like in the cars some kids were doing like this (head shake) and then they starting rapping in French.  And I opened the door, and it's 50 Cent, man, you know, the music that they were rapping to.  And they were rapping in French.  That's what I mean, how powerful this voice is, this hip-hop voice is.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that desperately--
Speaker 2: They're rapping in Tanzania now.  I mean a friend of mine just came back from Arusha, Tanzania.  And the Maasai was wearing a baseball cap and a Maasai blanket around his shoulder.  And he's rapping in Swahili, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, and I mean--
Speaker 1: That's how powerful that voice is, man.  And my goal is to utilize that voice to preserve history.  So if that one song can, like, make people remember who Muddy Waters was, I did my job, man.  Because our own people need to know who Muddy Waters is.  He's the one that literally changed music.  He's the one that plugged up into an amplifier, and that's how the birth of rock and roll began.  That's how rock and roll began, you know what I mean?  That's how it--you know, '[I] Can't Be Satisfied,' in 1941 [sic. 1948].  That was the first blues song plugged up.
Story_ID: 278482
Speaker 1: I think you said before you pointed out the story about Aerosmith, that the white musicians are playing guitars, you know.  And in the '60s [1960s] in England they were listening to all American blues.  And American blues was fading off the charts, and they were buying it in England.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they knew who the musicians were, who was playing, who was writing the songs.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, man, Jimi Hendrix had to go over to--I was telling you this earlier that he had to go over to Europe.  And he was there, and he came there as a nobody.  And one week later, he was a star, you know what I mean?  It's just a matter of being heard.
Speaker 1: Now there's a story, another story about the 'Motown Revue' [sic. 'Motortown Revue'] going to England.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's on the Funk Brothers CD.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know the CD they made about--the DVD they made about--the film they made about the Funk Brothers.
Speaker 2: 'In the Shadow of Motown' [sic. 'Standing in the Shadows of Motown'].
Speaker 1: But James Jamerson, the bass player for Motown didn't make the tour, because he didn't something and didn't get on the plane or something.  But they were waiting for him over there in the Seines.  They knew who James Jamerson was.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: They knew who James Jamerson.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Where over here, we knew the bass rifts.  And we said that's a bad dude playing the bass.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we didn't know what his name was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's interesting.
Speaker 2: That's how it is, man.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but somehow we're going to have to, like take the time and, you know, appreciate our own stuff.
Speaker 2: The only way people are going to appreciate it is if we use that voice, if we use that voice that people are listening to.  Because you can say, "That's James Jamerson," all day long, and they ain't going to hear it unless you put it in a rap.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the history of music, and blues being essential to it, you were talking before we started doing the interview about Taj Mahal going back and playing old Robert Johnson, and Sleepy John Estes, and Mississippi John Hurt on his early albums, in addition to his own stuff, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Going back and picking them up.  And then I recently found a piece in the music store where he's on stage with a West African jeli, or griot, as they were called in French.  And they're playing like, he's playing kora, you know.  And a lot of people have, you know, traced a lot of blues rifts back to West African kora playing.  And--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And it's, I mean it really gets deep, you know.
Speaker 2: It gets very deep.  It gets very deep, man, and a lot of people need to know that, you know, that this is the basis of American music that's appreciated all over the world, man, that was originated by African Americans that nobody knows who they are nowadays.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's another piece on PBS where Ali Farka Toure out of Guinea [sic. Republic of Mali]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he's standing around playing what really sounds a lot like the blues--
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: --in Guinea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it really gets deep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just, we just need that voice.  You know, we just need to somehow--and you know, I'm trying, I'm trying my best.  And I'm going to do it.  I'm going to do it, even if I have to get Kanye [West], if I have to get, you know, Ludacris, or whoever they're listening to.  You know, I talked with Eve about it, and Eve was weighing into it as well.  You know, but it's got to be somebody popular, man.  It can't be somebody that--you know, it's got to be somebody up there.  So, because right now looking--like you said, you know, are there any other young guitarists?  You know, I don't see any of them.  I don't see, I don't see them, you know.  And it's sad.  I mean because I have to worry about the future after I'm gone, and I'm thirty-five.  You know, and I'm trying to, hopefully, you know, turn somebody on.  You know, my son picks up a guitar every now and then.  But he, you know, he's not serious yet.  And I'm not going to force it on him.  I want him to want to do it.  And that's basically what I'm trying to do with this goal of mine with hip-hop, is to turn somebody on to where they want to do it.
Story_ID: 278483
Speaker 1: It seems your father [Lee Baker, Jr; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] was very patient with you, in terms of that.  I don't think he, from what you described, he wasn't trying to make you play the guitar.
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, he actually wanted me to go to college and become a lawyer or doctor or something like that, until he saw that I had talent.  And he said, "Oh, okay."  You know, he didn't force it on me.  They used to actually get mad at me, man, for not asking them anything, you know.  So they automatically knew I didn't--they thought that I didn't know nothing.  Because I didn't ask them, you know, "How you do this?  You know, how you do that?"  You know, but I wanted to get it on my own.  And the reason why I wanted to get it on my own was because nobody would be able to take that away from me.  When family, friends or whoever, when they show you something, they're like, "Oh, man, I showed you that," you know.   But no, I taught myself; I taught myself.
Speaker 1: So, we've got to strike a balance between I taught myself, and passing down a tradition I guess, on some level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of blues tradition, man, I mean life for people like Robert Johnson and Sleepy John Estes, and so many people--life was rough, you know.  Robert Johnson, I think he was like--
Speaker 2: Musicians' lives are rough, period.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Robert Johnson was dead before he was your age, he was thirt--
Speaker 2: Thirty-two [sic. twenty-seven].
Speaker 1: Yeah, thirty-two.  He wasn't thirty-five, he wasn't as old as you are now.  He was a young man we're talking about who, you know, left this great body of work.  He's gone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Life just took him on out of here.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I take that back.  I think Robert Johnson was twenty-seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think he made thirty, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was born--he died in '32 [sic. 1938], I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: But he was a young man.
Speaker 2: Musicians' lives are rough, period.  I mean, you know, you don't eat right.  And if you're on the bar circuit, you're drinking, you know, and smoking or inhaling smoke, you know.  Some dabbled in the drugs, you know.  I mean it's just, it's rough, you know.
Speaker 1: And what you were saying off-camera before we started, is that I guess you're part of a new generation, in a sense that you're a vegetarian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a vegetarian, man.  (Laughter) My dad turned me on.  He got sick and his doctor told him he should turn vegetarian for a while.  So, he was a vegetarian for like three or four years, something like that.  And in that time period, he taught me.  You know, he was like, "You know, I don't eat meat."  You know, he talked to me and told me why and everything.  And I tried it and I liked it, and I've been one since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah, there's a new kind of bluesman, nowadays, man.  Well, me and my brother [HistoryMaker Ronnie Baker Brooks], you know, we do contemporary things that are not, you know, all the way traditional, but we've got that tradition base, you know.  You know, like how many bluesmen do you know that will write a reference guide ['Blues for Dummies,' Lonnie Brooks, Cub Koda, and Wayne Baker Brooks], you know?  You know, how many bluesmen do you know that are vegetarian (laughter)?
Speaker 1: There's a certain--now tell me how you react to this.  Because I've had, you know, I've been associated with the Kuumba Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], and we were doing a blues based show, you know.  And it was called, it's a show based on like, Bessie Smith.  And the people that would come to the show--a lot of blues fans that are not black would come to the show.  And on some level, there was, you could see there was an appreciation for the blues.  They knew the names of all the people and stuff like that, but there was an expectation that they had, I think, of black people that came out of the blues experience that wasn't the most flattering picture, you know.  And it wasn't, and it was like the certain aspects of our culture, or our struggle, have been glorified.  And they expected us to be still there, stuck in it, you know.  I mean the whole idea--
Speaker 2: Stereotypes you mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's the same with the jazz I think, the idea that the musician is going to be the highest person, you know, is going to be the most--is like sexually charged  to the point where they can't, you know, control themselves, I mean all that kind of stereotypical stuff.  I mean do you, I mean do you encounter that when you're on the road doing the blues?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I get it all the time.  You know, I get people offering me all kind of stuff, thinking that I'm the one, you know, that they should bring this for.  Or, you know, when it comes down to, you know, seeing a young lady that I like, and I want to, you know, get to know, "Oh, you're a musician.  You probably got women in every state."  You know, or, "You think I'm a groupie.  You think I'm a--," (laughter).  You know, "Nah, I just want to say hi, and tell you how beautiful you are, you know."  But that's all right.  You know, but yeah, you get that all the time, man.  And you know, you just brush it off, or you let it bother you.  I tend to brush it off.  It's like--
Story_ID: 278484
Speaker 1: Oh, let's talk about 'Blues for Dummies' [Lonnie Brooks, Cub Koda, and Wayne Baker Brooks].  Yeah, tell us about 'Blues for Dummies,' and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I think it was 1996.  Yeah, it was 1996, and my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] headlined the Chicago Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival].  And we were home that weekend, so you know, we got a chance to actually experience the Chicago Blues Fest for the first time, I mean the whole festival, for, you know, the three days.  I think it was yeah, three days, from Friday to Sunday.  And you know, some friends of mine came in from Ohio and, you know, I did the gig roadie-ing for Dad that night.  And after I was done, I was done.  So I mean, what really sparked it was, you know, we went to all the clubs and, you know we got tore down, and woke up with a hangover.  And I was like, oh man, I should write a book about this.  But what really sparked it, they had the Muddy Waters--his home.  They had his home in the middle of the street, you know, that they got from the plantation.  And they brought it to Chicago [Illinois] and let people go through the house.  They had like, you know, pictures.  And it was, you know, a very small home.  But I was looking in this place, like man, you know, everybody should know about this.  This is how this man lived.  This is how he was inspired to do his music.  This is how he was, you know, living.
Story_ID: 278485
Speaker 1: So, Muddy Waters' house was brought in for the Chicago Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival].  It was actually his house that he grew up in?
Speaker 2: It's his house that he grew up in on the plantation.
Speaker 1: In Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was on exhibit, you know, traveling to, you know, a few festivals.  But this was the spark for 'Blues for Dummies,' [Lonnie Brooks, Cub Koda, and Wayne Baker Brooks] man. I was like, everybody should know about this.  They shouldn't have to come to some festival and know about it.  You know, some people probably even, you know, probably just walked by it at the festival.  But this is the granddaddy of, you know, rock and roll.  This is the one like plugged in, you know, in 1941 and created rock and roll before people knew what rock and roll was.  And now look how huge rock and roll is.  You know, and look at how different genres are expanded and evolved from blues--R&B, you know, and then soul from R&B, and then hip-hop.  And then, you know, on the other side you got, you know, rock, and then hard rock and then metal, and then you know punk and then you know, there're just so many American musics that are in the mainstream today derived from the blues, and people should know it.  And you know, when I woke up that morning I was like, man, I want to write a book about this; I want to write a book about this.  A friend of mine worked at IDG Books, which was the For Dummies people.  And, you know, the light bulb went off, like "Bing!  You know, we should take this to IDG."  You know, I went up to IDG and told them the idea.  And they were like, "All right, we're going to have to get an outline together."  So for a couple of days I'm thinking, man, how do I want to do this?  You know, I know their style of writing and their style of--you know, their style was funny and at the same time you know, it's very knowledgeable.  It's like, "How am I going to do this?"  You know, so I wrote the guy on the outline.  And I took like a notepad that was like this long.  And I handed him the outline and he goes, "What's this?"  (Laughter) I go, "This is the outline, man."  And that's how I--you know, it may as well have been on a napkin.  (Laughter) But that's how it was, you know.  And he read it, and he was like, "I love it, I love it."  You know, and it took a while.  So we basically was thinking, all right, we need some more authors involved with this.  So we need a music historian, because I'm not a music historian.  But they wanted me to be, you know, a part of it because it was my idea.  And we'd need a legend.  Like, a music historian might, you know, take a while to find, you know, because you need that right one.  But the legend, I know a legend, and I can find a legend, you know, right now.  Like, my daddy [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], you know.  And I went to him and told him the idea.  And he was like, "Man, I ain't going around calling nobody no dummy."  (Laughter) I was like, "Dad, you don't understand, man.  This, you know, can be real good for your career, you know.  I mean this is a brand name that's all over the world.  You know, it's in hundreds of countries, you know."  Well, at the time it was in like thirty countries, and they were doing it in thirty languages.
Speaker 1: On I don't know scores of subjects.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean everything from 'Classical Music for Dummies'...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Macintosh for dummies.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, a wide range of everything, man.  And, and, and he was like, "Ah... you know--."  And I was like, "Well, I'll tell you what.  Just go in the bookstore, and you know, tell me how many books you see, you know, with the yellow and black For Dummies name on it."  And he went and he was like, "Yeah, I saw 'Sex for Dummies.'  (Laughter) I saw 'Beer for Dummies,' I saw 'Wine for Dummies.'"  And I was like, "See."  You know, and he's like, "But still, man--."  For some reason he was so reserved about it.  You know, so I started moving on.  And so I found Cub Koda who's from Brownsville Station, the band, 'Smoking in the Boys Room.'  And he was a go.  And we were like, "Man, we still need to find a legend."  So, you know, we called up [HistoryMaker] B.B. King's people and, you know, talked to B.B.  And B.B. was like, "Yeah, I'll do it."  You know, and I went to--well, I talked to Robert Cray, I talked to John Lee Hooker, and they were all for it.  And I told Dad, I said, "Are you sure you don't want to do this, man?  I got, you know, B.B. said he'll do it."  He's like, "All right, well, I'll do it then."  (Laughter) You know, he was like, "I'll do it."  When he heard that I talked to B.B. and John Lee and Robert and them and they were like on board, he was like, all right, this ain't something that my little son is just, you know, getting himself into.  This is something that's real now, you know.  But the hardest part was getting the music.  Because, you know, with the book, there's a CD with, you know, blues hits on it, you know, ranging from, you know, from Bobby Bland to B.B., [Clarence] Gatemouth [Brown], Rufus [Thomas].  You know, so many people, you know, involved with it.  But we basically, you know, got down with the book and put it out and published it in '98 [1998].  And right now, as far as I know, it's in eight languages.
Speaker 1: That's quite a success, quite a story.
Story_ID: 278486
Speaker 1: Who are your favorite musicians?  And I know your father [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] is one.
Speaker 2: My father is number one, my favorite.  Buddy Guy--now, you know, if you want to count the living or you know, the dead, then you know, I have like different ones.  But Lonnie, Buddy [Guy], [HistoryMaker] B.B. [King], Dead would be--Albert King, Freddie King, Albert Collins.  I like Curtis Mayfield as well, you know.  As far as rap, I like Kanye [West], Eminem, but he's, you know, 50 [Cent], Ludacris, Mos Def, Talib Kweli, [The] Roots.  I love Roots, I love them guys.  Let's see, soul and R&B, Aretha Franklin, Curtis Mayfield, like I said.  James Brown--I can go all down the line.  But as far as blues?  Is that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just thought I'd ask you who your favorites were.
Speaker 2: A wide range, a wide range.
Speaker 1: So you listen to a lot of different kinds of music?
Speaker 2: Everything, everything.  I, you know, I don't listen to jazz that much, but I do like jazz.  I don't listen to country that much, but I do like country.  You know, certain songs will probably catch my attention, and then for a week straight I'm on country.  (Laughter) Or you know, for a week straight, I'm on classical, or you know, just listening.
Speaker 1: What's your impression of the relationship between country music and the blues?  Is there any relationship?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Country, to me, is blues with a twang, someone talking with a, singing with a twang.  That's all it is, that's all it is.  It's just somebody pronouncing words, you know, with a twang.
Speaker 1: Because I think they both come out of a similar southern experience on some level, I mean similar in some ways, anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much.  It's just, you know, it's just the way somebody talks, you know, or somebody sings.  You know, its accents, you know, their different accent.
Story_ID: 278487
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I hope, well I'm very concerned about, you know, African Americans in the ghetto, you know.  And the reason why, you know, is because I'm looking all the things that we've done for this country--you know, blood, sweat and tears--and there's nothing that we're doing in the ghetto--or there's nothing the government is doing, when you're spending close to half a trillion dollars on war.  And just a percentage of that could be going to the ghetto that can change somebody's life, it can change millions of lives, you know, if you just put a percentage of that money that you put on killing people for life in the black community.  It would change a lot of the way people think; it would change the way people live.  You know, it would be hard work but, you know, that's--I'm concerned about that.  I mean I'm concerned about how easily the government would put up money for war and killing before they put it up for life that's living.  And that's part of my hopes, that I hope that, you know, one day that, you know, it can, you know, reverse.
Story_ID: 278488
Speaker 1: What are your, I guess, future plans?  I mean, what are your goals now?  You're still young in the music business and all that.  And, you know--
Speaker 2: My goal is to win a Grammy [Award].  That's one of my goals, and to me that's like a five year goal.  Right now at this point, it's to win a Grammy for my music.  And the reason why I want to win a Grammy, is because when you win a Grammy you're recognized, you know, for your art at the highest you can possibly be recognized.  And with me and my music, I want to be able to win the Grammy, and then when people know who I am, I want to be able to turn them on.  I do it today still on my shows.  But I want to be able to turn them on to where I got this stuff from.  This is who you really need to be knowing, you know.  But when [HistoryMaker] B.B. King--you know, people know B.B. King, but he will not be televised on the Grammys.  That's another one of my goals, is just to be able to help have bluesmen have their own category just like they have with rap; just like they have with rock.  So, when B.B. King goes up there, you know, and accepts his award, it can be televised.  So with the Grammys is saying, "Oh, well, you know, blues don't make enough--blues don't have enough sales to be televised. Because there's not a market on this show that people would know of."  So how do you, how do you get, you know, the market?  By putting them on TV.  So, it's a catch twenty-two.  So, if B.B. King won an award he should go up there and accept the award, and speak just like everybody else.  This is American music, man.  That's the basis.  That should be the first category being played with the Grammys, is the blues category.  And then you move on.
Story_ID: 278489
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I would start playing guitar a lot earlier.  I would have started--that's one thing I wish I could change, that's just one thing.  Everything else, I'm satisfied and complete with.  But I wish I would have started, when I was like, you know, six or seven years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In some ways, as I'm thinking about it, the exposure you had to all of this was kind of a start that a lot of people don't get.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  You know, the publisher [IDG Books] was like, "Man, you know, man, this book ['Blues for Dummies,' Lonnie Brooks, Cub Koda, and Wayne Baker Brooks] is something that [HistoryMaker] B.B. King should be doing, you know."  And it's like, "But you came up with the idea, and we can't stop that." You know, this is, you know, fate, I guess.  You know, that's how I look at it, it's fate.  You know, it's something that was going to happen regardless.
Speaker 1: Yeah, somebody was going to do it sooner or later, but you did it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm talking about with me.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm, you know, I'm focused on getting out who people should know, you know.  And that book tells everything you should know about your history--everything you should know about, you know, another culture if you're another race or another--
Speaker 1: Or enough to keep you from being a dummy.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that too.  But my main thing was to be able to turn on people who didn't know these people.  And they should know, man.  That's why I'm an advocate about, you know, the blues and the Grammy's [Grammy Awards], you know, hoping that they televise it.  And then that way the market would grow, if they televised it.  It needs to be out there, man.  If you don't water your roots, how are you going to grow, man?  How is the tree going to grow?  The tree is going to--if the roots die, then you know, the tree will still stand a little bit.  And the fruit will grow, you know, what's still there.  But when that tree falls, you got nothing.
Story_ID: 278490
Speaker 1: Now tell me this.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, what would you consider at this juncture--and you're still early.  But what would you consider now to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, man.  I would say my legacy is preserving the legacy that, you know, of my grandfather and my great-grandfather.  You know, taking it to another level of, you know, what my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] does for a living.  That's a good question man.  You know, I never think of stuff like that, you know, what's my legacy?  You know, I don't--I just do it.  I just do whatever I feel, you know, that's right.  I do whatever I feel needs to be done.  I do what I feel, as far as my music.  You know, I put--you know, I write that.  You know, I don't look at--like a legacy.  But now that you've asked me that, you know, it's mostly preserving the legacy that my dad, you know, has took to another level from his great--from his granddaddy [Henry Jackson].  That's pretty much--I have to think about that one, man.  I'm going to have to think about it a little longer than right now.
Story_ID: 278491
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family.  You have, you mentioned some children, or at least your son?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have four children.
Speaker 1: Four, okay.
Speaker 2: I have three girls and one boy.  And my middle girl plays guitar and cello for the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].  And my son plays, but it's on and off, you know.  He's more into art than anything.  You know, he likes art.  My baby girl, she's a little drama queen.  (Laughter) She's a little actress.  She's going to be the star of the whole family.  She's going to take it to another level.  And my oldest, you know, she just graduated.  She's, you know, going to junior college.  You know, so everybody has their own special little thing.  But you know, I'm looking for my daughter, my middle girl, to keep the music alive in our family after I'm dead and gone.
Story_ID: 278492
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you want to talk about, before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think you asked me just about everything.  I mean, you know, if you want to take a look at my bio.  Oh, yeah, I think me, myself--I mean my dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks], Koko Taylor, and myself were probably the first bluesmen, and women, to play the All-Star Game in Chicago [Illinois] in 2003 at U.S. Cellular Field [Guaranteed Rate Field, Chicago, Illinois].  I think we were the blues people to ever do any kind of all-star game.  And that was like five minutes before they announced the team.  And we were in the middle of home plate, on the pitcher's mound.  So we were like right in the middle, like five minutes before they announced, before they did the start--I mean everything was just, I was in awe, in front of fifty-two thousand people.  You know All-Star Game, no roody-poos, all pro ball players that were the best, and we were right there.
Story_ID: 278493
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy in a way, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I guess, you know, for my music, you know, and through the things that I, you know, achieved.  And I want to be remembered as a musician that tried to turn people on to what was real; where American music came from; how it evolved into, you know, an industry that's full of American music.  You know, they need to know about blues.  That's how I want to be remembered, as a person that advocated blues.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 278494
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the Olympia [Beer] stage at the ChicagoFest.  My dad [Lee Baker, Jr.; HistoryMaker Lonnie Brooks] had just played at the ChicagoFest back in 1980 with Muddy Waters, Willie Dixon, Koko Taylor, Sonny Seals [Steele "Sonny" Seals].  And that's me to the left, that's my dad in the blue jeans, and then that's [HistoryMaker] Ronnie [Baker Brooks] to the right with the blue stripes.  And that's my little sister, Gina [Baker].  And this was after his performance.
Speaker 2: Next photo.
Speaker 1: That's me, prominent in the picture there as a little kid.  That's my brother Bobby [Robert Lauderdale] to the left.  That's my Aunt Marlene [ph.] that's leaning over, and I have no clue who that is to the right.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: That had to have been like 1972, '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And of course, that's my dad to the left.  And that's me, proud of my dad, hugging on him.  That's 1978.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Again, that's my dad on the Olympia stage at the ChicagoFest.  I think he was just about to--yeah, you know what, he was just starting.  That's him to the left in the blue jeans.  That's me in the middle with the red stripes, and that's my brother Ronnie with the blue stripes.  And that's my little sister that someone is trying to put up on the stage, or bring down.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's Ted Witcher [Theodore Witcher], who produced 'Love Jones' the movie 'Love Jones' with Nia Long in it.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: Well, it's actually Theodore Witcher.  So it would be--
Speaker 2: Well, the last name?
Speaker 1: W-I-T-C-H-E-R, I believe.
Speaker 2: He's a Chicago [Illinois] filmmaker, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a Chicago filmmaker.  He went to Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] with George Tillman [Jr.].  And I first remember him in Iowa in the late '80s [1980s].  He came to see us, and he said he wanted to--he got into film because he wanted to write a movie and direct a movie about my dad, Lonnie Brooks.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's me in Indianapolis [Indiana] in 1998.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's me and Mr. Hubert Sumlin, who used to play with the great Howlin' Wolf, holding up our book 'Blues for Dummies' [Lonnie Brooks, Cub Koda, and Wayne Baker Brooks].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that right there is me and Buddy Guy trading licks at Buddy Guy's Legends [Chicago, Illinois].  And that had to have been like 1999.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: That's Michael Ealy and myself on the set of 'Barbershop' one.  And that had to have been 2002, yeah, 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--no, 1998, I believe at the Chicago Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival].  I'm unsure on the date--the Chicago Blues Fest.  That's myself, and my dad in the middle, and my brother Ronnie.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's George Tillman, Jr., and myself at Columbia College in 1997.
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's myself, Branford Marsalis, and my dad at the Willie Dixon tribute out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at [HistoryMakers] B.B. King's in 1993 I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's Chris Rock and myself at the Green Dolphin [Street] here in Chicago.  And that was during the [1996] Democratic [National] Convention here in Chicago.  We played for Comedy Central that day.
Speaker 2: That was '96 [1996], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '96 [1996], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's the two-headed monster, the two guitar monster.  (Laughter)  No, actually that's my brother with his guitar strapped around me, and myself playing my guitar.  And we're both like playing both of the guitars at the same time.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's me and Eve, the rap artist Eve, on the set of 'Barbershop' one.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: George Tillman, myself, and Bob Teitel, the producers of 'Barbershop'-- yeah, producers at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's myself and Sean Patrick Thomas on the set of 'Barbershop.'
Speaker 2: Great, next.
Speaker 1: That's Lauryn Hill and myself at the Smoking Grooves tour at the Tweeter Center [Hollywood Casino Amphitheatre, Tinley Park, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: That's myself and my dad doing an ad for Gibson [Gibson Brands, Inc.], which was an advertisement that went across the world.
Speaker 2: And what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, 1998.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's my CD, 'Wayne Baker Brooks, Mystery,' the title track off of Blues Island Records [Chicago, Illinois].  And I am the owner of Blues Island Records and Blues Island Productions [Chicago, Illinois].
