Story_ID: 260637
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Tuesday, January the 11th, 2005.  And this interview is taking place in Baltimore, Maryland.  Now if you would, please, for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it, please.
Speaker 2: My name is Marion Curtis Bascom, M-A-R-I-O-N, C-U-R-T-I-S, B-A-S-C-O-M.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Pensacola, Florida, March the 14th, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: A clergyperson.
Story_ID: 260638
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions that we ask just to get to know you a little bit better.  And so I ask that you give me just short answers to these questions.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: A good piece of rack of lamb.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Nassau in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.
Story_ID: 260639
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name, and where she was born, and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: Let me say from the outset, I know very, very little about my parentage and its background.  My mother was born in Pensacola, Florida, in, in 1906.
Speaker 1: And your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Mary Ella Anderson Knutt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your mother raise you?
Speaker 2: I was raised by being juxtaposed from my mother to my aunt to my grandmother to my grandmother, so that you might say that my upbringing was rather circuitous.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, why don't we do this: why don't we, why don't you tell us what you do know about your mother?
Speaker 2: She was the gentlest, firmest, most loving, arrogant, beautiful, tender woman I have ever known.  She was a mixture of all of that and more.  But more than anything else I can say, is that I respect her as she sleeps.  She never provided for me a moment in which I was not happy with her.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: My mother ran the gamut.  She was a domestic.  She was an excellent cook who finally developed by experience into a professional cook.  In fact, her last cooking was done at Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland], a camp for kids here in Baltimore [Maryland] that was organized during the days of [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson when he became excited about the Great Society.  She cooked for several thousands of youngsters out in Carroll County [Maryland] here in, in Carroll County at our camp.
Story_ID: 260640
Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father, starting with his name and what you know about your father.
Speaker 2: I know very little about my father, other than at a, at an early age, maybe six or seven years of age, he died.  He contracted tuberculosis, and that's about all I know about my father.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name was Brucell, B-R-U-C-E-L-L, Brucell Bascom.
Speaker 1: And do you know where he grew up as a boy, or?
Speaker 2: In Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 1: Do you happen to know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: One lived in one, one block of the street, and the other lived in the next block of the street, and that was the beginning of it all.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, how would you describe your father?  I know that he died when you were a very small boy, but what, can you describe him?  How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: I would describe him as being a boy that was greatly loved by his mother, my grandmother [Alice Boris], who spoiled him to no end.  Very early she bought him automobiles.  And he was quite a boy.  About that, that's about all I can say to him.  She sent him to a little school, as I'm told, called Spring Hill Academy [sic. Spring Hill College] in [Mobile] Alabama.  And she sent him for a while I think to Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I'm not sure that he managed to finish either one of them.  He was the boy who never did too well but was loved by his mother to a fault.
Story_ID: 260641
Speaker 1: Why don't we talk a little bit now about your grandparents.  I know that you spent time with both of your grandmothers.  But why don't we start with your paternal grandparents, their names and what you know about them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My paternal grandmother was named Alice Bascom Dunklin [ph.] Boris.  She was married to my grandfather, who was Sam Bascom, whom I never knew.  She was married to Early, E-A-R-L-Y, Early Dunklin, who was also a railroad employee.  And she was married to Vincent Augustus Boris [ph.], whom I knew very well, who was a contractor and musician in Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was a great source of inspiration to me.  She was born in Alabama and was--these are thing she told me--she was born in Alabama and was the, the, the, the child of a woods rider.
Speaker 1: What's a woods rider?
Speaker 2: A woods rider was a white man who ran the plantation on which she was born and who kept oversight over all the people who worked on the plantation.  She tells me that she was his daughter.  She says that sometimes way across the woods she could hear him cracking his whip.  And all the people on the plantation knew that when he cracked his whip, that trouble was on the way.  She was not a slave but post-slavery and not too far from it.  You know, and your questionnaire you ask what have I done about my, my parentage?  One of these days, if I don't die before I get too old, I'm going to try to pick up the pieces because I was, so I'm  told, was delivered by her grandmother, who was a midwife.  Her name was Anna Jackson [ph.].  I can only remember her ever so vaguely.  She was called Granny Jack.  She delivered most of the babies in that area in Pensacola.  My grandmother, getting back to her, was a very attractive woman and very frugal.  She knew how to save money, and she would build her a house for rent at the dropping of a hat.  Now if, and, and these were in the '30s [1930s] and very early '40s [1940s], if you did not pay her the rent, she would hire somebody to go and put a lock on the front door, a padlock.  And very often the people knew that she was going to come and knock on the door for the rent, and they wouldn't answer, and so she would lock the people in the house.  She was a character.  And many years later, I used to kid her about the fact that she loaned money to people on, with terribly high interest rates.  You had to pay her a dollar, a quarter on the dollar per week.  So if she loaned you five dollars, at the end of five days, or four days, you, you'd owe, you owed her a dollar, you owed her a quarter for every day for, for the money that she loaned you.  So she was a, a character to end all characters.  She was benevolent.  She loaned a little church, which is now in Pensacola, Houser Chapel AME Zion Church [sic. Houser Memorial AME Zion Church, Pensacola, Florida], she loaned them money to buy the property where the church presently is located without interest.  Well, I guess that's enough about Big Mama.  That's what I called her.  Her name was Alice.  And everybody in the city called her Ms. Dumpsey [ph.].  She was a plump, very pretty woman.
Speaker 1: My other grandmother was named Corine, two different people altogether.
Speaker 2: What was her last name, Corine?
Speaker 1: Corine Anderson.  That is the maternal grandmother.  She, for the most of her life, was a nursemaid to well-to-do white people.  She worked for an ophthalmologist there [Pensacola, Florida], Dr. Ernest Kina [ph.].  And she raised all of Dr. Kina's children.
Story_ID: 260642
Speaker 1: She [Bascom's maternal grandmother] raised you, you said, from about age six on through high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Pensacola, Florida].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so did you, did you still see your mother [Mary Anderson Knutt] often or--
Speaker 2: You know, my mother moved to Chicago [Illinois] when I was a little boy, and I stayed with her for as long as she could keep me.  And I went to a little school--not a little school; it was a big school, the Raymond [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] on 37th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  And I went to Sunday school for a while at Olivet Baptist [Church, Chicago, Illinois] at 31st [Street] and South Parkway.  Of course, they have changed the name from South Parkway to Martin Luther Boulevard [sic. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive].  But I came back to Pensacola [Florida] and remained there.  My mother came to Pensacola on occasions to visit with me.  I loved my mother so very intensely until when she would come down, even if she gave me some little, a package of Wrigley's gum, I would chew the guy and save the packages.  That was the kind of love I had for my mother.  And interestingly enough, she came here to Baltimore [Maryland] to live with me before she died and became the cook at Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland].  I guess that's my, my, my grandmother, Corine [Anderson], was a character unto herself, a very ladylike, corseted woman, very religious.  And she saw to it that I went to church for Sunday school, and then I stayed to BYPU, which later became BTU; that was Baptist Young People's Union and Baptist Training Union.  Then I would come home, and there might be a 3:00 service somewhere, and I would probably go to that.  And then back at 5:30, I would have to be back at BYPU in the evening and stay through night service, which was at seven or eight o'clock, so that my whole Sunday was taken up with going to church.  Incidentally, I have never under any circumstances been, been at a point where I had so much church that I didn't want anything to do with it later.  I have always loved the church, in its weaknesses and in its strengths.  And maybe before we finish I will talk to you something about what I think its weaknesses are.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, we'll come to that.  [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, what impact did your father's [Brucell Bascom] death have on the family?  Do you remember when your father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --died?
Speaker 2: I, I remember when he died, but I don't remember any impact.  By that time, he was living in Pensacola, and my mother was in Chicago, which means that I did not know a real warm, tender relationship between the two of them.  And I guess that's the best way I can put it.
Story_ID: 260643
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up are a couple of things: number one, I remember trying to bathe some kittens.  And they disagreed with my decision.  And they pretty much scratched me to death.  I remember always wanting to be on the pulpit.  I was always interested in preaching.  I always loved preachers.  It's strangely, it's just strange thing now that I don't love them quite as much as I did when I was a little boy.  But I remember enjoying the experience of preaching funerals of cats and dogs as a little boy so that I would disappear from the pew and the church and wind up sitting on the pulpit with the preacher on Sunday mornings sometimes, and nobody could stop me.  This is the kind of, of experience that I, those, that's the earliest thing I can remember.
Story_ID: 260644
Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe for us what Pensacola [Florida] was like when you were growing up, so that would be like in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s].  What kind of community was it?
Speaker 2: Pensacola is the place of my birth.  And I guess every bird likes his own nest.  It was a typical southern city that took great care at identifying for black people where they belonged and assuring white people where they belonged.  I hope you see the nuance there.  I remember having to sit on the back of the bus.  I remember going to Kresge's [S.S. Kresge Co.], which the dime store and Woolsworth['s; F.W. Woolworth Co.], Woolworth, and McCrory [Stores] and seeing the, the fountains on the walls saying white and colored.  When we went to the movies, the movies, the front of the movie where the white people went in was on Palafox [Place].  Colored, the colored would have to go back down to Romana [Street] and go up about four flights of steps and to sit in the balcony.  We knew that we were not supposed to sit there.
Story_ID: 260645
Speaker 1: What street did you live on?
Speaker 2: I lived on Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N, Street.  It was near to the end of the city, not quite near to the end of the city, because I think the city ended at Cross Street.  But I lived, believe it or not, on the last street in Pensacola, Florida, where the street was paved.  Beyond that, every street to Cross Street, maybe ten or fifteen blocks, the streets were sand beds.
Speaker 1: And what was your block like?  Can you kind of describe your block for us?
Speaker 2: Well, on the corner there was a grocery store.  And the next building was a, a dog hospital.  And there were another couple of houses.  And then my house was a, a little house with a front porch, a very thin hall and dining room.  And then on the hall there was my grandmother's [Corine Anderson] bedroom.  And the next room was where my uncle and I slept.  And then there was a kitchen and a toilet on the back porch, and I think it was closed in.  And there was a kitchen, be- and the, and the big stove, the wood stove where I took a bath every Saturday night.  That was bathing time.  You didn't bathe.  You might wash your feet, particularly in the summer because you were going barefoot most of the summer.  You washed your feet every night before you went to bed, but you didn't necessarily wash your face and all of that because it was too much trouble.  I guess that's, that, that's about it.  That's the house I lived in.  We had a, had a big yard with a lot of pecan trees and some peach trees.  And we would plant okra, and collard greens, and turnip greens.  And well, I guess that was it; that was our house.
Speaker 1: Were you all one of the few families that had a toilet that was enclosed in the--
Speaker 2: No, most of the toilets when I came along were, were close to house or in-house.  I don't remember any outhouses as a boy other than further up the road, you know, you could see them.  And that, of course, interestingly enough, is a far cry from years ago when I went down into Appalachia visiting some poor families down there.  And many of them would put their toilets, the outhouses, out front, which was an indication of how prosperous they were that they had an outhouse.  That's, that's an aside that is not important to this conversation.
Story_ID: 260646
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school where you attended?
Speaker 2: Spencer Bibbs [Elementary School, Pensacola, Florida].
Speaker 1: Could you--
Speaker 2: SP-E-N-C-E-R, Spencer Bibbs, B-I-B-B-S, School.
Speaker 1: And how many rooms was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess it might have been twelve rooms in it.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was a pretty big school?
Speaker 2: Pretty big school, yeah.  It wasn't, wasn't all that big, but it was a school where we had, where we had to, in the wintertime, we would have to go out and get scuttles of coal.
Speaker 1: How cold did it get in Pensacola [Florida] during the wintertime?
Speaker 2: Cold as sin.  You see, Pensacola is up in the, in, in the panhandle.  And it's a part of Florida that many claim should be a part of Alabama.  So, there's a city that's maybe twenty or thirty miles from Pensacola called Flomaton, which is Florida/Alabama, Flomaton, Florida and Flomaton, Alabama.  But, I guess that's--
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from grammar school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: I can remember pretty much every teacher I ever had.  There are some I can't remember, but I, and I firmly believe the reason I don't remember their names was because they didn't deserve to be remembered.  But my, my first teacher was Ms. S-A-L Hawkins.  That was not a public school.  She just had a little kindergarten around at her house where children went to be kept pretty much.  But that was my kindergarten teacher.  I cannot remember my first grade teacher, but my second grade teacher was one of the strongest influences of my life.  Her name was Sadie E. Prior [ph.].  She later became principal of Spencer Bibbs.  The third grade was Benny Rainey [ph.].  I can't remember the third, the fourth, the third grade, but the fourth grade was Suzie Peat [ph.], and the fifth was Mary Boyd, and the sixth was Verdell [ph.]--I can't think of her last name.  But she was the teacher that I was most frightened of.  She had a great big voice, and she used it with great alacrity.  And then, of course, that was as much schooling as black kids could get on that side of town.
Story_ID: 260647
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years [at Spencer Bibbs Elementary School, Pensacola, Florida].  When did you start actually preaching?  Was that during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: No, I started preaching when I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Pensacola, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, then let's wait.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, what type of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think that I have ever worked up to my optimum.  But I have always just sort of tried to accommodate that notion by the fact that I do not see very well, and I have never been able to see very well.  I can only, I can only see well out of one eye.  And as I have grown older and grow older, my wife [Dorothy Bascom] does most of the reading to me.  I tire very easily after trying to read, and as a result, she does most of the reading for me.  But we read maybe two or three books a month.  And it is both secular and religious.  I think the, the latest to, the latest one that comes to mind of a secular nature is the one title, 'Vernon Can Read![: A Memoir,' Vernon E. Jordan, Jr. and Annette Gordon-Reed].
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.]'s--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --autobiography.
Speaker 2: --that's the story of Vernon Jordan's life.  And well--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom: during elementary school, did you have dreams and aspirations?  Like, what did you want to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: A preacher.
Speaker 1: What did your friends think of that?
Speaker 2: It really never occurred to me what they meant, what they, what they felt.  They always knew that I was a church mouse.  And in fact, most of my friends were, were church kids.  I had a grandmother [Corine Anderson], I told you how religious she was.  I had a grandmother who would not let me ride my bike, bicycle on Sunday.  She was that superstitious/religious.  And after one grandmother [Bascom's paternal grandmother, Alice Boris] had bought me a bicycle, she wouldn't let me ride the bicycle to Sunday school or church on Sunday mornings.  She wouldn't let me play baseball on Sundays across the street in the lot.  So, my life was wrapped around the church.
Speaker 1: So you always wanted to be a preacher.
Speaker 2: Always, and I suspect if I had the chance to do it again I would do it all over.
Story_ID: 260648
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Fishing, let's see, I would say fishing and, and schoolyard brawls, going to Sunday school, and choir practice, and plays for Christmas and Easter.
Speaker 1: What smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: The paper plant, that on the days the wind would blow east, this terrible scent from the paper factory, the paper manufacturing plant in our town.  That's one of the smells that I remember.
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: The sounds were sounds that I remember from school and from church, Sunday school songs that in my older years don't make much sense, but I was raised on them, but the happy sounds.  I can remember Ella Fitzgerald singing, "I lost my yellow basket, and I found my yellow basket.  Oh, yes, I really did, I found the girl who took it--the boy who took it, I knew just where he lived.  He said that he was sorry and gave it back to, and I'm so happy I don't know what to do," ['I Found My Yellow Basket'].  And you know, those are some of the sounds.  But I guess some of the sounds that continue to thrill me are the sounds of the great music of the church.  I'm gonna mention her in a few minutes, but I can remember as a little boy hearing at Olivet [Baptist Church] in Chicago [Illinois] when I was with my mother [Mary Anderson Knutt], "Inflammatus" ['Stabat Mater'] by [Gioachino] Rossini and hearing that great choir at Olivet maybe of a hundred voices singing some of the great anthems of the church and William Henry Smith, who arranged some of the great music of the church, negro spirituals.  I can remember the sounds of the organ and Mount Zion [Missionary] Baptist Church in Pensacola [Florida], where my teacher was also the organist, Carrie L. Smith [ph.], who whetted my appetite for the great music, not only the church but secular music as well.  I can remember her playing 'The Blue Danube' [Johann Strauss II]; just [R.] Nathaniel Dett's 'Listen to the Lambs,' 'Great is Jehovah, the Lord,' ['Great is Jehovah,' Franz Schubert] all of these-
Story_ID: 260649
Speaker 1: It was Carrie Hicks [ph.], who when I went from Spencer Bibbs [Elementary School, Pensacola, Florida] to [Booker T.] Washington High School [Pensacola, Florida] was my seventh grade teacher.  And she taught me in the little primitive Baptist church, which was contiguous with, with the high school, Washington High School, whose principal then was Vernon T. McDaniel, the one man that probably I have more respect for than any other man I have, I have ever known.
Speaker 2: Why is that?
Speaker 1: He, he, first of all, was a gentleman.  He taught us to play tennis on the tennis court.  He was not just a principal.  He was a principal/teacher.  He, he taught children and students and teachers.  He was not the principal.  He was the principal/teacher.  And it was during this period that segregation was coming into stronger ferment.  And he is the man who sued Escambia County [Florida] for the privilege of paying teachers equal salaries.  And he has also spoken on my pulpit here [Douglas Memorial Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  He's now deceased, long gone.  But name, you know, Sadie Prior [ph.], my second grade teacher and principal; Carrie Hicks, in the seventh grade; and Lillie James, who taught me English in high school, who's a sister of [General Daniel] Chappie James [Jr.], the famous general.  I forgot to tell you that I also went to Chappie James' mother's [Lillie James] little school [Lillie Anna James Private School] in Pensacola [Florida].  And during the war [World War II, WWII], when he was learning flying and all that at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], he would zoom his, his, his plane right over his mother's house from Tuskegee to Pensacola air base, the naval air base [Naval Air Station Pensacola, Pensacola, Florida].
Story_ID: 260650
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up as an only child?  Were you ever lonely?
Speaker 2: Growing up with a grandmother like I had was hell.  My grandmother--I had two grandmothers.  Big Mama [Alice Boris] was not the--and that's, that's my father's [Brucell Bascom] mother--was not this terribly strict grandmother.  She would, she loved to go fishing, and she'd take me fishing.  But I, I must remember that my, my paternal grandmother was much better off.  She had a car, and she could drive, and she could get somebody else to drive us fishing and all that sort of thing.  My other grandmother, the maternal grandmother, was strict and almost unyielding at points.  I have recently forgiven her for any misgivings I might have had about her.  She was older than my mother grandmother, and I think she was born nearer to slavery.  I don't know when she was born.  But she was a woman who was very strict and my mother's [Mary Anderson Knutt] mother.  I don't know what else I can say about her.  Oh, I was about to say that as time has gone on, I have began to understand her roots and her upbringing.  And you know, the white community--and this I guess will be the most touching thing that I can say--the white community has done a good job on, on fixing the minds of black people, so that when I was growing up, black people were almost brutal to their children, you know, such things as "Go out in the yard and get a peach tree switch because I'm gonna give you a whippin'."  You had to go out and get your own torture.  Well, this was my [maternal] grandmother, Corine [Anderson].
Speaker 1: Did you ever long for brothers and sisters or siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I longed for them.  They never came.  I used to have some real notions of hoboing and running away from home.  I guess you're about the only one I've ever told that.  Because the railroad, the L&N, the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, was only two blocks from our house [in Pensacola, Florida].  And many times I had thought of hoboing and going away, never to return, but that never happened.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you live with your other grandmother?
Speaker 2: Because the other grandmother wouldn't consent to it.  Remember that my maternal grandmother ans--my mother was answerable more to my maternal grandmother than anybody else, and that was, that was the case then.  And really, I never did live with my, my paternal grandmother until the house caught on fire, and I, I had to move and stay with my other grandmother.
Speaker 1: Did you pray a lot as a child?
Speaker 2: In my own simple way I did, yes.  And at this age I'm still praying as a child.  My notions about God and about life have radically changed, and they continue to change.  Many of the things that I believed in as a, as a child I no longer believe.  Some of the miracle stories about Jesus, I don't believe as they were interpreted then, and as they, and as I have later come to interpret them.
Story_ID: 260651
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit to [Booker T.] Washington High School [Pensacola, Florida].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in in high school?
Speaker 2: I was in dramatics, and I sang in the chorus. I tried to play tennis.  I was alway--always interested in the cultural affairs.  For example, if there was to be a recital of some well-to-do singer, I always managed to go to, to hear them.  I've always been a lover of the arts.
Speaker 1: And when did you preach your trial sermon?  That was during high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't remember the date, but I think it was in 1942.  I think it was in 1942, and, and I've been working at it ever since.
Speaker 1: What church did you preach at?
Speaker 2: Mount Olive Baptist Church in Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 1: How did you do that day?
Speaker 2: With the help of people who were interested in sort of guiding me, I did a fairly good job.
Speaker 1: Did people begin to talk and say, you know, we know one days he's gonna become a great preacher?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I was, I was so enamored with the, with the notion of the pulpit and so enamored with trying to find out what was really truth for me, and I'm still struggling with it.  I do not even now claim to know the truth.  I know some truths about the truth.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That's about--go ahead and say it.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-two [1942].
Story_ID: 260652
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Pensacola, Florida]?
Speaker 2: I had no thoughts but to go to college.
Speaker 1: Why?  Where did those thoughts come from?
Speaker 2: I was raised with the notion that I would be going to college.  You know, it just never occurred to me.  I was reared at the time when it, it would have been obscene not to think of going to college.  How could I preach without having some, some basic training?  How, how could I preach to educated people, and I did not have some basic knowledge about correspondence, be it oral, written, or otherwise.  So that--
Speaker 1: Where were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: I continued to go back to church.  I was Baptist, and I would put it this way: I was Baptist until I got over it.  I'm still Baptist of a kind, a sort.  But there was a Baptist college in Florida, Florida Memorial College [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida].  And fortunately, the president of Florida Memorial College was Dr. William H. Gray, Jr.  Dr. William H. Gray Jr. was the father of Herbert Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], who was the congressman, although we know him as William Gray.  As a little boy, when he was in col--when I was in college, he was just a little boy, he and his sister, Billie Ann [ph.], in St. Augustine [Florida].  And his daddy was president of the college.  His daddy was very friendly to me and very kind to me as a college president, gave me opportunities to speak even on his behalf across the state so that I had a great time in college.
Speaker 1: And what subjects did you enjoy most?
Speaker 2: I guess I enjoyed mental health, history, English.  I loathed and despised tests and measurements and math.  I liked a little science, but math has always been an enigma to me.  I love music.  I guess that's--
Speaker 1: And, and how were, how were you able to afford college?  Did your grandmothers pay?
Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandmother [Alice Boris] pretty much sent me through college other than college aid.
Speaker 1: Which grandmother?
Speaker 2: Big Ma.  I'll let you see her picture before you leave.  And interestingly enough, she is the one who said to me: you don't have enough alphabets behind your name.  I had a B.S., and I was preaching.  And she didn't know to call 'em degrees.  So, she, so I, I was pastoring then at the college.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, you received your B.S. degree in what?
Speaker 2: In English.
Speaker 1: In English.  What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Story_ID: 260653
Speaker 1: So after that, you got your first job as a pastor?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 2: --I, I had pastored while I was in college [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida].
Speaker 1: What church did you pastor?
Speaker 2: It was called Shiloh [Missionary] Baptist Church in St. Augustine [Florida].  And from Shiloh, I was called to First Baptist Church [St. Augustine, Florida]--
Speaker 1: What year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in St. Augustine.
Speaker 1: Okay, what year did you go to First Baptist?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: And that was your first official pastoring job out of college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, First Baptist.
Speaker 1: And what was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, it's behind you there.  I'll show you the picture a little later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the congregation like at First Baptist?
Speaker 2: At First Baptist it was typically First Baptist people.  They thought themselves to be a cut above everybody else in town, just like First Methodist, First Presbyterian.  That church that I pastored was the mother church in St. Augustine, and age is pretty much important in St. Augustine.  It's the oldest city in the country.
Story_ID: 260654
Speaker 1: Then when I left there [First Baptist Church, St. Augustine, Florida] I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: What year did you go to Howard?
Speaker 1: I went to Howard in 1948.
Speaker 2: To (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --study for your master's of divinity?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't get a master of divinity.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got a bachelor of divinity.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And while I was at Howard as a student, I was called to Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: I wanna ask you something about Howard though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what was the climate like at Howard in 1948?  What was the climate on campus like?  Were these different people that you were accustomed to being around or?
Speaker 1: It was an institution that prided itself, as it still does, on being concerned with learning and you know, culture.  Although I did not go to college at Howard, I went to the seminary at Howard.  But those were the days of well, many of the great professors that I did not necessarily study with, but I went to the divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].  The divinity school is one of the schools in the Howard University system.  It, there were some great scholars at Howard.
Speaker 2: Did you feel out of your league, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: --fit in?
Speaker 1: I didn't feel out of my league.  As an example, I was the only one who went in as a, as a middle or, as a freshman and did not have to go back to the, to take remedial English in, in, in the liberal arts college.  So I was, I had pretty much a pretty good record in terms of being able to produce the language.
Story_ID: 260655
Speaker 1: How did the opportunity at Douglas Memorial [Community Church] here in Baltimore [Maryland] come about?
Speaker 2: I was invited here to preach at the Ebenezer AME Church [Baltimore, Maryland] down on West Montgomery Street.  And the, the pastor told me that Douglas Memorial was, was vacant because the year before the pastor had died.  So he said--he was showing me the churches around the city, and he said, "[HistoryMaker Reverend Marion Curtis] Bascom, here's a church who is without a pastor."  And I looked up at it as we were driving on.  I said I'll, I said, "I'll take it."  And he said, "Would you really be interested?"  He said, "It's not a Baptist church."  I said, "I'll take it."
Speaker 1: What denomination?
Speaker 2: It is a nondenominational church.  It is Douglas Memorial Community Church.  Well, he introduced my name to the pulpit committee.  They invited me to preach.  And I preached there on two occasions, and they called me and invited me to be the pastor.  And so, in July the 14th, 1949, I was called to this church, and I stayed there forty-six years.
Speaker 1: And was the fact that it was interdenominational [sic. nondenominational], was that appealing to you or was it a little--
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was appealing to me.
Speaker 1: --discerning?
Speaker 2: I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at a time when scholarship was more important than denominations.  You might say that Howard's divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] is kind of composed of a polyglot faculty; a little bit of everything is there.  And it is, it is not connected to a denomination.  It is nondenominational.
Story_ID: 260656
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, you said that an interdenominational church was appealing to you because of what you were learning at Howard [University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].  Tell us a little bit about what was the congregation like at Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] when you first arrived in 1949.
Speaker 2: It was a fairly high sophisticated church.  And one of the things that moved me more than anything else was the fact that it had, it had a, an outstanding musical program.  For all these years our church has probably had, has followed the lines of the great music of the church.  I would say this without boasting, but it probably has the largest repertoire of sacred music of any black church in America.  And interestingly enough, I brought to Douglas Memorial Church the minister of music, who is now retiring after forty-five years as minister of music at the church.  He was in high school when I was the pas--his pastor in St. Augustine [Florida], James Spencer Hammond.  He is leaving next month.  And we have probably, we have, the church has sung, the choirs have sung at the White House [Washington, D.C.], at the cathedral, the Washington [National] Cathedral in Washington [D.C.].  It has sung everywhere, and it's produced some of the finest oratorios, 'The Holy City' by [Alfred R.] Gaul, the--they slip me right now, but 'Elijah,' [Felix] Mendelssohn's 'Elijah' and well, just go--I, I can't pull them up right now.
Speaker 1: And tell me, what did your grandmother [Alice Boris] think about you pastoring an interdenominational [sic. nondenominational] church?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was interested in my fulfillment.  And she was not necessarily concerned what anybody else thought.  She thought if I made the decision, she respected that decision.  And on that basis, she felt that I was being directed by some power other than myself.
Speaker 1: So this was your, your paternal grandmother or your maternal grandmother [Corine Anderson]?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: What did your maternal grandmother think?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother, I think was happy that I was coming.  She had lived with me for a while (background noise) in St. Augustine in the church house there.  And you know, there comes a time in, in one's life when parents sort of understand that you have moved in another direction, not negatively, but that you have moved into a direction where you must be the adult, and you must make the decisions.
Speaker 1: So she was accepting?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  In fact, she visited me here many times.
Speaker 1: How was the conger- congregation different from that of First Baptist [Church, St. Augustine, Florida] in St. Augustine?
Speaker 2: Very little, only this church had a broader range of membership.  It was a much, much larger church.  The church that I had in St. Augustine had about three hundred members.  This church had eleven or twelve hundred, so that we're talking about two different worlds: St. Augustine, a place for newlyweds and half-deads; and Baltimore [Maryland], a kind of metropolitan city on the main line of the United States of America with all these institutions of learning, so that there was no arging- arguing when I, I came here.
Story_ID: 260657
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of Baltimore [Maryland] (background noise)?
Speaker 2: I have always loved Baltimore, and I think I always will love Baltimore.  I'm pretty sure I will.
Speaker 1: And what was Baltimore like when you first arrived here in 1949 and the early '50s [1950s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Segregated.  Blacks had not moved much farther west than Monroe Street.  The restrictive covenants were very much en vogue.  And of course leads me to say that, in this city there was a highly active, socially conscious community.  There were two very significant people, one at the Urban League, Furman L. Templeton; and the other one was Lillie May [Carroll] Jackson, who was the mother to Juanita Mitchell and the whole Mitchell crew.  She was actively the president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP].  And she was active, determined, mean, loving, demanding, all of this.  And this was the climate into which I came.  There were very few black lawyers in town.  I knew almost every black lawyer in town.  I don't any of them hardly now because there are so many.  [HistoryMaker] George Russell was over on Monument Street in a little house over there along with Bob Watts [Judge Robert B. Watts] and one or two others that I can't remember.
Speaker 1: And you started to become active in civil rights issues and had the opportunity to meet [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in the '50s [1950s], correct?  Can you tell us a little bit about how it was you came to meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, I was visiting with Dr. Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he was also a guest of Dr. Gray.  And we struck up an amicable relationship.  He at that time was just beginning in the movement.  And I guess it was fortuitous that we met because this was the time of ferment, Emmett Till, Dr. [T.R.M.] Howard, who was head of the, the hospital [Friendship Clinic] in Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  This was the time when things were in ferment here, so that there was no--if you were alive and had any sense of urgency about who you were, there was nothing else to do but to get into a movement, because when I was pastor of St. Augustine [Florida], we had had a registration in our church [First Baptist Church] where one night, maybe two or three hundred people in St. Johns County [Florida] came to our church to register to vote.  We had convinced Mrs. Elsey [ph.] to bring her books from downtown to Lincolnville [St. Augustine, Florida].  That's the black section then.  And she brought in her books from downtown, and we registered hundreds of blacks, so that there was a--you see, you have to understand that the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] were just, just bubbling with ferment.  And there were local leaders here who were at work, you know.  It was, in spite of the fact that I knew Martin King, worked with Martin King, supported him, I also supported A. Philip Randolph, and Bayard Rustin, and the March on Washington, the march for Baltimore.
Story_ID: 260658
Speaker 1: I was commissioner of the fire department during the disturbances when Mart- [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, so that I was one of the few people who could drive around the city [Baltimore, Maryland], anywhere I wanted to go, because I wore a white hat from the fire department.  There were three commissioners, and I was the one black.
Speaker 2: You were the first African American.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I not only hope I, I know I was the first black, but I hope that I, because of my actions, elicited support and, and everything else because I did a good job and helped to break the backbone of segregation in the fire department, when blacks could not sleep in the same beds that white firefighters used, so that this was a time of great ferment.  This as a time when [H.] Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] was loose, when Gloria Richardson was loose, the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were loose, so that, as I said, it was fortuitous that I was here at that time, and I got into it.  And I don't remember all the details, but I was present.  And when Martin Luther King wanted to come to town or needed to come to town for support--the man who lies dead today, Samuel T. Daniels, you never, you did not get a chance to interview him, did you?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.
Speaker 1: No.  Well, Samuel T. Daniels became the grand master of the Masonic fraternity.  And every single thing that I'm talking to you about now Samuel T. Daniels had his hands in it.  This was the time of [HistoryMaker] Parren [J.] Mitchell, [III]. This was a time of Joseph [C.] Howard [Sr.].  It was just a time when everybody was on tiptoe, anxious to break, as Mordecai Johnson used to put it at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], to break the backbone of segregation.
Story_ID: 260659
Speaker 1: During that time, were, were, in addition to being anxious, were you also hopeful?  Did you, did you believe that it could be accomplished?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I guess, to make it sound high-toned, I just guess it was a kind of invincible surmise on my part.  I couldn't see it being any other way.  For instance, in 1954, when the school desegregation was declared null and void, the Plessy vs. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896]--
Speaker 1: Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but I'm saying that the Plessy vs. Ferguson was ruled illegal in nineteen (hand motion)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I am also saying that at that time, it just was so hopeful.  It was the brightest spot I think in, in my life as regards to race.  And it was not until the ugly notion of interposition came into being, when the South decided that it was not interested in what the [U.S.] Supreme Court had said and would use every legal tactic, that things began to sort of go down. But even as we interview today, I am less optimistic today.  Yes, some, some blacks have improved.  Yes, some blacks are making millions of dollars, known and unknown all over the country.  The, there is still this, this business of money that stands at, at, at the door that keeps blacks out.  And though some blacks have disappointed me greatly, they have only proved that they're human.  For ex- for example, who would have ever thought that you would have had this magnificent building down at President [Street] and, and Pratt [Street], the, the black museum [Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History & Culture, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Who would have ever thought that--
Speaker 1: The Reginald F. Lewis--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Reginald F. Lewis.
Speaker 1: --African American.
Speaker 2: Who would have believed any of this?  But at the same time, blacks are undereducated.  They still live in ghettos.  The, the courts are still spanking the hands of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], locally and nationally because of, of the poor, the poor housing for blacks.  Schools are in bad shape.  And I don't to sound, you know, I don't want to sound negative.  I just want to sound truthful, that there's still a long way to go.  And I doubt seriously if in my lifetime that we can get over the psychology of the herd, H-E-R-D, that all of us are still in a herd, and have not understood the power of the human family.
Story_ID: 260660
Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about when you were fire commissioner in 1968.  Can you tell us what the city was like during the disturbances and how do you help to bring calm a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well, let me make the picture a little more bleak by telling you that in 1958 I was a member of the grand jury of Baltimore City [Maryland].  And we could not go, members of the grand jury, black members of the grand jury, could not eat in any restaurant for lunch downtown, 1958.  We would have to go into Reeves [ph.] drugstore, which is now Rite Aid.  And maybe they had counters, so you would go to the front of the counter and order what you wanted and go somewhere and eat it.  I guess that, you know, coming back then to the disturbances, it was nothing else to do but to, to speak from our pulpits.  And--
Speaker 1: What did you say?
Speaker 2: The article that I gave you over there was about Governor [Spiro] Agnew.
Speaker 1: But I want to come to that, but I want to ask you first, what, what did you say from the pulpit [at Douglas Memorial Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland]?  How did you help to restore calm?
Speaker 2: Well, there are some facts that are available.  I had talked to, to General [George M.] Gelston was the head of the police department, and he was adjutant general of Maryland.  And I was in his office one day down at the [Fifth] Regiment Armory [Baltimore, Maryland].  And he looked out of the window, and he said you see, we now have in our possession guns and sites where we can pick off anyone we want at North [Avenue] and Pennsylvania Avenue.  We now have the, the fire power to quell almost anything.  It was not a threat, okay.  But at that point, where, where you get all up in the air, then you have to become real.  Let me give you a, another funny example of George Gelston.  We were supposed to have a march up Calvert Street one Sunday.  And so the police told us, "You cannot, you cannot have the march today."  And those who were in the march sat down in the middle of the street.  It was summertime.  Now George Gelston said this, he said "We'll just be patient.  When the sun gets hot enough, the asphalt will get them all up.  We won't have to touch them."  That was a dirty thing, but I, I mention that in passing.  And you asked me how, how did you get calm.  Pretty soon we began to understand that we had to live in this community.  Everything in the community had been almost destroyed and burned up.  And so you have to return to some place of sanity and quiet.  And the churches were, well, everybody was saying look, we can't keep burning, burning, burning, burning.  There has to be an end to it, and we have to go back to work, and we have to get our schools going.
Story_ID: 260661
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the meeting that several, I think a hundred African American leaders attended at the request of Governor [Spiro] Agnew, who was then the governor of Maryland at that particular time in 1968.  What happened at that meeting?
Speaker 2: Well, he invited us to the meeting, not necessarily giving us any agenda.  So we went thinking that he meant that the time had come to develop a peaceable kingdom.  And so we all went in and sat, and he sat up front with his entourage of people.  And all of a sudden, after saying some rather friendly introductory remarks, he said "But you leaders have failed."  And one by one we got up and walked out.
Speaker 1: And he used some profanity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I don't remember all the details.
Speaker 1: But it was insulting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, highly insulting.  And those of us who left came to my, to our church [Douglas Memorial Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] there at Lafayette [Avenue] and Madison [Avenue].  And that pretty much is where that picture was taken.  And we went there that afternoon and evening to regroup, to rethink, and try to firm up what our attitude and actions would be.  We decided that we resented what he had said.  There were some who did not leave, but what was important was that a majority of those whom he had invited got up and walked out on him, and, and bedlam broke loose.  The elevators were so crammed, people couldn't get on coming downstairs.  And on the way down, when everybody got down, we said we'll meet at our church.  And so we walked around up Park Avenue, wherever we were down there, to Lafayette and Madison Avenue, three, or four, or five blocks.
Speaker 1: And in a nutshell, what plan did you come up with?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the specificity of the plan as much as I can remember that we determined that we were against his attitude and the things that he had said and done at that meeting.  And it riled up, it made us guilty, and we were not the guilty ones.  And as a result, we met there.  I wish I could remember the details of what we did.
Story_ID: 260662
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland] was and what the goal of it was.  And was that the late '60s [1960s] when--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Early, mid, early '60s [1960s], okay.
Speaker 2: The, the Great Society, and this was just about the time when Head Start and all these other projects were initiated, so as to begin a new era after the, you know, the, the terror of the '60s [1960s] had come to bear.  We were in the process of building a camp for kids, our church.  And once we got the camp built, we applied for federal funds.  It was an incorporation, separate and distinct from Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  All the property is owned by Douglas Memorial.  The camp was given by Douglas Memorial in, in perpetuity that is to the camp, so that Douglas Memorial only owns the grounds.  But it is in perpetuity to be a camp for underprivileged children.  And we began the camp with a reading program, trying to raise the level of students by X number of years during the summer.
Speaker 1: And so, was it a, an escape for a lot of kids in the city [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Every summer we've had at least a hundred kids to leave from Douglas Memorial to go to Camp Farthest Out for free.  And we got support from WBAL [Baltimore, Maryland], from major donors all over the city and the state.  And as a result, we probably have in those years hosted maybe thirteen thousand kids.
Story_ID: 260663
Speaker 1: We were just wrapping up, talking about Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland].  And Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] has also done some other notable things in terms of its involvement in the community, and Camp Farthest Out is one of 'em.  But I also wanted to ask you briefly about Douglas Village [Baltimore, Maryland].  Can you tell us a little bit about that project?
Speaker 2: Douglas Village is comprised of housing from 1301 Madison Avenue up to the church itself, which is 1325 Madison Avenue.  It originally was comprised of living homes for fairly well-to-do people in Baltimore City [Maryland].  When I came, it was occupied all the way up with predominantly blacks.  And one by one people moved out, and in moving out, the block became just empty.  And so we arranged to buy all of the houses.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: I th- in the '80s [1980s].  The purpose and, and, and they were divided into apartments.  Originally they were one-family houses. (Background noise)  Then we divided 'em, so I think there are maybe thirty apartments.  These, in fact, Douglas Memorial through the years has invested out of its funds pretty much close to $350,000.  We did get a loan, but I think we have done away with the loan in terms of paying it down and out.  And it is now, I think, self-sustaining.
Story_ID: 260664
Speaker 1: Also in the '80s [1980s], you were one of the founding members of Associated Black Charities [(ABC), Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what is, what was that, what is that organization?
Speaker 2: The Associated Black Charities is a group of blacks whose primary interest is to provide a financial arm for organizations and groups who are in need.  Although I'm not active on the board anymore, I was a part of the organizing of it, and it came out of our membership in the, in the United Way [Worldwide].  We became highly dissatisfied with the way the United Way was dispensing money.  And as a result, we organized, being "friendly," in quotes, with the United Way.  And as a result, we had meetings after meetings after meetings.  And we have had, I think this is the third director.  The name of the first director escapes me.  Donna Jones Stanley has stayed here longest and probably, and has developed Associated Back, Black Charities beyond belief.  I, I would think that it is now an agency that has a budget of about $25 million.  I think it is the most successful predominantly black association in the United States.  It provides help for institutions like child care.  In fact, it has made a contribution to Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland] once or twice.  It was, just all over the community it is, it's a place where blacks, and not only blacks, but people all over the state can come and make applications, that the applications are studied, and we hold those applicants responsible if we select them for accountability.  And I would say that it is the stellar organization in Baltimore City [Maryland] sponsored by black--
Story_ID: 260665
Speaker 1: You decided to step down from Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Well, yes.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 2: I had decided that many years ago when the church was in the process of trying to stabilize itself and to develop itself, its, its constitution, I came to the notion that a man or woman, when they come to the age of seventy, ought be prepared to, to step down.  And so in the constitution, we provided a place where the minister of Douglas Memorial Community Church should retire at the age of seventy, and at the age of seventy I retired.  And I would say that more than a thousand people sat down at my retirement party at the Hyatt Regency [Baltimore Inner Harbor, Baltimore, Maryland] on, in March of 1995 to share in that party with me.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Do you, did you feel like at, when you turned seventy, that it was time for you to retire or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And now that I've grown much older, I know it was time.  I just have the feeling that I have done as much as my physical body is prepared to take.  I think I'm still fairly mentally alert.  I think I'm cohesive in my thinking.
Speaker 1: You are, very.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you--so that after, after you stay somewhere forty-six years, there's some guy down the block says, "Look, when are you gonna get out of the way so that I can get to where you-" you see, pastoring a church of the size and strength of Douglas Memorial demands vigorous leadership and not sentimental leadership, vigorous leadership.  And since I have left, the following pastor, the man who followed me (background noise), has continued in school and got a Ph.D.  The man who's there now is working on a Ph.D., and more than likely he'll get it in the next year, so that it provides a real opportunity for people to grow.
Story_ID: 260666
Speaker 1: When you went to Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1949, it was a congregation of about eleven hundred.  And when you left in 1995, how had the congregation changed and grown?
Speaker 2: I think it had grown in terms of, of strength.  I think I had successfully whittled the congregation down to about eight or nine hundred, because you can't stay at a place for a long time and, and not see changes.  And sometimes the preacher does not continue to grow.  Sometimes he is in disagreement with the way things are growing.  I'm very glad that I am no longer there, in spite of the fact that my years there provided me a source of income.  But at the same time, I'm very glad that I'm, I'm, I have gone because I think that the black church in many ways has made some, some changes that I am not use to.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: I find it difficult to scratch where I don't itch, and by that I mean to forever be happy, and handclapping, and praises up, and blessings down.  I think that a church, if it is to show its great strength, must concern itself with causes and not praises.  I think that religion is a thing that should be a part of your head and not your emotions only.  I think your belief systems ought to be systems that will keep you alert to the hurt in the world.  For example, in the black church I wonder, what have we done with this terrible tragedy from Africa to India?
Speaker 1: The tsunami?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wonder what the church is doing.  Is it, it is actively concerned and giving aid?  At one time the black church was very, very, very uptight about making Christians out of Africans and building churches over there.  And you have to remember that Africa is a continent of God's making and that it is not a place where it was overwhelmingly Christian.  Blacks did not come to this country as Christians.  They came to this country as slaves, and they were converted into Christianity.  So that I think that the church has to look back at Africa with a new light to see what it can do along with Africans that, that can make for a, a better world in which to live.
Story_ID: 260667
Speaker 1: I'm not too sure that we don't have too many megachurches.  It's, it's a, it's a, it's a job being the pastor of eleven hundred.  What do you think about eleven thousand?
Speaker 2: Is it possible do you think to pastor that many people, to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 2: --the shepherd of a--
Speaker 1: --it isn't.
Speaker 2: --flock that big?
Speaker 1: No, no, it isn't.  It's, it's, it's possible to have a movement.  But I don't think it's possible to have a church that is concerned with the hurts of every day.  For example, Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] is an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] college.  Where is it?  Gone.  It does not even have accreditation.  It would be interesting to see how many historically black denominationally tied churches are accredited in the United States.  Black people are not supporting the things they created.  Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] had to be rescued.
Speaker 2: Do you think the black church is doing a good job in terms of meeting the basic needs of its people, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, providing shelter for the poor?  Do you, do you think the black church is doing a good job in that area?
Speaker 1: I don't know, but I would say this, that the black church needs to look at itself.  And I don't, I, I think the black church is busily navel gazing, trying to look at its own navel to see how powerful it can become in terms of members.  You've got churches in this town [Baltimore, Maryland] with thousands of members.  I would raise the question: what are their aims and objectives?  Are they becoming clergy-centered or people-centered?  And I know the clergy, that the clergy will not like me much.  I'm not the most popular preacher.  I think that I am one of the most respected preachers but not the most loved preachers, because I have the ability to tell them where I think that they, they're short of their responsibility.
Story_ID: 260668
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: I think what stands out most with me is the fact that the church [Douglas Memorial Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] that I led provided me an opportunity to establish a credit union [Douglas Memorial Federal Credit Union Inc., Baltimore, Maryland] with around a million dollars in assets; a Meals on Wheels program where volunteers take food to the hungry five days a week; for Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland], that cares for children and is still ripe for further enhancement and to give further service; I think of Douglas Memorial Village [Douglas Village, Baltimore, Maryland]; I think of the loyalty of those people who provided for me, flight to go to the march on Selma [Alabama] and Montgomery [Alabama] and provided a place where we were one of the churches that permitted Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] to, to have a speaking engagement in our church on one Saturday evening when nobody else would accept him.  Those, those are just some of the things that I'm happy about and remember, that Douglas Memorial has loved me when I strained them, and well, in the words of Mordecai Johnson, in answer to that question, I've just given you the introduction to the answer.  There are so many others that I could think about.
Story_ID: 260669
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That it will begin to help to take care of itself as best it can.  What frightens me more than anything else is the fact that we just, we have a subculture that needs attention.  We have a, a drug problem that we, that needs attention.  And I'm not saying that we can take care of it alone, but I'm saying that we've got to find ways to sit down and, and to look at ourselves, take a hard look at ourselves and cease this business of floor showing.  Now you're getting me into trouble.
Story_ID: 260670
Speaker 1: What is it that you'd still like to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I guess what I would really like to do is to help the church to look at itself again and again.  I, I find myself sometimes feeling like a stranger in my father's house.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because the church, my father's house that I love, and we began at the very beginning of our talk to talk about my love for the church.  It is still undiminished, but it is still--the years have taught me--ready to do a greater work than it's doing.  I wish that we could begin to look at ourselves and organize around more things that we are for than the things we are against; an example, almost every church in this town [Baltimore, Maryland] uses oil.  We buy it from everybody.  Wouldn't it really make sense if we could get five, ten churches to center their purchases, selective buying that would enable us to concentrate our money together?  Wouldn't it be good if our churches could bank with [The] Harbor Bank [of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland], and Ideal Savings and Loan [Ideal Federal Savings Bank, Baltimore, Maryland], and Advance [Bank, Baltimore, Maryland]?  Wouldn't it be great if we could selectively pool our money?  How many, how many--what is the success of the Jewish community?  Much of their financial success is the fact that they're on the same merry-go-round.  And that, that's a part of my hope for the black church.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career?
Speaker 2: No, I told you that.  I told you that all my life I had wanted to, to be a kind of a witness for the religion into which I was born, understanding full well that all religions have their place in the scheme of things and that all religions need to understand that the dynamic determinant in the universe looks at all of us.  And well, that's where I come from.  I think that maybe the day should come when we'll have a parliament of religions, where all religions will respect each other.  And I know I'm way ahead of my time.
Story_ID: 260671
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  What is it about you that you want people to say when you're no longer here?
Speaker 2: Well, I would hope that they would think of me as being honest and if whether they know it or not, that they would remember me as one who was a bearer of the eternal word.
Story_ID: 260672
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Whatever interviews like this will do for it.  Who knows, somebody might look at this one of these days, and it might make sense to them.  And then we might wind up that it'll be archival material that no one will ever see.
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy at Douglas Memorial [Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] is or will be?
Speaker 2: Lifting its sights to service.  That's about all, not wanting to be the most well-known church with the most well-healed people, that it will attract people who'll have a exalted notion of what their lives are about.  I don't think it's, I don't think it's any accident that Henry [G.] Parks was a member of Douglas Memorial.  And I'm sorry that you will nor anybody else will one of these interviews, because Henry Parks was the head of Parks Sausage [Company, Baltimore, Maryland], and it was he who was in the city council.  I don't think it's an accident that he was a member of Douglas.  I don't think it was an accident that Sam Daniels [Samuel T. Daniels] was a member of Douglas.  And I'm very sure it was no accident that Eddie [C.] Brown and [C.] Sylvia Brown were not members of Douglas.
Speaker 1: Were members.
Speaker 2: They are.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, so what do you think?  You think that was divine intervention that they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think it was divine intervention.  I think that it, that belonging to Douglas Memorial made sense for them.  And Douglas Memorial must find a way to make sense to others belonging there.  It must have a justifiable reason for being on the corner.  And if they're not, and if it is not a justifiable reason, then they need to sell it to the A&P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] or the Giant Foods [Giant Food Stores].
Story_ID: 260673
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Marion Curtis] Bascom, what advice do you have for someone who's interested in a, a career as a clergyperson or a career in the church?
Speaker 2: My advice would be as simple as this: if you are going to be a bearer of the word, you must guide the people with the skillfulness of your hands and the integrity of your heart.  It's just that simple.  You must guide them with the skillfulness of your hands and the integrity of your heart.  If that's not the case, forget it and organize something that will enhance you for your own personal benefit.
Story_ID: 260674
Speaker 1: That is about, that is about 1996.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I guess that's all I can say.  It's me.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: That is the picture of my wife, Dorothy [Bascom].  She is my second wife.
Speaker 2: About year was that, what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: Let's say twenty-five years ago.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years ago?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, so 1985?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Former principal/teacher and a teacher.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of some of my friends.
Speaker 1: Can you just say [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Vernon] Dobson's name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to the right is Vernon N. Dobson, a colleague of mine, a fellow alumnus of mine at, from the Howard divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].  The little boy is his grandson.  And the young man standing behind the little boy is his father, who is a former delegate of the assembly of, the state assembly [General Assembly] of Maryland.  That's Michael [V. Dobson].
Speaker 1: Michael?
Speaker 2: Dobson.
Speaker 1: Dobson.
Speaker 2: And with the beret is [HistoryMaker Reverend] Marion [Curtis] Bascom.  I might say that in all of, in most of my civil rights activities, Vernon and I have been a part of a kind of quartet of preachers, one being Frank L. Williams, the former minister of Metropolitan United Methodist Church [Baltimore, Maryland] here and more lately the Asbury United Methodist Church in Washington [D.C.], Robert Thomas Newbold [Jr.], who was the pastor of Grace United Presbyterian Church [Baltimore, Maryland], and of course Vernon Dobson, pastor of the Union Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland].  These were the four who were called at one time in Baltimore [Maryland] the four horsemen: Frank Williams, Vernon Dobson, Robert Newbold, and Marion Bascom.
Speaker 1: And this was taken at the Million Man March?
Speaker 2: This was taken at the Million Man's March.
Speaker 1: In 1995.  Million Man March (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: I think 1995 (unclear).
Speaker 2: That is the First Baptist Church of St. Augustine, Florida, where I served for two years or so immediately after I finished college [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: That's about what year was that one taken?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947] and '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: That is my beloved mother, Mary Ella [Anderson] Knutt, K-N-U-T-T.  Now you're-finger (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay and about what year was this one taken?
Speaker 1: Let's see, Bernadette [ph.] is '52 [1952] - '53 [1953].  That's, that's about the same time, 1953.
Speaker 2: That is my father, Brucell Bascom.  That is the spoiled boy of my grandmother, Alice Bascom Dunklin Boris.
Speaker 1: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken let us say cirkey [ph.], circa '35 [1935].
Speaker 1: And could you spell your father's first name?
Speaker 2: B-R-U-C-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: That is my maternal grandmother, Corine Alice Anderson.
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken during I would say about '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: And here's the grand lady who told me: "Son, you don't have enough alphabets behind your name."  That is Alice Bascom Dunklin Boris.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was that one taken?
Speaker 2: Let us say about 19--about 1950.
Story_ID: 260675
Speaker 1: My beloved wife, Dorothy [Bascom], and me, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Marion [Curtis] Bascom.
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: This is 2000, maybe 1994.
Speaker 2: I am there speaking at a clergy group let us say in 1992.
Speaker 1: That is my wife again, Dorothy, and myself I guess around 1995 maybe.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, Dorothy, and me.  I guess that is, that might have been at my retirement in 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay, who's this, Reverend Bascom?
Speaker 2: That's my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, you got that one, Matthew [Hickey]?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE:  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Those name, those campers I cannot remember, but that's in one of the--
Speaker 2: Camp (unclear).
Speaker 1: --knows it--let me see, Noah's Arks.  We call the cabins Noah's Arks.
Speaker 2: What is that, Camp Farthest Out [Sykesville, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: That's at my retirement.
Speaker 1: Now that's my mother again, Mary Ella [Anderson] Knutt.  She, that was taken when she lived in Chicago [Illinois].  And it must have been 1945, '46 [1946].
