Story_ID: 16279
Speaker 1: I'm conducting -- I'm Adele Hodge, the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the camera person.  And I am conducting an interview with the wonderful Reverend Willie Barrow, today in Chicago at the HistoryMaker's office, 1900 S. Michigan Avenue.  And Rev. Barrow, would you give me your full name and spell it, and any nicknames you have?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm from the South and you know we all had two names (laughs).  My name is Reverend Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, and Taplin, T-A-P-L-I-N, my maiden name.  And my married name is B-A-R-R-O-W.  So my name is Reverend Willie Taplin Barrow.
Speaker 1: Okay, and nicknames?
Speaker 2: Bea.
Speaker 1: Bea.  Okay, and you're known by 'The warrior' too.
Speaker 2: And Little Warrior.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us the city and state we're in.  I didn't mention it.
Speaker 2: Well, right now we're in, in Chicago, Illinois.  And- but I'm always so proud of where I came from.
Speaker 1: Give me your birth date and your age today?
Speaker 2: My birthday is 12/7/24.  December 7, 1924 so I'm seventy-seven years old.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Burton, Texas, Washington County on a farm where I, I -- I get so excited when I, when I talk to young people and when I talk to people, period. That I learned nature so very early because every morning we had to get up and make up our beds first.  And I was telling some young women the other day, how many women today, or men, make up their bed before they go to work.  And you couldn't see -- nobody made their bed.  But we had to get up, make beds, milk the cows and slop the pigs.  And it was, it was six of us-- three boys and three girls, born on a farm.  And we had a lovely mother and father.  And my father was a-- an ordained minister and he pastored one church for fifty-one years.
Story_ID: 16280
Speaker 1: No kidding.  Well, we're going to really -- I'm excited to get into the detail of all that.  But first we have some more fun questions, just to get our cobwebs off (unclear).
Speaker 2: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 1: All of it.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: My favorite saying is 'Let us stay connected.'
Speaker 2: And favorite season or time of the year?
Speaker 1: Wintertime,  I like wintertime.
Speaker 2: Okay, favorite color?
Speaker 1: Purple.
Speaker 2: And where do you like to vacation most?
Speaker 1: I, I really like the Caribbean.
Story_ID: 16281
Speaker 1: Now, give me your mom's name and -- her full name and spell it for me, and your dad's full name and spell it.  And tell me where they were born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Octavia, O-C-T-A-V-I-A.  Octavia Hooper, H-O-O-P-E-R.  That was her maiden name.  And, and she was born in Texas, Cameron, Rogers, Texas.  And my father was named Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N, Taplin, T-A-P-L-I-N.  And he was born in -- I really don't know where my daddy was born, but it was in Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, name your siblings for me in birth order?
Speaker 2: Sib Jim, them two names again.
Speaker 1: Spell it.
Speaker 2: S-I-B, capital S-I-B and then capital J-I-M Taplin, T-A-P-L-I-N.  Sib Jim Taplin, he was my oldest brother.  My second brother was Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, T-A-P-L-I-N.  Curtis Taplin.  My third, my baby brother was Chancie, C-H-A-N-C-I-E Taplin, T-A-P-L-I-N.  And my oldest sister is Lula Mae, double names again.  Lula Mae Hancock Taplin.  So that's L-U-L-A, M, capital M-A-E, and she's Hancock, H-A-N-C-O-C-K.
Speaker 1: And where are you in the birth order?
Speaker 2: And I'm the next one.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  I'm the next one.
Speaker 2: And, and then my baby sister is named Ruby Lee, R-U-B-Y, L-E-E, Ruby Lee Taplin.
Story_ID: 16282
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.  Okay, let's go back to your early, early years, like your mother.  Do you remember your mother's parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I remember my, my mother.  My mother's mother, you know, back in those days, it was --  What was her name?  -- it was real family.  Her name was Luvendia, L-U-V-E-N-D-I-A, Luvendia Hoop-- Hooper, H-O-O-P-E-R.  And she lived with us after, after she -- my, my--my mother's mother lived to be a hundred, lived to be-- I'm sorry, ninety-five. And I didn't, I didn't know my, my mother's father, but I knew my, my-- my great grandmother who raised my daddy.  She lived to be 113.  And her name was Frances, and her -- Frances Taplin.
Speaker 1: Did you hear any stories of slavery or anything from her?
Speaker 2: Ooh, Lord, yes.  With my grand, and my grandmother was, the one that lived to be 113, she was real tall, thin and, and she was a masterful woman-- woman.  And she talked about slavery and, and how they had to work, and they were treated.  She also talked about the master too. 'Cause I -- and then my, my mother's mother was a little bit more laid back, the one that lived to be ninety something.  And guess what happened?  She used to -- that's why I believe in family right now.  The bottom line is family.  She -- when, when she couldn't live any longer by herself, every-- she would live -- there, there was four brothers and sisters.  And, and she would live three months with one and three months with the other and three months till, till the year was out.  And all of us got a little taste of our grandmother.  That was real family.  And we took care of her.  And that's why my whole bottom line right now is family, stay connected.  No matter what come between us, communicate, stay connected cause when it's all and done, it's family.
Story_ID: 16283
Speaker 1: What's your favorite story you remember about your -- both of your grandmothers?
Speaker 2: Both of my grandmothers -- what was so striking about it, they loved my father.  My, my father to my mother's mother-- I, I never knew it was my mother's mother through my father because she treated him -- they got along so well.  And, and then my-- my great, great grandmother, my mother took care of her.  And I, I guess it was, it's all in the blood of, of how a family ought to be loving and kind because when I married my husband, and he was from Belize and he came to this country at a very early age.  Somebody took care of him.  Then after he was here about ten years, he sent for his mother.  She stayed with me and everybody thought it was my mother.  And his sisters and all of us are just one big family.
Story_ID: 16284
Speaker 1: So you don't remember any of your father's, other than --
Speaker 2: Other than my uncle.  Oh.  My father's baby brother.  That's another one.  He came and stayed with us, and I always thought he was my big brother because he stayed with us all the time.  And he was the hunter in the family.  That was when we had guns and we wasn't killing each other.  He was killing squirrels and rabbits and that kind of thing.  And so we had meat every day because my uncle went out into the pastures and, and-- and he killed our food.  And I, I think-- think so much about when God created the world he said there was birds of the air, the fish of the sea and the beast of the field.  And, and that was our survival.  And that was when we was linked with the, with creation.
Story_ID: 16285
Speaker 1: And your Mom, what, what kind of story stands for you in regarding -- what kind of relationship did you have with your mom growing up?
Speaker 2: I had a great relationship.  We could talk to momma about everything.  But they were so strict.  (laughter).  They were so strict.  My mom and my dad and, but I was very, very -- I was a 'Daddy's girl' because I used to -- my daddy used to travel and he used to be an evangelist.  So I would, he would take me with him.  And I think that's how I learned really how to write and I, and I learned how to, how to speak.  And at eight years old, I was writing a dialogue for Easter and for Mother's Day and training young people in the church, giving Easter programs, Christmas programs and all of that cause I used to travel with my father.  My mother was, was kind of laid back, quiet.  But she was a real mother.  She stayed home.  And she enjoyed that, but she also worked in the fields and washed and ironed for her -- and cooked for six people.  And with my grandmother, that was seven.  With my uncle, that was eight.  And, and then with, with her and my daddy, that was ten.
Speaker 1: Now, you girls helped out I hope.
Speaker 2: Oh, we had to. (laughter).  At that time, everybody had-- had a chore.  You couldn't just get up and say "I'm not going to do anything."  When you went to school, you had to make up that bed and then we had breakfast together, 6:00 a.m., like in the morning.  We had breakfast together and then we had dinner together.  That was very -- but they didn't call it dinner back then.  They called it supper--  (laughter) supper.
Story_ID: 16286
Speaker 1: What kind of sounds, smells, stories remind you of your child -- sights, what reminds you of your childhood as far as --
Speaker 2: I guess the thing that reminds me of my childhood is that we -- in our childhood, my six brothers and sisters, we had a discipline.  And when I see the, the undisciplined youth today that they're almost on their own- we had to get permission to do just about everything, you know.  We couldn't just go out.  You had to have- you had to get permission to go out.  And I didn't understand why-- and courtship, oh my God! What reminds me is that-- my boyfriend, my little boyfriend that I was attracted to, he had to get in the car with father and mamma.  They were in the back seat (laughter).  And, and everybody rode together, but just to be out late at night? And, and not only that, when the-- when the guy came to your house, there was a-- what we call the entertainment room.  And we'd go in there and sit, no doors closed--  and all of that stuff.  So I was under a very disciplined atmosphere and, and then-- and, and you were allowed to do -- you had morals.  And they, they really highlighted morals.  Remember, and when we'd go to school, say, "remember that you're a member of the Taplin family." They had that family thing really bad-- and, and that you represented not just yourself, but your family.  And, and I remember that very, very vividly. And, and that's what I taught my children.
Story_ID: 16287
Speaker 1: Your, grade school.  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Pilgrim Rest. (laughter)  Pilgrim Rest.  It was right next door to the church, Pilgrim Rest Church because you know, in the black community, the black church was the foundation of your, of your social life.  It was a social outlet.  It was a political outlet.  It was an educational outlet.  I, I can't imagine anybody couldn't read because first they had to read the bible.  And if you can read the bible, you can read anything (laughter).  If you can read Genesis and Exodus and, and not only that, we had to spell the books of the bible.  When I was eight years old, I could spell every book in the bible,  the Old Testament and the New Testament.  And so you had to know how to read because you had, you had to go to Sunday school.  And the black church was never designed to just go to heaven (laughter).  It was the political arena,  it was the education arena.  It was the, pardon me, it was the social outlet because you cooked.  And we used to have dinners in the church.  And, and that's where your, your cafeterias came from and your cafes and your restaurants.  All of that came out of the church.
Story_ID: 16288
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite elementary school teacher?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mrs. Kinnard.  K-I-N-N-A-R-D.  Oh, Lord, our elementary -- and I went to a one, one-room, what do you call it ?-- just, just all the classes was in one room.  One-room school.  And, and it went up to the 12th grade.  And, and we was all divided by, by room.  But Mrs. Kinnard stayed in Brennan, Texas and she would come and stay with parents on, like she'd come up Monday morning, and then she'd stay until Friday.  And she stayed with parents. Isn't that something?  And, and we knew her as a teacher, but as a-- as a mother, as a companion, as a friend.  And, and my music teacher was named Mrs. Wilella.  W-I-L-L-E-L, W-I-L-E-L-L-A.  And she was my music teacher.
Speaker 1: Did you -- what instrument?
Speaker 2: Piano.
Speaker 1: Oh, great.  So well, how old were you when you started playing piano?  About six.  And then at, at twelve, I was directing the choir.  And at sixteen, I was called to the ministry.  At sixteen, and then I went to seminary.  Oh. And -- because my daddy, they was so strict.  They were afraid that if, if you left home, something would happen to you.
Story_ID: 16289
Speaker 1: So you were married, you were a minister when you got married?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yes.  And, and I met him [Clyde Barrow] when I was in seminary. And, and guess what?  I went to -- I was on my way to, to class.  And, and I got off the bus and he got off the bus first.  And then he looked at me and he said, "Hi, young lady."  And I just kept walking.  And he said, "Didn't you hear me speak to you?  Next time I speak to you and you don't speak I'm going to whip your little butt."  And I said, "I'm sorry, who are you talking to?"  I said, "First place, you don't know me.  And I don't know you.  And I don't allow any man to talk about whipping my butt."  And I said, "Don't you ever do it again," and I kept walking.  And, and I never saw him again until -- and I didn't have a job.  And my parents didn't have any money to, to send me to college.  So I sent -- there was a woman from Winston-Salem, North Carolina, just came to my rescue.  And she says, I'm, you can stay with me off the campus.  You don't have to pay me nothing and I will feed you.  And, but at that time, I had a lot of faith.  And I'm a faith child.  And I went to the store and I got me a big ole bag of, of everything I think I could eat.  And, and I told the, the--the clerk, I said, now, I'm here in school.  And I-- my parents can't afford to send me, but I'm going to get a job so I want you to charge this.  And, and she never said a word.  She, I took my groceries on home and cooked it.  Two years later she told me that she wanted to say something and-- cause I, and when I got a job, I went back and paid her. And she- two years, she said, I wanted to talk but I couldn't open my mouth.  That was a miracle from God, you know.  And then at that time, the guys were, they were sending the guys to service [referring to World War II].  And, and I applied for a job at Kaiser Shipyard.  And I was one of the first women welders.  I was making forty-two dollars an hour in 1940 something because they had sent all the men to service.  And all they could use was women.  And guess what, I was, I was welding and I did-- I went to welding school, he went to welding school.  And, and I met him like a month and a half later.  And that was the same man that said, he was going to whip my little butt.  (laughter)  He was studying welding and I was studying welding.  So I beat him because I could do overhead.  I could do vertical, and I could do flat and that's why I was making so much money. 'Cause if you could only do vertical, you know, just up in, up in the corners, you'd weld the ship.  But if you could -- and only, some people could only do flat, but if you could do overhead, you could make big money.  So, so I was making big money, went to seminary, and then we got married -- I was engaged to another guy.  And, and he went on his vacation -- he's from Texas.  I went on my vacation, and he met and married a girl in two weeks time.  And, and that just broke my heart.  And, and so he was in seminary,  I was in seminary.  So we came back to Portland, Oregon and I went back to my job, and that's when I got engaged to my husband.  And we got married.  We courted two and a half years, two and a half years.  And I told him, I said, "Now, listen, I like you.  I'm in school, but I don't want -- I don't allow no boys to touch me."  And he thought he, he couldn't even help me off the bus.  So, so he -- I was, he was-- we were going to dinner one evening.  And, and I said, and fell off the bus, and he didn't touch me.  And he said, "Well you told me not to touch you."  I said, "I don't mean that way."  And that's we, he really got a lot of confidence and we had a lot of confidence in each other.  We courted for two and a half years.  And we got married in 1945.
Story_ID: 16290
Speaker 1: What type of child were you, personality?
Speaker 2: I've always been-- well because we had such highly disciplined parents, we had-- you heard of black sheep.  We had one black sheep in the family and that was my older brother.  And he wasn't bad.  He just, he just-- he just didn't get permission to go out.  And everybody else got permission to go, but he would go on his own.  But we were, we -- my mother and father as I, as I tell people all the time now, education is caught as well as taught.  And, and I caught from my parents.  I never heard my daddy swear, never.  Never heard my mother swear.  Never heard-- and I know they argued, but the-- but they were go in the room, some place.  I never heard them argue.  So, so I came up in that kind of sound atmosphere.  And I think, and, and most of us-  I was married fifty-four years.  My oldest sister was married fifty-seven years.  And my baby sister was married fifty years.  She separated from her husband for seven years and went back and, and stayed twenty-three.  Yeah.  So, so all of us have had long marriage, longevity marriages.  And I think it's because of the home base.
Story_ID: 16291
Speaker 1: What were your high school years like?
Speaker 2: They were, they were kind of, kind of rough and, and tough because I -- you know, when you're forteen and fifteen.  I shall never forget those years.  You're not grown.  You're not a-- and-- and you, you're a child, but, but I was always that progressive child, you know, because I ran around with my father.  And when you can sustain yourself with church people, you can make it anywhere (laughter).  You can make it anywhere, so, so that was kind of rough.  And because of the heavy discipline we were under, I was just afraid I would do something to hurt my mother and my father so I was kind of in that crunch.  I can remember that very well.
Speaker 1: Did you have the same teacher in high school you had in grade school? Mrs. Kinnard?
Speaker 2: No, I, she was in, in grade school.  And I had a man in, in high school.  He was, he was very, very--very good.  And he just didn't take no nonsense, you know.  But, but it was the same high school, you see, because we had a one-room school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought.  Yeah. That's why I thought Mrs. Kinnard --
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, right--right, right.
Speaker 1: So was your male teacher as much influence on you as Mrs. Kinnard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, because he was-- he, he was a strict disciplinarian too.  And that was, I think that was when 'men were men' and 'women were real women.'  And, and they had the-- they had the caring of a child progressing.  And education was the bottom line.  And that's why education, it really be-- it begun in our churches.  And that's where we had these religious schools.  But now you can't compare them.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 16292
Speaker 1: Tell me, outside of the, outside of your home, Hooper was it?
Speaker 2: Hooper, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Burton, Texas, what was life like?
Speaker 2: Well, we had one store.  And we had -- I mean one post office.  And it was a very small town, v-e-r-y prejudice, to the point that the white kids rode the bus to school and we, we couldn't ride the bus.  But I was an activist then because one day -- and I've always had bad feet.  One day my feet was hurting me so bad till I jumped up on the bus when they, when the white kids was walking in.  And, and, and walked in and, and sat down.  And that scared them to death, except one girl.  She said, her feet is hurting her. And, and then the whole bunch of kids that I was with, they started running behind the bus.  And they thought they were going to get into the bus.  But I rode and, and the driver picked speed and he -- and, but this one little white girl defended me.  She sure did, even though it was illegal to ride the bus.  And that -- well about a year, about six years after that, they had a black teacher, I mean superintendent.  He was assistant Superintendent because of that one incident caused so much controversy.
Speaker 1: It, it --  How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was, I was in high school.  I was about forteen.  And then they got the black-- it made trouble for the black superintendent or--  No, no, he wasn't there then.  Oh, he-- they brought--  After that controversy, and when, when my daddy and a lot of other preachers from different counties, counties was-- was a big then.  And, and they came all over and they talked.  And they were able to talk, you know.  And, and there was a-- and that's what happened.  And, and now-- somebody called me about ten years ago and asked me about what really happened that day-- I told 'em my feet was hurting! I can- I shall never forget it!
Story_ID: 16293
Speaker 1: What happened after that incident when you got on the bus?
Speaker 2: The only thing they did, they start discussing -- they started talking to each other about the problem and, and the preachers got together and the parents got together.  And they started talking, and then a few years later, that's when they got a assistant superintendent.  But the bus thing didn't change until 1960.
Speaker 1: And you walked ten miles?
Speaker 2: Ten miles.  And we didn't it was nothing because it was a whole road full of children, you know.  Yeah, see everybody was walking.  So you had your little friends, and you'd catch up with them.  And then you'd leave school together and- and you walked across the field.  You had short cuts and no matter how it was raining, you still walked, you know.
Story_ID: 16294
Speaker 1: So do you have any special stories from your high school years you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: I really, I really-- because during those years all you went to school for was to learn.  I didn't know anything else, you know, other than com- than compete.  And to read, to write, you had spelling contests, you had all that.  You- I mean you studied.  And it was-- and you didn't have, you didn't have, you know-- you didn't have the TV, you didn't have -- but you had, at that time Victrola's [old-form record player] (laughter).  And, of course, you only played that at certain times.  And you couldn't -- you didn't have all this crazy music.  So it was a educational atmosphere,  the environment was that.  When you went to church, when you went to school, when you played with your friends, that was the environment.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school again?
Speaker 2: The high school was the Pilgrim Rest High.
Story_ID: 16295
Speaker 1: So you're getting ready to go off to college or to seminary?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that period.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have any money.  I went to stay in California with my aunt  who was eighty some years old.  And, and I was in San Francisco.  And so she stayed -- I stayed with her, and I, I used to-- do embroidered bedspreads.  And I made bedspreads and sold them-- chenille bedspreads and just embroidered bedspreads and showed, sold them.  And then I applied for, for Pacific Bible Institute [Warner-Pacific Theological Seminary, Portland, Oregon] and they accepted me.  And I just went on faith.  And I told my daddy and-and them, and they were so frightened.  I was by myself and going to leave my great aunt, and you're going to be yourself.  This is the way you got to carry yourself,  1,2,3,4,5,6.  And they gave us- gave me my pointers and, and had-- and had prayer-- and had prayer.  And so I wasn't so, I don't think I was that good.  It was that I just didn't want to hurt my parents.  And every time I was, I was tempted to do-- get out of the order of that tradition, I'd think about my parents-- what my mama going to say and what my daddy going to say.  That's what I-- it's so important for parents to set the examples--to set the examples.  And they do, whether it's good or bad.
Story_ID: 16296
Speaker 1: So you decided to become a minister from all those years growing up and going with your father and --
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What are the kind of things --
Speaker 2: And then I was the musician for the church.  And then, then -- like I said, I wrote plays for the church and, and I just felt the calling to help people cause that's what the ministry is all about.  It's all about helping others.  The 'styling and profiling' that we have today and, and might I just say, on this day of the nineteenth of August, our whole -- since 9/11 [September 11, 2001], the whole world agenda shifted-- the world agenda shifted.  And corporate don't know where they are, they really don't.  And, and our schools don't know where they are.  People are absolutely dismantled.  They don't know where to go, what to do.  And, and it upsets me when I hear people say, "Now, what are they?  Who are the they? " We the "They".  We're the one got to recreate a new agenda.  And everyone of us have- has to do it.  And that's why I like -- I go back to this saying, "It takes a village to raise a child."  Now, who's in the village?  Who is in the village?  Business, hospital? We are a 120,000 nurses short,  120,000.  What are you going to do when you go to the hospital?  And if you don't have a close family to help you and to see about you, you-- we're in trouble.  So, so I really do think that we got to back to education and our kids got to know how to read and to write.  And, and turn that t.v. off, three hours a night-- meet your child's teacher 'cause see, I -- Ms. Kinnard [high school teacher] was like, was like my mama.  I could tell Ms. Kinnard anything.  Teachers don't like children, children don't like teachers.  So, so who--who do you communicate with?  I-- and for your information, I had one child and, and then--then I had-- I adopted two.  And I have--but I have a 110 godchildren.
Story_ID: 16297
Speaker 1: What was your son's name and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Keith Barrow.  Keith.  And I was, I was married ten years and doctor says you can't have any children.  And I went on a fast, a fifteen-day fast.  And after I came off that fast, I, I became pregnant with, with Keith.  I already had Pat and Earl and Earl died about twenty years ago.  Pat, my daughter, is in -- she is the, she's at NYU [New York University, New York City] and she is the Dean of Students at NYU, just a beautiful child.  But I got a 110 godchildren.  And Keith, when he was in college, Keith-- Keith, he was extraordinarily smart cause he was high-- he was in college while he was in high school.  He got his PhD at twenty-three.  Really.  Oh, yeah.  He was just extremely, extremely smart.  And, but he was extremely religious as well.  And I don't know-- they don't know yet what happened.  He was getting ready to perform, and he performed -- he was an entertainer.  He did about ten records. And, and I have given his recordings to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] .  And, but he was a devout-- he had a devout commitment to the Lord.  And when he received AIDS, he was the one--he was getting ready to go to his, to perform. And he, he called me from New York [New York],  he was -- he lived in New York.  He's got his PhD in Psychology.  And he said, "Mama, I feel sick."  I said, "What's wrong?"  He said, "I just feel sick.  And I got to perform in the next three hours."  And then he called me back and he said, "Mama, I got to go to the hospital."  And he went to the hospital and that's when the doctor diagnosed him as, as having HIV.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he died?
Speaker 2: Twenty- twenty-three, no-- twenty-seven, twenty-seven when he died.
Story_ID: 16298
Speaker 1: That was a horrible period for you?
Speaker 2: Ooh, ooh.  I lost my mother.  I lost my father, and I lost my -- there's just two people living now, and that's me and my sister.  But to lose a child, it's an entirely different kind of hurt. I mean it's a-- it's a hurt.  To lose your mother is bad enough and your father, but ooh-- the child.
Speaker 1: And this was the child you birthed.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And, and he had a commitment -- no matter what we, and we talked and now his sister, Pat-- we talk every Sunday night.  And he used to call," Mom, what's your schedule for the week?"  And then he would say this is my schedule, and we knew where each other was.  We'd communicate with each other, and it was a wonderful twenty-seven years.  And then I lost my husband just three years ago in 1997.  And I lost him because, and he told me, we're going to tell everybody cause you could, that, that-- that smoking is not good for you.  The doctors said, had told him to quit smoking.  He quit five years before he died, but the damage was already done.  So did he have lung cancer.  Yeah, lung cancer.
Speaker 1: So in the period, in the burr, Barrow household when you were raising Keith and, and --  Pat.  Pat.  And Earl.  And Earl.  What was life like?
Speaker 2: Wonderful.  I was, I was evangelizing then.  And my sister who had two kids, she was living with me.  And she took care of the kids if I had to go out on the road.  But then otherwise than that, I was a housewife.
Story_ID: 16299
Speaker 1: Now, along -- at what point in all of this family growth and activity, did Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] come into your life?
Speaker 2: Well --  Operation Breadbasket.  Breadbasket.  Well, my husband -- we left Portland, Oregon and, you know, we, we went back to California.  And, you know, California, they were so racist and so prejudice at that time.  You, the only job that a black man could get is either at a hotel or a cafeteria or Pullman [railroad] porter.  That's what they were.  So he couldn't get neither job.  So then I moved to Chicago.  And when I moved to Chicago [Illinois], he was a welder.  He got a welding job here.  Then after that he got a job with General Motors as a welder.  And so, so that's when I moved back to Chicago and began to work with Langley Avenue Church of God and, and the minister hired me to do the, the youth coordination--the youth ministry in his church.  So that's how I got started-- and then I got started then-- then I began to -- I was working in the Labor Movement.  See I came through four movements.  The first movement was the reformation movement.  And that's what I'm writing a book on, on the movements in which -- that started me out.
Speaker 1: The Reformation?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  My mama was Methodist.  (Laughter)  My daddy was Baptist.  My uncle was Jehovah Witness.  And, and my grandmother, you know, there's two kinds of Methodist: AME [African Methodist Episcopal] --  And CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal].  And CME (laughter).  My mother was a-- my grandmother was a AME and my, and my mother was a CME.  And, and with all of those denominations, with those different faiths and beliefs, it was really, it was really something.  Now that was just in the household.  But we have that nationwide.  Now, it used to be, it's not as bad as it is now.  And they used to-- that's how the, the Methodist-- the Baptist went out from the Methodist because the Methodist believed in, in baptism by sprinkling.  Baptist said, you got to be emerged [ immersed].  Jehovah Witness say you don't have to be, be neither one.  (laughter)  So, so-- so I went through all of that reform in terms of doctrines.  And then, then that movement.  Then I left that movement and went to the Viet Nam War movement.  And the Viet Nam war movement, I marched and marched and marched and, and got in-- and got involved there with the Viet Nam War.  And then I joined the Labor Movement,  the Labor Movement.  And Charlie Hayes and Addie Wyatt --
Story_ID: 16300
Speaker 1: What was the major labor issue at that time?
Speaker 2: The major labor, labor issue was workers and getting adequately paid, and getting vacation time and hiring women.  And I worked for Armour and Swift Company [meat packing industry].  Swift bacon-- Armour.  And I, and, and my main job was -- and then when I used to have to go to labor meeting, they didn't even have labor officers, even in the Labor Union.  So we fought that.  And my friend Addie Wyatt was the first woman to hold this-- decision position in the AF of LCIO [American Federation of Labor - Congress of Industrial Organizations].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that was the labor movement.  How old were you during the labor movement?
Speaker 2: Thirty.
Speaker 1: That was, that was early.
Speaker 2: Then, then during that movement, I went to-- I heard about a Reverend John Porter.  He's a Methodist man.  And I went to his church.  And Reverend John Porter had -- Dr. King had contacted him.  And the Southern Christian Leadership movement.  So I joined the Southern Christian Leadership [Conference], SCLC under John Porter.  A lot of people think I joined under Reverend Jackson.  Not, not--  under John Porter.  And the morning of Selma [Alabama] and when Dr. King made that clarion call to the nation for they had ran those horses over those people, over Edmund Pettus Bridge [in Selma Alabama].  He said, "I need help.  I need help." And that's when that white gentleman from, from Massachusetts [James Reeb] came.  And, and the girl from Detroit [Michigan] [Viola Liuzzo] that got killed, and then the, the white minister from, from Massachusetts, he got killed.  Reverend Porter said, I got to send a delegation of you all, got to take you to -- down there.  I got to respond to Reverend King.
Speaker 1: So --  This was in the 1964 or right in there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was 1960- [1965] because '63 [1963] was the, was the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, now, we went down there on a train for one day.  There was about a hundred of us, about seventy-five white people and about twenty-five of us, black and brown.  So we went down there and after we got down there, they told us we couldn't get off the train because there was too much violence and that the rednecks was out there waiting on us.  And, and so we had to stay there for about four hours before we could get off the train.  Then when we got off the train, they had a truck waiting on us.  We had to, they said, you can get on the truck, but you got to lie flat on your belly.  And we were -- and we got off the train and got our little luggage and got on these trucks, but we couldn't move-- 'cause they said because the Klu Klux Klan [Ku Klux Klan] was out there.  And so finally we moved and went to this church where they was having this rally.  And, and that's when Viola La Risco [Liuzzo] or whatever her name was -- LaRisa. [Liuzzo] moved and went to this church where they was having this rally.  And, and that's when Viola La Risco [Liuzzo] or whatever her name was --
Speaker 1: LaRisa. [Liuzzo]
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when she got killed, that night.  And, and then we stayed at people's houses.
Story_ID: 16301
Speaker 1: And the Klu Klux Klan [Ku Klux Klan], they said, you may be able to sleep in the bed, but get yourself prepared to sleep on the floor and under the bed.  So I remember that night that, that, that when we came out of the rally, Andrew Young, Dr. [Martin Luther] King asked us, could we stay.  It was just so many people.  He said, "How many can stay because we're going to walk to Birmingham [Alabama]".  And so I raised my hand.  I had one dress.  And, and a lot of our people that was with us, we raised our hands. And, and, and that's how -- and he said, but you got to go through training first.  So Andy Young and James Orange, who is in Africa today, and, working with the African people. And Andy Young trained us, and on-- if, you know, for the women, if they hit the men and if they shoot the men, how you got to jump on top and take the bullets and, all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 16302
Speaker 1: Give me a, a sample of the training sessions, just kind of walk me through it.
Speaker 2: Well, we got training in, in this manner, that this is a non-violent movement, nonviolent.  We don't use guns and we don't use rocks.  We don't use -- we, we-- and, and this is the way you do nonviolence because these people, if they knew better, they would do better.  You know, and, and if you are violent, you can't march.  If you throw a rock or if you -- you can't, if you have weapons, you can't march, okay.  And you got to listen to your, at that time we had teams.  For every ten persons, you had a person walking with you, watching you and telling you what moves to make, etc.  And if you had to go to the washroom or something like that, the, there would be somebody there to take you.  And if you go to jail, you had to such infor-- so much information.  I shall never forget.  We walked and we walked and we walked, night and day.  And when you got tired, you just kind of rested.  We had time to, to rest and then we got to Birmingham.  And we had that, that big, big march.  And that's when, when Dr. -- well, Dr. King was walking with us and Coretta [Scott King, his wife], you know.  And all of his lieutenants.
Story_ID: 16303
Speaker 1: What was the movement doing for money on a day-to-day basis as you were walking?  How, where was the money coming from?
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't -- we didn't have to ride.  And, and we didn't -- we couldn't go into the hotels.  So we had to stay with people.  It was homes. Just like we just got through having our convention in July [referring to her church?].  And we stayed down at the Hyatt.  We had conventions for years (laughter), and you know what happened?  We'd be getting homes like if our convention was going to be in, in August of next year, we'd be soliciting homes now.  And people would open up their homes.  Child, we had-- that's when there was real communication, cause you'd have -- and, and there were no -- and you didn't have to lay on the floor and all these pretty dresses and things.  You think we, we--we spent that money feeding ourselves, you know.  Because you had on your loafers and your, you were-- you came to, to fight.  You was a warrior.
Speaker 1: So after the training sessions, everybody felt ready?
Speaker 2: Ready.
Speaker 1: And they were all, of course, enthused by the power of (unclear)  (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yes --
Speaker 1: -- floating in the group.
Speaker 2: The thousands.
Story_ID: 16304
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite stories of that training, just before you hit the road?
Speaker 2: I just, I just had James Orange [Rev. James Orange- project leader for SCLC- helped organize Selma March].  There's something about that young man.  And I just, every time I see violence, I think about James Orange, and how he communicated with us, not just in words but, but his words had so much fire and spirit in it.  And Dr. [Martin Luther] King hardly ever used the word, race.  His whole vocabulary to us was man's humanity to man.  Where is your humaneness?  That's why we had black and white and working together.  And we, they coined that song, black and white together, hand in hand together.  I mean there was a spirit, something like the 9/11 spirit [ referring to September 11, 2001].  You know, everybody then start walking together.  Now, they kind of question -- because they don't know what to do right now.  But, but it was the hand-in-hand.  We, we were sleeping together,  we were eating together,  we were walking together,we were riding together.  It was, it was that kind of togetherness.  And, and I think that's what is happening in our day right now with the fires, with the winds, with the storms, with the terrorists.  It means that -- and, and this, this phrase I coined for the new millennium, "We are not so much divided as we are disconnected," -- we are not so much divided as we are disconnected.  The Baptists, the Methodists, the Mormons, the, the Catholics, got to come together.  I think that's why we have this big stuff that's going on right now.  The Catholic Church, it's got -- it's going to be a reform within the Catholic Church with what's going on.  It will never be the same.  Say, things are going change.  And just like now, we got to come together in order to make a difference.  I look at my body, my left hand, my right hand.  They both have different functions.  My nose have a function.  My ears have a function.  My eyes have a function.  Even your eyelashes have a function.  Your mouth don't do what your leg does, but it, it comprises the body.  And the body-- that's why God compared the church as the body of Christ cause every function makes up the body.  And when that function is cut off or stifled, what happened?  Then you become handicap  (laughter).  That's why they have the handicap signs up, because you become-- you, you can't function as well.  So that's why we got to come together.
Story_ID: 16305
Speaker 1: And your experience in four powerful movements shows why that connection is so important.
Speaker 2: Right, why it's so im-- so important.  And it's about people.  Once we -- see right now-- the Enron, the JP Morgan's and the-- and the, you know, and the rest of these big companies, it's about power!  Yesterday, they -- they just said, the brother got three- what $320 million, [referring to Ken Lay, CEO of Enron ?] even though he resigned.  It's about, it's about -- how is that you've got twelve bathrooms and I got to use the tree?  I mean nobody needs twelve bathrooms. Nobody need twelve, ten cars, you can't drive but one at a time.  Power, hungry and greed.  God enough-- God made enough trees for everybody to have a house  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hold that thought. [break]
Speaker 2: After the training sessions --
Speaker 1: And we marched to --
Speaker 2: From where to where?
Speaker 1: Selma [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Selma to --
Speaker 1: To Montgomery [Alabama].  Montgomery.  Montgomery, I'm sorry.  Montgomery--  Selma to Montgomery.
Speaker 2: How many miles?
Speaker 1: Ooh, I don't know.  It took us about a day.
Speaker 2: A day.  That's all?
Speaker 1: A day, I guess -- maybe, I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Did you bring sleeping bags and things out in --
Speaker 1: No, I didn't have but one dress.  And I just carried -- we, all of us just -- people didn't care about no- they just lay on the grass.  Oh.  Yeah.  And that's when, when, when mostly we were laying on the grass and those that couldn't, people opened their doors.  You laid on their porches and stuff like that, and then got up, traveled the-- the next day.  And --
Speaker 2: Your own estimate of how large was the group, and it kept growing I imagine.  Oh, it kept growing, yeah, it kept growing.  It kept growing, and because the rallies got bigger and bigger.  By that time, they -- you didn't have no television.  You didn't have no -- and they didn't put you on radio.  So, what happened was that we had to have rallies and then they would call Dr. [Martin Luther] King, North and South, that's how I got on Dr. King's staff, was-- was I was part of the advance team.  See before he went any place, then he had ten or twelve of us, sometimes twenty-five people there a month before he got there. See, so we could go to the churches, to the schools, to the -- you know, and he had some articulate speakers and, and we would, we would build the foundation for his coming in.  And he was paying, he was paying me then twenty-five dollars a week  (laughter).  Twenty-five dollars a week and, and so I worked for -- with Dr. King for eight years.  And then --
Speaker 1: What years were they?  Let's see, it was, it was 1960 to '67 [1967] , It think because I was working for Dr. King with the March on Washington.  I came back to Chicago [Illinois] and, and joined the group here.  Nancy Jefferson and all of that group here and Bill Berry from the Urban League and, 'cause Bill Berry and Charlie Hayes and Addie Wyatt was the one-- was the one he talked to when he wanted to bring, set up a business-- set up Operation Breadbasket, keep the slice of bread in your community.  He got the idea from a preacher in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who had set up Operation Breadbasket --
Story_ID: 16306
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, trace for me, if you can, how the police officers and the other observers outside of the marching group, how did they  --
Speaker 2: Now, the ob- the observers were, they'd be lined up by the thousands cause they heard Martin Luther King [Jr.] was coming.  And they would -- even though they weren't part of the, of the march, but we went through their town, you see.  And they would be lined up on the, on the sidewalk.  But those were people who were supporters of us.  But now, what, now the Klu Klux Klan and the police would, would-- would be on the lookout for them as well as our -- what did we call them, marshals.  Our 'marshals.'  Yeah, and, and we had-- we had our own 'marshals.'  That's what Andy [Young] and Bernard [last name] and, and all of them was, and James Orange.  They were 'marshals.'  And tell me about the things that they tried to precipitate trouble, the law enforcement officers.  Oh, they may say, "get back over the, nigger."  Or, or-- or they may hit you on your ankle or hit you. Oh, yeah- they would, they would, get back.  And then, then you see-- and that, they thought that that would really precipitate anger and then -- but, but then because of our nonviolent orientation, we were able to take it.  But ordinarily, (laughter) you wouldn't take it.
Story_ID: 16307
Speaker 1: Just for a few minutes, give me an idea of what kind of person Dr. King was, person?  Oh, God!
Speaker 2: Personally, your personal assessment?
Speaker 1: He was, he was probably the most intelligent, the most educated, the most humble man I have ever met.  He never tried to make anybody believe that he was educated.  He just did what he had to do.  And he could, and he- he knew his purpose.  I would say he knew his purpose for being.  And he acted accordingly.  And he was very secure in who he was because he didn't have problems bringing in the highest and the best, black, white, male or female.  And he wasn't inhibited by them.  The Jesse Jackson's, the, the-the Dorothy, the Dor- what was Dorothy's last name?
Speaker 2: Height?
Speaker 1: No, no- that's the, the one- the girl -- what I am to Jesse was what she was to Dr. King.  Her name is Dorothy, but anyway- And Andy Young and, and -- you, you just name them.  He had, he got the smartest men that he could find, people that could think.  And, and he wasn't, and he wasn't challenged by them to the point that he wouldn't want to use them.  You know, some leaders if you -- he always wanted somebody that knew more than him.  (laughter) Let me say it like that, that he felt that knew as much or more.  Most leaders don't, don't feel that way.  If you know more than, more than me, I'm a kinda set you aside, let you do certain things.  And I've known him to call a retreat or call a staff meeting.  And he would, and, and then- you know, these young people, everybody know it all, everybody be knowing it all.  And, and I know this, and I know that and, and dah tah, dah tah, dah and they would argue and fuss. And Dr. King would sit in that meeting and never say a word until the end.  He wouldn't say, stop it and dah ta.  He wouldn't say that.  He'd just sit there.  He was the most humblest man I've ever seen and could sit through confusion.
Story_ID: 16308
Speaker 1: How was it when you arrived at the Montgomery --
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was just so many, so many people there, it was just like, and they had a choir.  They had choirs and they ministers and educators and -- you, you name it.  They were there.  But Dr. [Martin Luther] King was the focus.  And, and Dr. King would say, why we're here and why we have to make a difference.  We got to be able -- these hotels are supported by our tax money.  The government is supported by our tax dollars, and he would just explain the 'abc's' of, of coming together and breaking down this, this-- this, this racial division.  And, and I think that's how -- and he could encourage young people because of who he was that this whole -- voting is important.  That's how we got the Voting Rights Act.  One vote is important.  And we got to learn our vote, not our looks.
Speaker 1: Where did the march, location wise, where did it terminate?
Speaker 2: Always at the church.  It was in a park, but, but even though the people -- and he had to have loud speakers all around in the streets, they, they-- would divide the streets up and, and have all of that as location, you know.  But that's where it was, in the church.  It had to be in that church cause that organ (laughter) and the musicians and the singers and the all of that had to be.  And then, then the people would- oh, Lord, they would cook.  And, and feed us, you know.
Story_ID: 16309
Speaker 1: After the march, what happened from your point of view?  How did things unfold with the movement?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when we got -- with the March on Washington, when we went there.  I should --
Speaker 1: I mean in between the Selma and Montgomery and the March on Washington, what kinds of things happened to, you know --  The Voting Rights Act, public accommodations.  Within the movement itself, as, as you were impacted, or had an impact?
Speaker 2: Well, we set up chapters.  Okay, tell me something about that.  We set up chapters across the country and had- and mostly ministers ran it because we didn't have any money to do nothing else, but go inside the churches.  That was our meeting place, you know.  We couldn't rent no halls and that kind of thing. But, but they were -- there was a chapter in Philadelphia, a chapter in Los Angeles, a chapter -- well, we didn't have a chapter in (throat clearing) Chicago -- we, we-- until we got Breadbasket, until we went to the whole economic deal that the economy have to -- we have to be included in our economics.  And that's how Breadbasket got started.  But otherwise than that, we had chapters around the country and people running them.
Story_ID: 16310
Speaker 1: What year did Breadbasket start?
Speaker 2: 1968.  1968. And, and that's when we, one of our -- who was that? He's an advertising agent, one of our advertising agents right now.  If I could just get his name?  But anyway, he was the one that made the first big sign that you put on the highways, "Keep a Slice of Bread in Your Community".  It was a big loaf of bread and then it was divided in slices.  And it said, and leave-- Walgreen's, if you going to come here; Kroger's, A&P, if you're going to be in the black community, then don't take everything you make and take it back to the suburbs or take it downtown.  Leave something in the community.  Give us a dealer-- we got to have a dealership.  We got to have franchises.  That's how that whole thing started.  And we had never built, constructed a food store.  And we spend most of our dollars in food and, and in cars.  So what happened, we built the first, a black construction company, built the first food store on 48th and Prairie [on the South Side of Chicago].  Constructed it and build it.  And Walsh [Construction Company] was still here and Pepper [Construction Group] was still here.  And all of those- and- but we built it.  And ever since then-- but we had to picket them.
Story_ID: 16311
Speaker 1: What was the name of food store?
Speaker 2: A Del Farm. A&P, we ran the A&P out of Chicago.  And then Del Farm and then, then Red Rooster.  Red Rooster was the other one, but we picketed them.  They didn't even have -- we have more garbage than anybody, and they didn't even have a garbage -- they wouldn't allow black people to pick up the garbage, not even exterminate.  So we, so-- so we, we entered into a covenantal relationship with these major corporations.  And, and I know -- I know whether you were here then, we went from the food industry to the cosmetic industry cause you know we own -- they, they called our hair black, nappy and, and didn't want to have nothing to do with it.  They didn't know there was so many dollars wrapped up in black hair.  So we had Johnson and all of these hair good products, Fuller [what hair products?] and, and-- and so, so what happened there, they, they-- they began to realize and do research on how much money there was in hair.  So now that's why they done bought up every- practically, hair company.  Isn't but -- I don't think but three left.  But that's how we went from the -- and then Revlon didn't have nobody on their board that was African American.  They didn't have nobody as president or vice president.  And, so then we had funerals all over the coun- all over the country.  And, and that's when I got the little name, warrior cause I went around the country to different funeral homes asking them for caskets.  And we, and, and everybody that had any Revlon product to come and bring it, let's bury it.  And I got, and I didn't bring that picture.  But I got the casket and, and the pictures of us burying Revlon products.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 16312
Speaker 1: And what happened after that with Revlon?
Speaker 2: Ooh, Lord, they, they--they got a, a vice president and they got managers and they got-- from the top-- from the bottom up, they went.  And from the top down.  And in fact, one of the girl's that's vice president, and she just got her package [retirement?] two months ago, and she's a member of my church.  She was the first female vice president of Revlon.  Of course, now they've sold.  I, I don't know, I don't know who they have now.  But that's how we got started, started with the food industry and then with the cosmetic industry, and then with the car industry.  The first black dealerships and, now we got-- and then franchisees from Burger King and, and what's that other food--food store, McDonald's.
Speaker 1: This was all Operation Breadbasket?
Speaker 2: All Operation Breadbasket.
Story_ID: 16313
Speaker 1: Okay, before we move forward to your becoming more closely connected with Jesse Jackson, let me take you back to the March on Washington and tell me the difference between that march and the Selma March.  And just recreate that march for me through your viewpoint.
Speaker 2: Now, the Selma March was, was-- was, I would say, was a wake-up call. So many of our people did not even understand or know public accommodations.  All we know that we couldn't go to the theaters.  All we know that we couldn't go to the hotel.  But it, and all we know that we couldn't go to the parks.  But during the Selma March, the world got turned on.  The whole world cause that Sunday evening when Dr. [Martin Luther] King made that clarion call and said, he said, I'm just like Paul.  And Paul said, "Come over to Macedonia and help us."  He says, "You've got to come to Selma."  He said, "Our people are being killed, dogs are eating them, and biting them.  They're turning bad dogs on them."  He says, he -- that was a wake-up call.  That's when the world woke up and found out what -- the attitude that they have-- that we have with, with African Americans.  The 1963 March was a coalition march, coalition.  It was labor.  It was, it was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  It was the Urban League.  It was the-- it, it was the Southern Poverty Law Center.  It, it -- I, I mean it was the black church.  It was the white churches.  It was universities.  It was -- it was a coalition march.  That's why it was so, so big.  And, and that was when everybody got the message, you got to go back and we got to be included in the economy.  And everybody went back with an assignment.  And the college students then began to do campus organizing, just on public accommodation, getting out the vote.  And that's when, when, when this whole itinerary as to where we were to go and what we were to do.  And that's the get out the vote, and we going to live in hotels, we can go to hotels, and we can, we can (laughter) we have an opportunity now to play ball, to play it all, you know.  So that's when the real movement began.  And it wasn't led just by Dr. [Martin Luther] King, 'cause Dr. King had trained so many of his lieutenants on what to do and how to do it.  And that's why I, I respect Al Sharpton cause that was, he was -- Reverend Meeks [  ], that was one -- they, they were kids at that point, you know.  And now they are movement leaders.  And, and I think Selma [Alabama] was the wake-up call.  It was the wake-up call cause we didn't have an idea that they would put dogs and let dogs bite people and, and do all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 16314
Speaker 1: When, on-- in the, the March on Washington, you walked from where to where?
Speaker 2: March on Washington? I was living at, at a hotel and that's when Sammy Davis [Jr.- entertainer], Mahalia Jackson [gospel singer] and all of them.  It was, it was around that, what is that lagoon or whatever it was.  (Unclear)  Yeah, that was -- yeah, they got a name for it.  That was, that was -- we went in, in buses.  I think we had 300 buses from Chicago.  And, and Philadelphia, people came from everywhere.  But it wasn't a long walk so much as-- what's the other guy, the labor guy?
Speaker 1: Walter (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Walter, no it was-- I forget his name.  Lord have mercy.  But anyway, he spoke that day, and they just had-- but, of course, Dr.-- Sammy [Davis Jr.] was there.  Every entertainer was there that was, that was anybody.  But Mahalia was, was, she was the one that took the cake that day, she and Sammy [Davis Jr.].  And I shall never forget, my son was, was-- I guess he was, must have been about six years old and, and I lost him.  And I couldn't find him.  And, and I had them to announce a little boy was lost.  And he was standing up there holding Sammy's hand.  (laughter ) on the platform-- Sammy Davis. But, but the preparation for that March, everybody was involved.  Bring a loaf of bread cause we got to make sandwiches.  Cook a cake, deposit box, fifty cents and a dollar.  It, it was that kind of cooperation.  Everybody could participate.  And then we had prayer groups around the city, just praying for the success of that march.  I mean you talking about everybody getting involved, it was there.
Story_ID: 16315
Speaker 1: I have often heard that some parts of the movement were very sexist, did you experience any of that, not wanting to give women the full --
Speaker 2: Well, it has always been.  And that's why I say, lately that, that's why I became chairman of the board.  Chairman of our board because we, we had twelve chairmen before I came, became chairman of the board.  There was Clay Evans, Bishop [Hamel Hartford] Brookins and Mayor Richard Hatcher [first black mayor of Gary, Indiana] and Tom Todd and Roland Burris [black elected official in Illinois].  And it was a whole bunch of them.  And it was, and, and I was on -- we were on our way to Cuba and Reverend [Jesse Sr.] Jackson said, you know, Tom [Todd] has to -- he's going into his law practice full time.  And we got to look for another chairman.  And, and I went back to my seat and something said to me, you go up and tell Jesse that you're not looking for another chairman because I've done all the work, wrote all the letters, made the agenda, made the calls for them to come and took the, make sure that the minutes were taken.  I did everything.  Theirs was a, was a great title, you know, cause they, they had earned the title.  But I said Jesse, it is now time to have a woman and I'm the woman.  And, and I said, pray about it, think about it.  I went back and took my seat.  And then he came back in, and he said to me, "Willie, it's a mighty poor dog won't wag his own tail.  I said cause I'm not going to fight a racist fight, then come back and fight a gender fight.  They both go along together.  We going to fight a gender and race together."  And I said, and-- "and it's an opportunity, and you can't -- no man can do it alone.  So you've had twelve men and I don't want to push the men aside, but I'm your next chairman."  And I've been that for ten years.
Story_ID: 16316
Speaker 1: That's great.  Do --
Speaker 2: Now, I'm getting ready to write.
Speaker 1: Do you know of any other female leaders who perhaps didn't take the time or the thoughts to wag their own tail?
Speaker 2: Oh, all of them.  I, I mean in the churches.  See, that's why I believe that need is the basis for organization.  Service is power, need is the basis.  When you see a need, that's the basis to organize.  And I'm an organizer.  And so what I did, what I think women has to do and, and 90 percent of the churches are women.  And we are, they -- and women sometimes don't, most times, don't know who they are.  They really don't know their-- who they are.  They don't know their purpose.  Once you realize your purpose and know who you are-- and going back to when, when God spoke to Adam. And said Adam, "I've created this entire world, trees and animals, and I didn't name none of them.  I left that for the person that I'm going to make a little higher than the animals.  And, and that's you. Man."  And, and let me tell you--  and then he, then he turned around told Adam, you, "I want you to name everything.  And he said, but it's not good for you to be alone."  God made man and woman to be in relationship, one to the other.  And that's why the world is like it is.  Women over here, men over here.  We got to come together and recognize each other's and give each other that balance.  It's a balance.  And the reason why our world is unbalanced is because men are trying to run it (laughter) all by themselves.  See, that's what's, what's wrong with, that's what the Catholic sisters are saying.  Catholic sisters says we're going to withhold our money until you recognize us as priests.  Now, the Baptist used to not recognize women, but they do.  See I belong to the Church of God.  They've always recognized women as leaders.  A lot of times they didn't want you to pastor, but you could preach.  But now, the Baptist done changed their story.  That's another type of reform.  And I've always said that women are not objects to, to be manipulated, but they are subjects to be understood.  Treat my brain like I got a brain- like God gave it to me.  Women can think and not only that, they're the first developers.  Nine months before that child is born, you have put everything in him (laughter) that can- that, that-- that will make them a person.  Well, since you are the developer, you know when they come here-- how to develop cause if you've got a bad attitude and don't know how to -- you put that bad attitude right inside of that baby.  And that's one reason why our kids are going crazy.
Story_ID: 16317
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the transition from Operation Breadbasket here in Chicago to Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity]?
Speaker 2: Operation PUSH? Breadbasket was the economic arm of-- of the Civil Rights Movement.  You know, but SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And remember the Urban League has always been the research arm.  And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] has always been the legal arm, (emphasis) legal arm.  And then SCLC was the activist arm.  And the, the National Council of, of [Negro] Women under the direction of Dorothy Height, where the AKA's [Aplha Kappa Alpha Soroity, Inc] and all the rest of the women organizations is under Dorothy Height.  So that's the women's part of the Civil Rights Movement.  And now we got, now the National Political Congress of Black Women.  Now, we got a 100 Black Women, 100 Black Men.  And we got a lot of organizations, but it takes all of these if we are connected, to make a difference.  So after I got through -- so, so PUSH started because after we got the franchisees and after we received the, the dealerships and managers and, and food operatives and got in all of these stores. As we were given opportunity -- we're not in enough yet (laughter).  So, so-- and then Jesse ran in 1984 and '88 [1988] for President.  He got 7 million votes in 1988 and that's how we changed it to the Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Rainbow because he got so many votes.  And they weren't just black votes.  It were -- they were white, they were Polish, they were Indians.  They were Hispanic and that's why we traded, we changed it to the Rainbow PUSH Coalition.  And the Board is Rainbow.
Story_ID: 16318
Speaker 1: Now, tell me something about your relationship to and with Jesse Jackson?
Speaker 2: Now, when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came North, to bring the movement North, he asked, he said, I got to put a woman with Jesse Jackson [Sr.], got to put a woman.  And Bill Berry and Bob Lucas and some of those guys says, we know the right woman you need.  And that's Addie Wyatt and [U.S.] Congressman [Charlie] Hayes cause he was heavy in the United Food and Commercial Workers Union [UFCW].  And, and they have given Dr. King a lot of money, and they was -- and the Labor Movement was, cause the Labor Movement which used to be the Civil Rights Movement really cause they were fighting for workers.  And so, so they said, Charlie said, "No, we cannot lose Addie.  We worked too hard to get her on the Board of the AF of LCIO." [AFL-CIO].  And so Addie said, "I know a woman, Dr. King that you could, you can put with Jesse."  He said, "Anybody that-- any woman that can stop Jesse from cussing."  (laughter).  So, so, they said, "Oh, I know the right one, Reverend Barrow, Reverend Willie Barrow." And, and sho nuf -- I had been working for him anyway.  So he said, I think you made a good choice and that's why he appointed me and Jesse. And now me and Jesse have been together for thirty-six years.
Story_ID: 16319
Speaker 1: What have been some of the major challenges of Breadbasket, PUSH [People United to Save Humanity], Rainbow PUSH over the years?  What would you consider some of the biggest challenges and how are you addressing the challenging you run into today?
Speaker 2: Well, the biggest challenges have been opportunity for African Americans and, and also women in business.  Our whole economy is, is, is around, is not around African Americans or Hispanic Americans or women.  And, and I think that, that until we really open the doors of opportunity.  They didn't know baseball could be played so well until, until they gave Jackie Robinson an opportunity, right.  They didn't know that tennis was so good until they paid, until they gave the two Williams sisters [Venus and Serena] the opportunity.  And once you get the opportunity, you can, you can be the best or be the worst, but get, get-- at least open up the doors.  And also Tiger [Woods].  He, he is-- they gave him the opportunity.  So what we're saying to corporations today is to give women the same opportunity and the same dollars.  Women still make less money than men make.  And that's an imbalance and, and it's-- and it's un- unjust.  And at my church I serve as the minister of justice in my church.  I give a report every Sunday morning as to what's happening in our community and how you can best cooperate.  It's more than just singing praises and shouting and dancing.  It is how -- what is you doing to correct the illness in our society.  And the challenges is, is that you, you got to go out and, and confront.  And that's what I, and that's my job, is to confront corporate America.  If I see stuff in, in the neighborhood, and if I see long lines-- a good case, good example.  Long lines in one of our major stores.  And it was five lines.  Well, the average consumer don't know it's illegal to stay in, to stand in line just for a checkout more than five minutes.  Oh, really.  It's illegal.  And, and so I stood in line-- sometimes I just go to the store and see how long, and then I do comparisons.  Go into the suburbs and see how long they stay and see how long we stay.  Then I come back, and then that's when I have a meeting with the managers.  I say, you got to change your attitude.  You got a-- a racist attitude over here and you're going to have people to stand in line too long.  And I just had to do that about three months ago.  I didn't have to picket them, not yet. (laughter)  But I knew the law,  and I don't even think they knew the law.  And then I found out that many of our corporate leaders, most of them didn't have but a eighth grade education, but they know how to get other people.  But they themselves, they require you to have a Masters and a PhD to teach them how to be your boss (laughter) you know what I mean.  So that has been, been a real challenge, is to open up the doors of opportunity.
Story_ID: 16320
Speaker 1: The other thing is training.  We, we got to -- I hate the word "my child," "my house."  If you're not talking about "our children" and "our house," then you're not talking about a house at all because it's our children,  it's our house.  It's-- it's our neighborhood, not yours.  So if we're going to make the neighborhood better, then let's talk about what we all got to do together.  I just had a big challenge in my-- in my ward.  I live in the 8th Ward (Chicago municipal legislative discrict, and-- and most people don't even know what ward they live in.  They don't even know who represent them.  How can you pay people?  Most of our people don't even know that you pay your alderman and you pay your Congressman and you pay your State representative, out of your tax dollars.  And you have never asked them for nothing.  You've never asked them to -- this is the kind of legislation we need.  Could you introduce it?  We have so much power in our hands that we don't know about.  And if-- it's up to us.  That's why they keep asking me when am I going to retire?  I said, I'm not going to ever retire because I got too much work to do.  The work with this generation, the work with ourselves in order to make a difference, a change has got to come.  I think all of us will admit that.  And who's going to make the change?  Me and you and you and you.  We got to make the change.  So, so -- and I keep on into the whole ministry of justice.  Just do right by your, by another human being.  Just do right by your children.  Just do right in the schools.  Just do right in building homes.  Just do right.  Everybody's entitled to a house.  Everybody is entitled to a living wage, not just a-- a right, but a living wage.  And that's one of the reasons why they were saying this morning over the news, what has gone wrong with this generation and with our children?  Why are we killing our babies and-- and one of our psychiatrists called up this morning, and he said, "rage."  You going to see much more anger and rage coming from the inside because of unemployment.  Seven thousand people unemploy -- was laid off last week.  Another 6,000 was laid and over a hun -- nearly 200 people don't have jobs, 200,000 people.  Never had to look for a job.  We got a job to do, to relate and to educate and to inform.
Story_ID: 16321
Speaker 1: The fifth movement, I guess, in your experience and maybe the first one in the rest of our experiences, the movement that swept Harold Washington into the office of --  Yes.
Speaker 2: -- of mayor [of Chicago].  Tell me about that whole dynamic from your point of view.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was in the meeting in our library when, when the committee  [referring to Operation PUSH?] indicated that we gone have, we going to have to have a black mayor, just like that.  They indicated, this committee indicated last week that we got to have a black mayor and they came up with what, four names or something like that.  And Reverend [Spencer, a HistoryMaker] Leak said he wouldn't -- Spencer said he wouldn't be interested, but his name came up to the top and some others.  But that's what happened with, with Harold [Washington].  There was, there were so many challenges in the community.  They said we need to, we need to get -- be thinking about naming another person to be mayor.  And so about twenty-five or thirty people came together.  And when they came together, we all agreed that it should be Mayor Harold Washington.  So we called in the mayor.  And at that time he was, he wasn't mayor.  He was [U.S.] Congressman.  And he came.  And, and he said, I'll get back to you all cause I'm going to tell you what the requirements ought to be.  If y'all want me to run for mayor, you got to raise this amount of money.  Put it in Independence Bank and put it there so I know it's there.  Then when you all do-- number two, a big regis-- voter registration campaign. And would you all commit yourselves that you will have not only register, but GOTV, 'Get Out the Vote.'  But when I see the money, because it's going to take a lot of money, and it's going to take a coalition to become mayor, a coalition.  Y'all willing to do that?"  Everybody said yes.  So we went and sat down and talked with Al Boutte [ a HistoryMaker] and who was, is the President of Independence Bank.  And he said, sure you can use this bank.  And then we began to raise money and, and, and reach out for other coalition members.  And then we, and letting people know that we got to get radio.  We got to get people talking about it.  And that's when the Jane Byrne [Mayor of Chicago 1979-1983] thing came up.  And I shall never forget, labor was out there, and we were getting ready to do this thing at Navy Pier-- 'Chicago Fest'.  And a man called up, just an ordinary man, he called up and he said, "If you all really want to run a candidate and get Jane Byrne out of there y'all, why don't we not support the 'Chicago Fest'".  And he said, and we need to picket Chicago Fest.  And we were picketing, just an ordinary man.  And Reverend [Jesse] Jackson called up Clay Evans.  And Clay Evans called up some more ministers.  And Clay said, "What you mean, picket?  Picket Chicago Fest?  And Jesse said, said, I think that man got a good point.  And, and then when we called the Coalition members back, they said -- Nancy Jefferson and all of them, the North side, the West side, all of us were together.  And, and sure enough, we started picketing.  And the picketing got bigger and bigger.  And then the, the entertainers began to cancel.  They began to cancel, say "If y'all picket, I'm not coming."  That's how we won that, that Chicago Fest fight.  And then, and then after Jane Byrne did what she did, it was, it was clear cut.  And we raised the money.
Speaker 2: What did she do and just for the record here?  Oh.  What did she do?  Well, that was--that was- Remember it was the remove, removal of the snow [referring to failure to remove snow, after a blizzard, in black neighbohoods by then Mayor Michael Bilandic whom Byrne defeated in 1979].  And didn't remove -- I can't quite happen.  I think it was the removal of the snow, I think [ Bilandic ordered CTA buses and trains to bypass inner-city stops to cater to white constituents].  So, but I got to get that, the exact thing.  But I know we- it was the 'Chicago Fest' she put on.  And I know the entertainers stopped and wouldn't come in for it, and so therefore she had to cancel it. [see http://www.hanania.com/byrne/byrne1.htm]
Story_ID: 16322
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  And right after that you started a heavy voter registration drive?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--yes.  On the West side.  And on the North side and on the South side.
Speaker 1: How many voters did you register in that campaign?
Speaker 2: I don't know the number, but Alice Tregate was, was-- was the leader in our movement in that.  And every organization, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League- the, (Bob Lucas Group ?) and, and the--and we went to, went to all the churches.  And we registered the people to really get out the vote.  And then the GOTV cause, cause I found out in, in our org-- in my--in our organizing that a lot of time you register people, but they don't come out to vote.  They will register, but they won't come out to vote.  So the GOTV, 'Get Out the Vote', is the key word and the bottom line.  And that's what we're talking about right now to get the House back [ referring to the U.S. House of Representatives].  And, and we'll get five seats back if, if people come out to vote now with this, with this Democratic election.  That's what it would be now.  [John] Conyers [Jr.] would become head of the Judiciary Committee.  And (Randall?) l would become the, the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.  And we got, we got about five committees that will, that will be chaired by legends.  And I think that's why this election is so, so important.
Story_ID: 16323
Speaker 1: So you have that strength happening now, but you have --
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  I just heard over the news when I was coming home that -- I know Reverend [Jesse] Jackson was down in Georgia last week, Sunday, helping Cynthia McKinney cause when she spoke out on, on the terrorists--  Secure, the security. Yeah, right, and I understand that the other group really went down and put a lot of money their campaign and got her and Earl Hilliard [U.S. Congressman- Alabama] and, but she's fighting for her life. But I heard that even the minister went down today to -- yesterday to help Cynthia McKinney [ U.S. Congresswoman- lost her seat in 2002, regained in 2004].  If we do it together, and if we form coalitions cause it's not going to happen without forming coalitions. And that's why it is so important that we form coalition.  And another is so important is that we, is that -- I hear a lot of talk about, oh, the Hispanic has increased their votes.  The population is growing and-- but at least the Hispanics speak two languages.  (laughter)  Why aren't we speaking two languages?  And that's why I'm encouraging our young people to, to--to learn French, learn Spanish.  My son did most of his performance in France.  And he didn't realize how important speaking another language was until he went to France.  And he first went and I took him on a, on a visit.  And we went to, to a French restaurant and couldn't order (laughter) we thought we was ordering one thing and ordered another because he couldn't-  He came back then, language be- became important to him.  And then he learned French and Spanish.  You know, so languages are very important because we- our challenges now, is the whole world. And our people got to learn language -- first got to learn English (laughter) and then, and then Spanish and then French.  That's the way we got to go.
Story_ID: 16324
Speaker 1: So, okay, we got the voters registered.  We've got--
Speaker 2: Public accommodation.  Tell me about the money, the Harold Washington.  How did, how did the Coalition go about starting that, pump (unclear) money into kitty?  Well, by-- I shall never forget.  We were having dollar parties (laughter).  I mean we had a lot of the dollar parties --
Speaker 1: She's coming (unclear).  Is it off now.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, dollar parties.  I've never seen so many dollar parties in all my life.  And we raised hundreds of dollars.  And then those that could give, they gave thousands.  And we had White people.  We had black people.  We had Hispanics.  We women's group-- they got the money like they got for Carol [Moseley-Braun - former Senator-Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, so you went back to Washington and said we have--
Speaker 2: You see, he, no, he went to the bank.  Oh, okay.  And saw the money.  And then that's when he declared.  And then the radio-- remember we had all kind of little old cliches going about Harold Washington.  Everybody in the street, even the children was, was--was, was using, let's elect Harold, elect Harold!  Something about the "Barrow and the Harold."  And it was, it was-- then it became a political environment.  And if you wasn't talking about Harold and electing Harold, you wasn't talking about nothing.  So that's- kind of flavor.  Do you remember the last weekend or two before the election-- where it got really tight and, and Harold Washington, he got excited or something and he responded-- that's really what turned it even more in his favor.  Do you remember that situation?  I can't remember.  I was so busy in the field.  Oh, okay.  You know, cause I stayed in the field.  When--  it was getting like very, it was close and getting down to the wire and something had angered him.  I, I don't remember what, but his response to that turned the tide even more in his favor at the very last minute-- His speaking out.  Yeah, and I've forgotten--  Yeah, I forgot, I forgot exactly what it was, but, but I do remember--  You remember the situation, right.  Right, right--right.  I don't know what it was --  What it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- but it was something that turned it at the last minute.  Yes, you're right, you're absolutely right.
Story_ID: 16325
Speaker 1: What was Harold Washington like as a person in your concept?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was just -- Harold was just brilliant.  (laughter)  He was such a brilliant person. Unlike- unlike Dr. [Martin Luther King] King, Harold, Harold really did speak out.  He could speak and speak out in closed-door meetings and as well as, as other meetings.  And then his challenge was is that he just know-- he knew more than anybody (laughter).  And they knew it.  And, and we knew it.  And when he spoke everybody just froze, you know.  And he knew where he wanted to go, and he knew where he was going.  And that's what I liked about Harold.  And he was just super-qualified.  And, and see when you have those kind of qualifications, and then you can- and then you'd be able to relate to anybody. You're, you're just there.
Story_ID: 16326
Speaker 1: Now, as we all know, his first administration was fraught with every kind of frustration in the book, the [Alderman Edward] Vrdolyak 29  [ referring to the group of aldermen who aligned themselves against Harold Washington's administration] and --  Where is he now?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I don't know where he is now.  He's not there with that lady that got indicted, is he?  (Laughter)  He changed parties I think.  Or something like that.
Speaker 1: I know.  He had a radio show for a while --
Speaker 2: Yeah, he sure did.
Story_ID: 16327
Speaker 1: From your perspective and your interaction with PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] and Harold Washington and, and the City of Chicago activity, was there anything outstanding about Harold Washington's first term that you remember, any kind of special story you can relate?
Speaker 2: The only thing I think I could say about Harold, he had the ability to relate to all people.  He really did.  And, and it came out in his actions and as he related to people. Even though the people that he knew didn't like him, you know, he was able to deal with those issues without, without being angry.  And let it float, you know.  Sometimes, everybody know where we stand. And sometimes that's not the best thing, let everybody know where we stand.  Now, some things-- cause you're going to stand anyway.  So why is it that you got to publicize it.  Just take your stand, and stand.
Story_ID: 16328
Speaker 1: Now, we're all familiar with the problems that happened after Harold Washington suddenly died, the tug of war in the City Council --  Oh --
Speaker 2: -- do you have any special perspective on that?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, [Alderman Eugene] Sawyer was a member of my church and still is  [Sawyer was elected by the Chicago City Council to complete Harold Washington's term, 1987-1989].  And, and I, I think we just kind of got carried away and lost it.  I, I think the community got thrown off with, with the discussions and with the arguments and with the-- And we just, we, we kind of lost, in my opinion, what we had gained because of who's going to be who.  And what's going to be what.  And we're trying to play catch up, and I don't know where we are.
Speaker 2: So is there a lack of trust in playing the political game.  A lot of times you have to trust your enemy even to make a political deal.  And there seems -- there was no way either side was going to make a political deal to keep down some of the dissention where a lot of the power of the African American base was frittered away- (simulataneous)
Speaker 1: It's according to where the lack of trust resides cause, because if it's a lack of trust, what are we going to do now with what's coming up?  Because all of us know about the Enron thing and about the, about the JPMorgan and, and all the rest of them.  Now, I mean -- and the stock markets, you know.  Four-one, 401k's and where are we in terms of trust cause I think right now, ain't nobody trust nobody.  Everybody is, is caution with everything there now because the trust is really gone.  So I think it was more competition than it was trust because anybody that knows, that knew [Eugene] Sawyer, knew he was a very humble man and still is, you know.  And he would probably do the best, but now we, now we got a, a judge.  And, and I guess -- and we probably wouldn't have gotten that if we hadn't a gone through that kind of, turmoil.  But I don't know.  I really don't where-- I, I think it was sides competition.  Sides.  I'm going to be on this side.  I'm going to be on that side.  But we got to learn how to just take the right side.
Story_ID: 16329
Speaker 1: So what can the African American community do to get back the strength and power it had behind the activity -- the movement really, activity that elected Harold Washington?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I-- now, I just think that we have a new chance because of the new agenda.  In November the, the fifth, I think it is-- we're going to have the opportunity to show that.  And if we educate our people enough to know that ain't nobody going to save us from us, but us.  And, and we're going to have to put forth the kind of effort to rewrite the new agenda.  And we can rewrite it because we have the power to rewrite it through votes.  And if we can take back the House [of Representatives], and take back the, the Senate here[ referring to Illinois sate senate], on the local level-- we just elected five new governors around the country.  I didn't know that until I went to the DNC [Democratic National Convention] meeting last week.  They, they have a governor, a female governor in Dayton, Ohio.  They have-- two governors came out. One came out of the South Carolinas, one came out of the North Carolinas and, but all together, there were five new ones.  Then we got something coming up in, in-- is it Nevada where the Governor, the Governor resigned?  And all of these places and even right here in the State of Illinois, it seems like we're going to have a new governor, you know.  And if that happens, I think we're in a position to make a difference.  And it's going to put the kind of people in decision-making positions that can bring about change.
Story_ID: 16330
Speaker 1: For the sake of the viewer, this archived interview, what is the new agenda?  What things are on the new agenda?
Speaker 2: Education, health, economics, family and church.  That's what I see, because we can't find the-- education starts in the house, in the homes.  It don't start in the school room now.  It starts the moment you conceive--
Story_ID: 16331
Speaker 1: Okay, the home --
Speaker 2: (Drinking water) Thank you.  Education.  I, I said first, education.  And it's got to start in the home.  And then, and then we-- I read this article the other day.  I called up one of our health institutions, and it's so or more -- there are over a hundred and twenty-- we are a 120,000 nurses short.  And we're going to have to-- we're going to have, to--to make it up some kind of way, and then you're bringing people over who can't talk English.  We're in a health crisis.  You see where that doctor left the patient on the operating table?  (laughter)  And he went to cash his check.  I mean we're in that kind of--of home, I mean education, health, economics.  We- they're going to have to share.  I, I was sitting down in the meeting with the Walsh [Construction Company], you have most of the- of the general construction and Pepper [Construction Group] and I was with them the other day.  And I told them, I said, you know, I've been in this city a long time.  I never had lunch with you, but I'm going to have lunch with you and so we can break down some of this discrimination in construction.  And so he promised he would come out and, and talk, and that he was going to do much more sharing.  Well, I am going to have lunch with him.  And that is-- and then I'm on the board of Coors [Beer] advisory committee, even though I don't drink.  I don't have no taverns and I, I said, but since our people drink, then give us a part of, of franchise of that.  And then, then I'm on the- if I'm on your board and then I can help you make some decisions.  Okay- was on the--on the advisory board of Burger King.  They done sold--sold last week.  And somebody done bought them up.  It is so much changing going on until you got to start the education program all over again cause the people that's coming in now, they don't know about-- they've not made a commitment like the Revlon's did in the past and the Burger Kings and the McDonald's and-- they, they haven't made that.  And also the, the Jewel's [grocery store] and the-- now Jewel's been bought twice, you know.  And the Dominick's [grocery store], all the-- we got to start all over again with new agenda.  And we got to begin to make some more Willie Barrow's, train some more Willie Barrow's, train some more Addie Wyatt's, train some more Jackie Vaughn's [first black woman president of the Chicago Teachers Union], you know, in the school system.  We, we--we got to do that.  And I think that's why the Lord has left us here so that we can begin to train and, and--and work with our younger people, intergenerational.  You need me, and I need you. You need my-- who, whoever, ever heard anybody say, I don't need my mama and daddy no more?  (laughter).  You, you always-- right now, what my mama taught me-- I wake up every morning, making up my bed.  My mama taught me that.  Said, if you, "If you lay in it, make it up.  If you eat on it, then, then wash it off. " (laughter)  That's the table and your dishes you know.  That's what, what I was taught.  So you can never outlive your mama and your dad, good or bad.  So even the legends of your day, the historians of your day-- that's why I like making history and writing about history.  I read Harriet Tubman [legendary former slave who led other slaves to freedom on the Underground Railroad] all the time. She's my idol, she's really my idol.  I look at a -- Fannie Lou Hamer [famed field coordinator for SNCC, was first black delegate from Mississippi Democratic party, helped form the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] stayed in my house.  And she couldn't -- that was when they couldn't stay in, in any hotel.  She came to Chicago [Illinois],  she stayed at my house.  And I wanted to-- cause we didn't do much sleeping, I was asking her too many questions.  Try to get your information because it's all about building, taking care of others and people.  If I can't help people, I don't--I don't need to be living.
Story_ID: 16332
Speaker 1: What are your overall concerns for the African American community of today?
Speaker 2: It is that everybody-- that shouldn't anybody go hungry.  Anybody go hungry in this nation and especially in the United States, and we have to fight for other nations cause that's part of a-- see God made the world.  And God never declared himself as an American.  He ain't no American, God made the world!  The world belong to, to God.  And he said, "Out of one blood, all nations were born."  So if we don't get that picture that these are our brothers and sisters, all nations, that we have to redeem ourselves and the people around us.  That's what I'd like to see happen is that every child get an education.  And if anybody's sick, they need to have health care.  That's what, that's what we got to work for. Health care, education and--and making sure that the home is there and there are parents in the home.  It take two people to raise children, two people.  If we can it in our head that we don't have two people, you need to stop having babies, you know.  Having babies, you frustrated and you frustrate every generation, and they frustrate generations.  Talking about, "I got this baby cause I was getting my kick."  Kick what?  And who you going to kick for not taking care of the baby, you know.  So, so--so, so that's where we, we going to-- those five areas, I think, is where we have to go.  If we look at education, if we look at health, if we look at economics and your, and if we look at church, it's going to be okay, it's going to be okay.  And there's a drove of young people coming back, coming back--coming back to the church.  And I love it.  I love it.  Everywhere you go now, practically, young people are coming to the church because what they are getting is not satisfying, you know.  And my grandmother used to tell my brother, my older brother, she said, "Boy, you know, I'm praying for you."  Whew, he'd get scared.  Don't, don't let grandma start praying.  (Laughter)  These kids ain't- you can tell them anything about God. They, they don't fear God nor man.  So, when you don't fear God, you sure don't fear man.
Story_ID: 16333
Speaker 1: What do you think has been your greatest achievement to date?
Speaker 2: Just being -- setting the example for being a good woman and a good wife and a good mother and a good citizen and a good, a good education.  And that's what has made me the woman I am today cause I was, I was-- I knew my purpose early in life.  And I committed my purpose to man's humanity.  And that's what I like about God, and God has helped me to do it.  And being a wife -- and my marriage wasn't, my marriage wasn't--wasn't without scars, 'cause life is not without scars.  And life is a series of adjustment.  That's what marriage is, a series of adjustments.  And, and having the ability to communicate.  And so, so having a successful marriage, therefore, I created a successful home. And then, and then I decided that whatever community that I lived in, I would know everybody on my block.  Before I bought my house, I went to my alderman and I, and I told him what my commitment was.  I said I want to know everybody in my block.  I'd like to have the list cause I want to know what I'm moving into.  And I'm going to send them a letter indicating that I'm buying this house.  And sure enough everybody in my block, we know.  They know me, I know them.  We look out for each other.  We know each other by name.  I don't send out a lot of Christmas cards, but everybody in my block get a Christmas card, every year.  And we communicate.  And, and what children that is left in my block, we communicate. ( in a childs voice) "Reverend Barrow," they help me get -- "can I help you do this?  And can I help you do that?"  I could stop them if they're doing wrong.  I don't like what you're doing.  But you have to have a commitment to justice, commitment to peace and commitment to your people.  And you can do that very easy.  I don't have no problem doing it.  So I leave these few words. (laughter)
Story_ID: 16334
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think you'll be remembered for and what would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: As the Little Warrior.  (Laughter)  As the Little Warrior.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: It means that I lift my hands, my voice, my energy to everything that is right, I compliment and anything that is wrong, I raise it to a level of visibility.  So that my people will know what I am doing and what I have done.  And then live on that level.  I want some more little Willie Barrow's.  I want some more with a voice like mine.  I want some more little Willie Barrow's that have courage and that have the guts to look you in the eye and with God, know God is on your side, nobody better not touch me and touch what I'm doing.  I tell them all the time.  I tell Jesse [Jackson], you can't touch me (laughter) cause God has-- I'm out here on, on God's journey.  And if I'm wrong I'll be willing to apologize, but if I'm right, don't mess with me.
Story_ID: 16335
Speaker 1: Is, is there anything that I didn't ask you, I should have asked you?  Perhaps about the attention that Jesse Jackson brought to PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] and that whole, you know, the whole period when he's very popular in, in the news and then the --
Speaker 2: Well, the news decided that they weren't going to-- you know, the news media who mostly controls our life--our lives decided that they were not going to give Jesse-- when he went back and brought those guys back from, from overseas and, and when he's changing the face of America [referring to Jesse Jackson securing the release of hostages in Kosovo or Iraq during the first Gulf War].  They said, he not going to-- we're not going to allow him to do that.  Now, now, Jesse has his faults, just like they have their faults.  They didn't want to send all them people who done stole all that money to jail.  And many of them is fornicators and adulterers, you know what I mean.  So that ain't no-- that, that's no big problem.  But they wanted to, wants to close his mouth, but they don't know that God has a nation that will obey.  He has the [James] Meeks [Illinois state senator and Reverened; heir apparent to Jesse Jackson Sr. to head PUSH], he has the [Al] Sharptons [Reverened and former candidate for the 2004 Democratic presidential nomination] and he has many more young men and women coming up that is speaking out because it is the only vessel that God uses is human instrumentalities. And if you let go and let God use you, they, they can never kill you.  They, they thought after they killed Jesus that they had killed the savior. But when he got up out of that grave, and the grave had to loosen up, everything else since then have to loosen up.  So, so he's our great example.  But they don't know it.  And therefore, we just have to keep on carrying on.  But Jesse is, is--is now in a teaching mode.  He's doing a lot of teaching and, and just like we taught him and taught his family.  And they said the reason why Jesse's family-- we raised them children.  It was us.  Jesse was moving, and going around. But we took care of those children, taught those children, like we have to do our neighbor's children and any other children.  That's why I have a 110 godchildren.  (laughter)
Story_ID: 16336
Speaker 1: That's a good one.  That's a good one.  And you have such excellent taste in the way you dress, just over the years looking at those pictures.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, let me tell you.  I didn't realize-- that's, that's why you got to have the Lord with you.  I didn't realize that if you're in public, the kind of colors you ought to wear.  I went to a retreat in Florida about a month ago.  And they had this doctor that-- she's a woman doctor out of Cincinnati, Ohio, and she was telling us as leaders-- it's about a hundred of us in there.  She says, don't wear dark colors, not-- every now and then you, but when you are working on the job and then you are in a leadership position, and even just on the street, she said, wear colors.  I didn't realize that I was wearing them all the time and didn't know why! (laughter)  She said wear colors.  She said, it first-- she went on tell us how it attracts the-- how the brain operates when people look at you.  And, and she says-- and, and how they relate to you if you wear colors.  (phone ringing) That's me. [pause]
Speaker 1: You were finishing your thought on the color and, and what the doctor had said, wear colors--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yes.  And, and right then and there I said, well, I didn't know it from a medical point of view of, of how it affects the mind, but then everybody was so amazed about it.  Everybody was pointing at me, that-- she's not talking to you because I wear colors a lot. Maybe from- because I'm from the country.
Story_ID: 16337
Speaker 1: Annette Flourenoy just joined us probably about a half an hour or so ago.  And I told her you had already addressed the issue of, it takes a village to raise a child  Yes.
Speaker 2: And she wanted to know what you thought of Hillary Clinton making that particular African proverb more popular than (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Thought it was great cause she's part of the village!  (laughter)  Part of the village, your congressman is part of the village.  Your State representative is part of the village.  Your alderman, which most of us don't even know, never-- don't even have his or her telephone number.  (laughter)  Do, and, and I talk to-- people call my office all the time.  I- the first thing I ask them, what is your name?  What is your address?  What ward you live in?  I don't know.  I said, well, I'll tell you what you do.  Before we go any further, you call the Board of Election, 269-7900 (laughter) and get your alderman's name and your congressman's name.  I can't talk with you unless I know your alderman, your congressman and your minister.  If you ain't got no minister, that's okay.  Just tell me you don't have one because it takes all of us to help solve your problem
Story_ID: 16338
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you your thoughts about reparations for the Black community?
Speaker 2: I think, I think part of what we are doing right now is, is reparations.  It's according to what, what our --
Speaker 1: Reparations from slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's, what I'm saying now, we didn't have no, we didn't get paid in, in slavery for nothing.  And all I'm saying now, that's why we're try, trying to make covenants.  That's one part of reparation, with corporations.  That's why I met with Walsh [Construction Company] and Pepper [Construction Group] and said, listen, we got to get part of the-- we got to get part of the, I mean you got to give-- open up the doors of opportunity where we can, we can become subcontractors, if we're not general contractors.  And, and some of us ought to be general contractors.  You, you--you've been contracting since Ol' Man [Richard J.] Daley and now we, now you still got the same contracts and don't want to let nobody in.  But they're opening up the doors a little bit better.  I think that's part of, part of--of reparation.  And I think-- now I don't know.  I listened to them yesterday talk about reparation.  It may not mean just dollars and cents, you know.  It may not mean Ella and Stella and Jim and Joe, you know.  It may mean a business.  It may mean where you can-- I mean businesses.  It may mean a bank for people who can, who want to go in business-- can go in business.  Women who are in businesses who are working out of their homes can easily get a loan, you know.  It may be that.  Right now I don't think anybody has really figured out.  All they-- all we know, we didn't get that forty acres and a mule.  And the mule is still living (laughter) and the forty acres is still there.  But I support the movement of, and the concept of reparation.  I really do.  What it really breaks down to, I have not figured it out.
Story_ID: 16339
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that, of significance, that I didn't ask you, perhaps I should have?
Speaker 2: I'm just glad to be a part and to know that this what you all are doing, doing.  How many, how long have you been doing this? [ referring to the Historymakers]
Speaker 1: (unclear) [1998] '98.  [1998] '98.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, cause I think we're going to have to begin, we have to continue making history and, and exposing history to our children in such a way that -- see you have no business even struggling with making history.  We could go to the reparation bank (laughter) and make sure that we have the money, make sure that we have the staff, and so that our children will know our history.  And it may be that reparation bank that can help us out in so many ways.  And not just a, a million dollars or $500.00 cause most times when we hit the lottery, the year after that we're broke. Because if you hit big money, because we go buy cars, buy, you know.  And still renting, don't buy no land and real estate and that kind of stuff.  We, we got to learn how inter-generational-- don't be poor all your life.  We don't need to be poor cause we are rich.  The money that we spend on food and automobiles and clothes and high fashion.  I just heard a report the other day how high fashion, white people spend like 37 percent and Hispanics spends like 38 percent and, and African Americans spend 46 percent on high fashions.  We got to learn how to budget our dollars and, and make dollars count.  And we got to study the investment cause the master didn't teach us investment.  He wouldn't even pay us, you know.  So, so-- so that's the whole other thing.  So reparations means repairing what has been lost.  And, and certainly we lost everything so I have to believe in reparation. But to, to-- to break it down, I think there are people that are doing that right now.
Story_ID: 16340
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That here was a woman that committed her life, not just for herself, but for her people. And her people is the most important thing that you can live for, is your people. And I love my people because God made them and God does not make junk.
Story_ID: 16341
Speaker 1: Now, is there any -- this is my last, and then we're going to do your photos.  Is there any comment, question, statement, activity, that's on the record publicly that you see as erroneous that you would like to correct here?
Speaker 2: I think there's too much violence.  I joined C. Delores Tucker in fighting violence in the media, violence on our programs and sex, open sex.  I think until we also get that off, out of our face and out of our houses, we still going to be stuck with immorality to the oomph degree.  Yes, ma'am.
Story_ID: 16342
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Octavia Taplin.
Speaker 2: Do you know when the photo was taken?
Speaker 1: I don't.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Rev. Willie Barrow's mother, Octavia Taplin, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16343
Speaker 1: Just Clyde and Bonnie. (Laughs)  Clyde Barrow.  And, and that's the lady that took care of me when I was in Portland, Oregon.
Speaker 2: Left, do you remember these names?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Otis, Otis Brown.  That was the guy that, that, that I was in love with.
Speaker 2: Otis Brown?
Speaker 1: And that he, he, he left to go on a Evangelist mission and met and married the girl, and married her in ten days.
Speaker 2: Um, and this is his wife?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  But, but he's also my best friend.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And this, this, this girl was named Bertha.  I don't know her last name, and that's my cousin, the young man.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: His name is--Lord, have mercy.
Speaker 2: Is he still living?
Speaker 1: No, he dead.  A. J. , A. J.  That's all I know him by.
Speaker 2: And your Maid of Honor?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and her name was Helen.  And that was my other mama.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Taplin Barrow (center) and her husband Clyde Barrow (center right) with their bridal party, Portland, Oregon, January, 1945.  From the collection of Willie Barrow]
Story_ID: 16344
Speaker 1: That's me and the Reverend.  Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson.  When was that, in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: No, yes, that was, that was '80s [1980s], yeah, about '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (right) with Rev. Jesse Jackson, ca. 1985.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16345
Speaker 1: Left to right.
Speaker 2: I don't know that guy's name, but he was from Florida.  That's me and that's Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy.  And that's Rev. Calvin Morris next to Dr. Abernathy and Rev. Andrew Young.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow with civil rights leaders, n.d.; (L. to R.): Unidentified man, Rev. Willie Barrow, Rev. Ralph Abernathy, Rev. Calvin Moore and Rev. Andrew Young, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16346
Speaker 1: He [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] called us all to Atlanta [Georgia] and met at the hotel, 'cause obviously he had been getting threats and all, and he was on his way then to, to Memphis [Tennessee].  And he said I won't be here with you long.
Speaker 2: [Reproduction of a painting of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16347
Speaker 1: Where was your wedding?
Speaker 2: Portland [Oregon].
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow and Clyde Barrow's wedding portrait, Portland, Oregon, January, 1945.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16348
Speaker 1: Whose that girl out of New York?  I can't remember he name.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow (left), Coretta Scott King (center) and an unidentified woman, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16349
Speaker 1: That's my son.  And then you see him, he got a, entertainment.  He was performing.  I got a, a picture of him performing.
Speaker 2: [High school graduation portrait of Willie Barrow's son, Keith Barrow, ca. 1970.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16350
Speaker 1: That's when he was a baby (laughs).  That's when he was a baby.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) he looks like his Dad.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  (Laughter) Yeah, you caught that right away, everybody said that.  He had on a black something.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow's son, Keith Barrow as a toddler, ca. 1950s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16351
Speaker 1: I don't know if Jesse's hair is big enough.
Speaker 2: Ooh, Lord, have mercy (laughter).  That was the Afro Blow-out kit, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: That was when they was wearing those Afros.
Speaker 2: The young man?  That's Keith.
Speaker 1: And who is this over here? [Bayard] Rustin? (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, that's 'Honey', that's my husband.  He, that was--he was wearing a 'Fro [Afro] too. (laughter)  Lord, have mer-- Lord, we don't want to go back, do we?
Speaker 1: They're coming back though.
Speaker 2: They're back. You see them. I'm telling you. They are back.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (center) with her son Keith and husband, Clyde Barrow at Operation Push, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16352
Speaker 1: Yeah, see I had mine too.
Speaker 2: Look at those earrings.
Speaker 1: Yes, Lord, I had mine too.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Rev. Willie Barrow, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16353
Speaker 1: Oh, that was my former Pastor, Reverend [Claude] Wyatt.  That's [Rev.] Addie's [Wyatt] husband.
Speaker 2: About what year was this?  The mid-'70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: It sure was cause I remember that dress I had on.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with Rev. Claude Wyatt at an Operation Push event, Chicago, Illinois, mid-1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16354
Speaker 1: Do you remember where this was?
Speaker 2: It was at [Operation] PUSH or on his campaign one, cause I did the, I did his '84 [1984] campaign.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow with Rev. Jesse Jackson at Operation Push, Chicago, Illinois, 1984.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16355
Speaker 1: That's [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Harold [Washington].
Speaker 2: Do you know who this is?
Speaker 1: Uh-unh.
Speaker 2: And in the back?
Speaker 1: That's Janine Ramone.  She's a--from Haiti.
Speaker 2: That's Cecil Partee.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow (front center) with Chicago Mayor Harold Washington and others; (L. to R.): Unidentified woman, Rev. Willie Barrow, Janine Ramone, Chicago Mayor Harold Washington and Cecil Partee, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1980s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16356
Speaker 1: That's Michael Jordan's mother [Deloris Jordan]--.
Speaker 2: This is '91 or 2 [1991 or 1992].
Speaker 1: And that's--what was that lady's name?
Speaker 2: '93 or 4 [1993 or 1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't know this one.  I don't know--Jordan, was that her name?  Yes.  And who was this in the white, do you know?
Speaker 2: That's not Melody is it?
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (third from left), NASA Astronaut Dr. Mae Jemison (standing center), Deloris Jordan (second from right) and others, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1991-1994.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16357
Speaker 1: That's Leon Davis.  He was our--one of our executive directors, Leon Davis.  I don't hear from Leon no more.  He lives in the 'burbs [suburbs] now.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with Leon Davis, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16358
Speaker 1: Oh, that was when the boys came back, you know, that--when he [Rev. Jesse Jackson] brought the guys back from wherever it was.  Yeah, that's when I was preaching sho nuf then.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with military hostages rescued by Rev. Jesse Jackson, Chicago, Illinois, 1999.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16359
Speaker 1: What's the occasion of this?  Um?  What is this picture (unclear)?  Preaching at my church.  It looks like it was published in something.  'N'digo' [Chicago-based African American newspaper].  'N'digo'.  That special section, right.  Yeah.  Their annual profiles.  Profiles, yeah.  All right.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Rev. Willie Barrow taken for 'N'digo' newspaper, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16360
Speaker 1: [Rev. Ralph] Abernathy was really young there.  Oh, that's--oh, that's --  Abernathy.  That's, I got, and that's, that's me and that's his wife [Juanita Abernathy].
Speaker 2: Oh, this is his wife--over here.
Speaker 1: Over here?  No, that one right there on my right.  With glasses.
Speaker 2: Oh--yeah, that one.  That's his wife, and do you know who that is?  And that's Pat.  Pat is a gospel singer and she lives in Denver [Colorado] right now.  [Patricia] Pat Drinkard.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (center) with others, late 1960s; (L. to R.): Patricia Drinkard, Rev. Ralph Abernathy, Rev. Willie Barrow and Juanita Abernathy.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16361
Speaker 1: Now Reverend Morris was also one of our--he was the first executive director [for Operation PUSH] after Jesse [Jackson]--.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Reverend Calvin Morris. He's now running the Community Renewal [Society] downtown [Chicago, Illinois], now.  He went to, went--taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], then he went down to Atlanta [Georgia].  Then he moved by here two, two years ago.
Speaker 2: You look so glamorous on there.  Look at that hairstyle, looking real good. (laughs).
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (left) with Rev, Calvin Morris (seated), and an unidentified man, Chicago, Illinois, early 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16362
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, that's the staff and Reverend [George Edward] Riddick, Lord, have mercy.  Reverend Reddick.  Girl, that was my arms, my legs, my, ooh.
Speaker 2: That man standing behind you?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was--they called him--Chicago [Illinois] called him the 'Walking Encyclopedia'.  He couldn't drive, he couldn't--the only thing he did, he just rode the bus and read everything.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow (seated) with Rev. George Edward Riddick and others at Operation PUSH headquarters, Chicago, Illinois, early 1990s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16363
Speaker 1: You know Cirillo McSween.  He is the, the largest owner of Burger--not Burger King, McDonald's.  He's the one got the three Mac--four McDonald's downtown.
Speaker 2: Cirillo McSween.
Speaker 1: Cirillo McSween.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with business entrepreneur Cirillo McSween, Washington, D.C., ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16364
Speaker 1: Oh, that was the first man, Mr. Henderson--Celeous (ph.) Henderson, owned a business school on the West Side.  And he was the first chairman of the African American business thing for Operation Breadbasket, and that's his wife.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow (left) with Mr. Celeous (?) Henderson and his wife, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1980s.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16365
Speaker 1: Actually can you flip it the other because the, the bottom of the picture is getting hidden behind that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, this way.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Jesse Jackson (standing, far right), his wife, Jackie Jackson (seated), and their children, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16366
Speaker 1: [No narration]
Speaker 2: [(L. to R.): Nancy Jefferson, Rev. Jesse Jackson and Rev. Willie Barrow, during Harold Washington's mayoral campaign, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1983-1987.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16367
Speaker 1: 'Brother Honey'.  But no matter how mad we got with each--we say, "Shut up honey!" (laughs)
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with her husband, Clyde Barrow.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16368
Speaker 1: Shirley Chisholm, C. DeLores Tucker and Dorothy Height.
Speaker 2: Do you know the occasion?
Speaker 1: I think we were at the Democratic Convention in, in San Francisco [California, July 1984].
Speaker 2: '70s [1970s] or is it the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Eighty -- it was '80's [1980s].
Speaker 2: [(L. to R.): Rev. Willie Barrow, Dorothy Height, former congresswoman Shirley Chisholm and C. DeLores Tucker at the Democratic National Convention, San Francisco, California, July, 1984.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16369
Speaker 1: [No narration]
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Rev. Willie Barrow, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16370
Speaker 1: Bill [Cosby] live way out in the country, about eighty miles.  I mean he's in the country--.
Speaker 2: Outside of California?
Speaker 1: No, outside of--,
Speaker 2: L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 1: No, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow with Bill Cosby and others during his visit to Operation PUSH headquarters, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16371
Speaker 1: That's my sister, Lula Mae [Taplin] and Willie B.
Speaker 2: Your older or younger sister?
Speaker 1: She's my oldest sister.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Taplin Barrow and her older sister, Lula Mae Taplin, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16372
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the photographer.  He the one that took it.
Speaker 2: He had to be in it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Willie Barrow (center), her husband, Clyde Barrow (right), and an unnamed photographer at Operation PUSH headquarters, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16373
Speaker 1: Voter registration, what year?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that was, that was in '60 [196-]--it was about '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow (left) and an unidentified woman at a voter registration drive, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16374
Speaker 1: Yeah, jobs, peace and equality.
Speaker 2: [Rev. Jesse Jackson during his campaign for U.S. President, 1984.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16375
Speaker 1: Ooh, that was during the, the [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Harold Washington period because that's [Alvin] Al Boutte [banker and entrepreneur].  And Cirillo [McSween], Cirillo was on the board [of Operation PUSH] at that time.  And that's the guy right there who has the largest [Ford automobile] dealership in the nation.
Speaker 2: Okay, name these (unclear),
Speaker 1: All the way to the right
Speaker 2: Linda, he, Linda gonna to marry him now--Linda Johnson [daughter of Chicago publisher John H. Johnson].
Speaker 1: Oh, [Melvin] Mel Farr?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mel Farr.
Speaker 1: Okay and this Al, Al Boutte.
Speaker 2: Al Boutte, and that's Jesse [Jackson], that's Cirillo and that's the Senator.
Speaker 1: Senator?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the Senator [Howard] Brookins, got the funeral home.
Speaker 1: [(L. to R.): Mel Farr, Alvin Boutte, Rev. Jesse Jackson, Cirillo McSween and Howard Brookins, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1983-1987.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16376
Speaker 1: What was I doing there with that.  I was--.
Speaker 2: I ought to follow her (unclear).
Speaker 1: But she kind of quiet.
Speaker 2: Gee, I never, I don't know, (unclear) never paid it any attention.
Speaker 1: [Rev. Willie Barrow wearing a balloon hat, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
Story_ID: 16377
Speaker 1: That's him.
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1: My son [Keith Barrow], performing.
Speaker 2: What's he sing?  Is he a, like a--.
Speaker 1: He started out gospel.  Then he went--
Speaker 2: R&B [Rhythm and Blues].
Speaker 1: R&B.  And then after that I don't know what. He said, "Mama, you don't know what I'm singing!"  He used to get so upset with me.
Speaker 2: [Willie Barrow's son, Keith Barrow, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Willie Barrow.]
