Story_ID: 16912
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by state--we're gonna slate it.  I want you to state your name and--including your middle name, and spell it for us.  And I want also your date of birth.
Speaker 2: I am Lonnie Griffith Bunch III.  So it's L-O-N-N-I-E, Griffith, I've never spelled that myself, G-R-I-F-F-I-T-H, Bunch, B-U-N-C-H.  And I was born on November 18th, 1952.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: September 5th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're in the President's office, my office at the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a historian.  I am the director of, of a history museum.
Story_ID: 16913
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is, just had lunch?
Speaker 2: A hamburger.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, early fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying--I mean, I'm sorry, favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Anywhere I am with my wife [Maria Marable Bunch].
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My grandfather used to always say, "Never believe your own clippings."
Story_ID: 16914
Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your father.  If you can talk about him and what you know about his background.  And I know you've done a fair amount of, you know, genealogical research in your family.
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] was really that cutting edge of African American males that, on the one hand, had opportunities for education, but still ran up against a system that prevented them from getting where they wanted to.  My dad was the son of a dentist, privilege within the African American community, went to an all-black college, Shaw University in, in [Raleigh] North Carolina.  After serving in the service, he went on to get a master's degree in chemistry.  He wanted to be a chemist.  He loved chemistry.  And so in the late '40s [1940s] he tried to get a job as a chemist in New Jersey and he couldn't.  And he couldn't find a job, couldn't find a job and ultimately decided, well, the one thing I love to do is teach, so I'll teach.  And in those days, late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s], that in the big cities like Newark [New Jersey] or Paterson [New Jersey], they didn't hire African Americans.  So he ended up teaching at some small little town in the middle of nowhere called Lincoln Park [New Jersey], about forty miles north of Newark.  And I never knew the story that when he retired, a man that worked with him his whole career said, "I bet your father never told you that when he took that job, that the first week of school people would line the streets in this small town to see the black teacher."  And this notion of my father sort of being able to make sure that, even if his initial dream was, was crushed, that he would do something productive that would help to make the country better has really sort of motivated me and shaped who I am.
Speaker 1: Did your father talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: He does.  He talks a lot about family.  He grew up at a time when he was really connected to so many family members who really straddled the nineteenth century.  So he talks a lot about sort of being tied to those people.  And he talked a lot about those growing up in a kind of middle class environment, which was unusual.  But he also talked a lot about going down South.  Our relatives were from North Carolina.  His father was born in North Carolina.  And so this notion of, of really being part of two worlds is something that has shaped him and in some ways shaped me as well.
Speaker 1: Well, what about his family life?  Can you--I mean just a little bit.  Not to belabor, but--.
Speaker 2: My father grew up, the, really the children of people who were already fifty when he was born.  They had had--apparently, my grandmother and grandfather had had a child who was killed in the influenza epidemic in 1918.  And basically, they waited another ten years before they had children.  So my father always says, it was like being raised by a grandparent.  So his father was fifty when he was born.  And there was--these were people who really made the transition from sharecroppers to, in essence, a black elite.  So that my father grew up in a very strict household, a household that was really the kind that said, here's the way you need to behave to improve the race.  So there was a lot of emphasis on education, a lot of emphasis on self- control, a lot of emphasis on giving back.  So he and his older sister where--his only sibling, and they grew up in an environment that was surrounded by black family, but they lived in what was then a predominantly white town.  And so, in essence, he had an integrated experience earlier than many African Americans.  And I always tell this story that later--early in my career, I was--I, I'd done a radio show in Los Angeles [California].  And so somebody called my office the next day and said, "Are you Lonnie Bunch?"  And I said, "Yes."  "Are you Lonnie Bunch from Belleville, New Jersey?"  I said, "Yes."  And she said, "Do you remember me?  I was your first girlfriend."  And I said, no, I--the name didn't ring a bell.  And she said, "Don't you remember you were the only black kid.  I was the only Jewish girl.  And when they taught ballroom dancing, they only let us dance together."  And I said, "Sure, I remember."  Her name was Carol.  And she said, "No, no, my name is Esther."  And she kept going on and on.  And finally she said, " And you know, Lonnie, I lost track of you during World War II."  And it was my dad.  So he and I had both had the very same experience, but it really taught me a lot about him, that I thought I was the only one who went through that, and didn't realize that, you know, thirty years earlier he went through the same thing.
Speaker 1: And had he ever thought about pursuing the, you know, being a dentist?  I mean he had a--.
Speaker 2: He hated being a dentist.  I mean his father thought, well, I've now made it in the profession.  My son will be a dentist.  And he tells the story that all through high school, that's what he was gonna be.  I remember when I looked at his yearbook, the class of '45 [1945].  It said, you know, he will be a dentist.  And he said, he went up to college and he was gonna be a dentist.  But then he got drafted at the end of the war, and he said when he came back after the war, he said, "I can make this decision.  I don't necessarily have to do what my father says." And that's when he went--decided he would be a, a chemist, rather than a dentist.  But I think until, actually, as he put it growing up and going away in the military, he would have followed the trail his father would have wanted him to be.
Story_ID: 16915
Speaker 1: And, the tradition of the name, was there any ever discussion about that because your grandfather was named Lonnie Bunch and your--?
Speaker 2: My--we talked a little bit about it.  My grandfather apparently wasn't the most talkative to his children.  It was a classic, "children should be seen and not heard."  So it was the kind of thing that he heard when other family were together.  And his father, my grandfather, Lonnie Bunch, Sr., was just very proud of who he was and his name.  And he felt it was really important to have that name passed on.  And I remember my father said that when he was a child, they called him 'Junior'.  He hated that.  So when I was born, he said, he really wrestled with, should I be the third 'cause he thought, he hated being Junior, what would that mean?  But he really felt that it was really important to carry that on.  And candidly, I only have daughters [Katie Elizabeth Bunch and Sarah Maria Bunch].  I almost thought about naming my oldest daughter Lonnie to carry that on because it meant so much in the family.  But we didn't.
Speaker 1: And then, and the name, Bunch, you had said that it came from--you were almost--based on the research, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, the name Bunch is an English name that the family Bunch came to the New World in the 1670s, the white, the white Bunches.  And they settled in Virginia and North Carolina.  And there was what is known as the old Bunch Plantation outside of Raleigh, North Carolina.  And, and our sense is that's probably where the family was during slavery and, and took the name that way.  But what was interesting that while the last name was Bunch, they made a, they made decisions to make sure all the first names had nothing to do with the plantation owners.  And so I think that for us it's kind of interesting because while the name Ralph Bunche is well known, he has an E on the end of the name.  We do not. And so the family joke was, 'different family, same plantation' kind of thing.  But that's where the name comes from.
Speaker 1: Did--have you been back there to do research yourself on--?
Speaker 2: I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I went to all the archives in Raleigh [North Carolina] and I went to the area that was the Bunch Plantation.  In fact, now it's called, there's a road called Old Bunch Plantation Road.  So I've been in the area.  I walked the cemeteries, trying to get a sense of the Bunches.  I was able to find a couple of, I guess it would be my great grandfather and some of his siblings.  Able to find a little bit on the maternal side.  Yes, so I walked the land a lot from that side of the family.
Speaker 1: And in the, you know, the Freedman's--the records, did you find any information about your--?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I looked through the Freedman Bank Records [sic, Freedman's Bank Records].  I've done all of that.  I didn't.  But I was very fortunate in that because I knew that one of the early family names was Robertson.  I knew they had worked on the old Robertson Plantation.  So I was able to track that down. And I found some amazing documents of my great grandfather and great grandmother, working sharecroppers, getting paid fifty-two cents for fifty--for five hundred pounds of cotton in 1892.  And so I actually found a little pieces of paper where it would have on it.  And it would say, I remember it would say, I guess this, this grandfather was a Brodie.  So there's "Brodie and his woman".  Didn't even say wife.  Brodie and his woman.  And they would pay him this amount of money.  And so I've been able to find a fair amount of material.
Speaker 1: And you found it where?
Speaker 2: In the North Carolina State Archives in Raleigh.
Story_ID: 16916
Speaker 1: Now, your mother.  Can you give her name and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Montrose Boone [Bunch].  And she is also from, what I would call a middle class family, but from a farming family, also from North Carolina.  She's from a very small town named Woodland, North Carolina which is in--probably forty miles from Raleigh [North Carolina] or, or in Rocky Mount [North Carolina].  And she grew up the twelfth of thirteen children.  So she was at the very end of, of the family.  And they owned a family farm that had been in the maternal side of the family for at least one, possibly two generations.  And they were considered the leading black family of this little town, Woodland, North Carolina.  And so my earliest memories are of going to Woodland and spending time with my grandparents [Johnnie Boone and Flossie Anderson] and then with an array of cousins, forty or fifty cousins.  And I was one of the few that didn't live in the South, live in that area.  So it was always a little bit of a challenge coming in.  "Who are you again?"  And, "You don't have the same accent as we do."  But it was really important in terms of who I am now.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother and what did she talk about her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother is the nicest person you'll ever meet.  She's very gregarious and social and it's very important to her that people are happy.  If you come to her house, she wants to make sure you're happy.  She's very good at--because she grew up in such a large family, the things she talks about more than my dad [Lonnie Bunch, Jr.] is family.  My dad really didn't talk about family really until his sister died, which was in the '80s [1980s].  And that got him thinking about family, whereas my mother has always talked about the importance of family.  And, because my father only had one sister, and she didn't have any children, it was really the other side of the family that were all my relatives.  So that's where the aunts, the uncles, the cousins.  So my mother would always talk about how important family was and how important it was for African Americans to maintain those families because that's all you can count on.  I remember her saying that time and time again.
Speaker 1: And how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: They both  were in college at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina]. So my dad went down from New Jersey.  My mother--which is a lovely story.  None of my mother's brothers--there were a lot of brothers, none of them went to college.  But my grandfather, which I think in an unusual stance, thought it was really important for his daughters to go to college.  So it was just-- happenstance, just because of the way education was, my mother had--has, two sisters.  Well, all three of them went to Shaw at the same time.  And they all graduated together.  And so there's this wonderful sense, and they're still very close, that the three of them were the youngest and that they sort of maintained the sense of family.  And so from that side, there was the sense of education for my mother's family.  And they were the first ones in those Boones probably to graduate college.
Speaker 1: And so your father, after he left Shaw, they, they went, came back to Belleville [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: To New Jersey, yeah.
Speaker 1: To New Jersey.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Came back to New Jersey, and my mother did graduate education so she could be a teacher.  And so they were both teachers.  And so my earliest memory is, of in some ways, we lived in a, what they call today, a working-class town.  And they were clearly much higher educated than anybody else.  And so they were teachers.  They had regular jobs, but they also had the summer off.  So it, so it made us, not only because we were African Americans, because of their lifestyle, very different in some ways than most of the other people in the town.
Story_ID: 16917
Speaker 1: What was the town [Belleville, New Jersey] like and where is it located also?
Speaker 2: Belleville borders Newark [New Jersey].  It's in Essex County, New Jersey.  It was a town that was overwhelmingly white.  By the time I was growing up there, it was Italian, mainly from Sicily and Naples.  So I grew up speaking Sicilian.  I was fluent in it, partly cause I wanted to know what people were saying about me, but partly because those were all the people I grew up with.  And, and I remember the grandmothers dressed in black in mourning and speaking Italian.  And so I would pick that up in order to communicate.  And it was the kind of town that would be considered lower middle class, relatively safe, limited crime.  It was a town that was dominated by a kind of Mafia attitude.  So there was a lot of that.  I remember growing up, knowing all about the Mafia and, and people used to say, oh, "there's no Mafia."  I thought, well, I grew up with all these kids.  I, I know all about that.  But it was a kind of town where I spent a lot of time in my young years fighting, being one of the few blacks.  I was the only black in my elementary school [Public School Number Five, Belleville, New Jersey] until my brother [Lawrence Gregory Bunch] came along, who's five years younger.  And I can remember, we lived at the bottom of the hill, and the school was at the top, and I can remember fighting to get to school and fighting to come home.  And I think after about four or five years of fighting, I realized, I can't beat everybody, and I can't outrun everybody.  So I had to figure out other ways.  So I learned how to talk so that people would sort of, you know, not want to fight.  I learned how to be funny.  I learned how to be a good athlete because that put me in a status where, you know, I wasn't just some black kid.  I was now the good athlete.  So, but I would say that my early years were really shaped by confronting racism everyday.
Story_ID: 16918
Speaker 1: I'd like to take you back to Belleville [New Jersey] during those early years.  And I want you--you've told me a little bit about sights, but I'd like to know what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I think, I remember very much that the street I lived on was a, was an old street so the houses were very close.  So you could hear the neighbors argue.  You could smell the spaghetti that, that the neighbors were cooking.  And I remember at the end of the block, the sidewalk ended about halfway 'cause the newer houses, those were the kind of GI Bill houses, didn't have a sidewalk. But at the very end of the street there was this circle that had a basketball court.  And that's where everything happened, where you'd go play ball, meet the other kids.  And it was where I had to initially fight for respect.  And then once those fights ended, then it was sort of a place that it was okay for me to be.  The sights I remember, I remember walking up the hill to the school.  That hill became a barrier in a way to, you know, could I get to the school?  Could I get home?  And I remember, remember one house, I'll never--I haven't thought of this in a hundred years.  One of things you want to do when you're a little kid is you want to fit in.  And being black, you're not allowed to fit in.  And I can remember that I used to think that the worst thing were the kids I'd have to fight.  But it was really other things that I remember.  And I remember there was a house I would have to pass everyday at school.  And I must have been little.  I must have second grade.  And there was a little girl who clearly wasn't in kindergarten yet who would sit on the porch.  And every time she would see me, she'd say, "Oh, here comes the fuzzy wuzzy nigger," every day.  It seemed like every day.  And I remember--she was a little kid, and I remember just hating, as I would get near that block 'cause I knew she'd be there.  And she'd say that, and I'd just, you know, walk through it, you know, as if it didn't bother me.  And so maybe people never knew it bothered me, but I remember like it was yesterday how much that hurt because I couldn't fight that.  I could fight the, the kids, but--the boys, but I couldn't fight this tiny little girl.  And so that may have only happened five times, but it seemed like it happened every day.  And to this day if I drive through that neighborhood where my folks no longer live, I, I can identify that house, and that memory comes rushing back.
Speaker 1: What was the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: I lived on Beech Street [Belleville, New Jersey].  125 Beech Street, a little street that had three blocks.
Speaker 1: Can you describe who was on the street or some of the neighbors?
Speaker 2: The--my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] grew up in the same house.  So he was born in that house.  My grandfather [Lonnie Bunch] built the house.  So in essence, the street grew up around us.  My grandfather built the house in 1919.  So the street grew up around us.  And so there were a lot of neighbors, and even though my grandparents died before I turned five, I remember that my grandmother [Leanna Brodie Bunch] was such a figure of respect that they called her Mrs. Bunch.  Now, I didn't know that was a big deal then, but looking back, they called her Mrs. Bunch.  They never called her by her first name.  They always were deferential to her, but I remember that the neighbors were, the older neighbors were the Wagners and the Laws, but the new neighbors were all the Italians, the Scanellis and the Paglianos.  And I can remember that I always knew I was different, but I also knew that since my grand--my father had grown up there, my grandfather built the house, that there was some level of cocoon of acceptance of being on that street because we had been there so long.
Story_ID: 16919
Speaker 1: Now, do you know about your grandparents coming there.  I mean how did they end up settling in that, you know, in that town, in Bell--[Belleville, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a--it's a long story.  I think the, the short end of it is that my grandfather [Lonnie Bunch Sr.] met someone, either when he was in college at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] or in dental school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who lived in New Jersey, and told him that's where you should come because there was no other family member, there were other Bunches that were in New Jersey.  But he went to--he was a sharecropper until he was twenty-five, decided that he wanted a better life.  So he found out that he could go Shaw at night.  He went to Shaw as well--go to Shaw at night.  He went Shaw for seven years.  Graduated college in 1910 at age thirty-one or thirty-two.  Decided that he wanted to be a dentist.  Now, we don't know why.  But decided he wanted to be a dentist, heard that he could go to a black school like Howard.  Wanted to go to Howard, found out in those days, you had to pay your money up front.  He didn't have money up front.  So he and my grandmother [Leanna Brodie Bunch]--I guess he married after graduating college, had to find jobs.  And so he found jobs in New Jersey.  And what they did is, they moved to Atlantic City [New Jersey] where the fancy hotels were and she did wash and laundry in the hotel.  And he did something that was an African American institution.  In Atlantic City, there were these little carts, they called them jitneys, where the rich people would ride in, and they'd be pushed.  Well, they'd be pushed by black men.  So my grandfather pushed white people along the boardwalk for three years 'til they had enough money to go to college--I mean go to, to dental school.  They put their money together.  My grandmother continued to take in laundry in Washington [D.C.].  They went to school.  He graduated, and again, someone said come to New Jersey.  Well, the story is that he came to New Jersey in, it's got to be about 1918, 1919, and wanted to practice.  And New Jersey wouldn't accept the dental degree from Howard University, said it was a black school, wasn't good enough. So he said, "Well then what do you need?"  And he says, "Well, you need to go to a reputable school." So he said, "What's the best dental school in the country?"  And here's where it gets murky.  We were--he was told it was somewhere here in the Midwest, in Chicago [Illinois].  So he came here, and went to dental school all over again, started from scratch, went a second time, got a dental degree from the school in here that I don't know yet, came back to New Jersey, and said, now, what?  And they said, "Welcome, Dr. Bunch."  And so he built the house in Belleville and practiced dentistry from say 1920, 1921 until his death in 1957.
Speaker 1: So what were his clients?  And that's what--I'm just trying to understand the ethnic makeup.  I mean I know--.
Speaker 2: Because we were in Newark [New Jersey], his, his office was in Newark.
Speaker 1: Newark, okay.
Speaker 2: So Newark was the town.  So, so--so he had black clientele.  I doubt if he had any white clientele.  But so his office was in Newark, and he lived in Belleville.  And one of the fondest stories I've, I've ever heard about that is that because my memory of them--they were in their seventies, early seventies, so they're old people.  But after they both had died, I remember talking to somebody, and they'd always say two things.  One is they'd say, "Oh, you're Doc Bunch's grandson, the painless dentist."  When I was a kid, he used to do my teeth, he wasn't painless, but at least that's what people thought.  And I remember being taken back as a kid that somebody would know my grandfather in that way.  But the thing I remember most is several people would come to me, even by the time I was fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, and they'd say, "Oh, we remember your grandfather.  His office was in Newark," and Newark was maybe nine miles away from Belleville.  And he said that, but everyday at 11:30 [A.M.], he would get in his car and drive through the streets of Newark in a leisurely way to go home and have lunch with his bride [Leanna Brodie Bunch], that he wanted to have lunch with his bride everyday.  And I always think that's a, a real insight into this man that I have no real knowledge of.  But the fact that even in his sixties or seventies, he would come home everyday to have lunch with his bride, I thought was really very important.
Story_ID: 16920
Speaker 1: Now, I want you to describe family life because for, up until five, you were on your own, you were a solo, or only child.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering, what was--was it structured very much, you know?
Speaker 2: It, it was--family life was interesting because since both my parents [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr. and Montrose Boone Bunch] were teachers, on the one hand, it meant they came home earlier than a lot of other parents.  So I didn't have all that free time where, you know, I was a latch key kid, but maybe for twenty minutes.  You know, I didn't have all that afternoon.  But it was also obviously driven by education.  And so that everything was about school, about your grades, about the respect.  And I remember that the crisis moments were always report cards.  And God help you if you got a little note from the teacher that said you were disrespectful of the teacher, even though it may have been racially driven, and they would--and then unbeknownst to me, they would go up and confront that.  But all I knew when I got home, oh, there was hell  to pay.  And, but I think, when I think about the family, I think about several things.  I think about the fact that my dad was working on graduate degrees when I was little, so that a lot of times he would--he decided to be--that chemistry wasn't gonna do it so he was gonna be a teacher.  So even though he was teaching, he wanted to a Ph.D. in child and adolescent development.  So he used to go over to Hunter College [New York, New York] and work on his degree.  So a lot of times he would come home just for a hot minute.  Then he would go.  And when I was really little, in order to pay for that, because teachers didn't get paid much, he would also tend bar.  It was at Broadway Open House, I remember that.  He would tend bar in Newark [New Jersey].  So the only time I really got to spend with him is sometimes he'd let me come down to the bar during the day, but that was rare. But other times I would spend time with him when he would come home late.  And he was so keyed up from work and school, and he couldn't sleep.  So he used to watch--there was a show called the 'Million Dollar Movie', late movie.  It must have come on 11:00 o'clock [p.m.], and, you know, just all those dumb movies from the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  But I would hear him.  So I would sneak downstairs.  And at first, he'd chase me back up, but then he'd let me stay.  And I would just sit there with him, and we'd watch these movies until he fell asleep because he'd always fall asleep, but during that time, he would tell me stories.  First, he'd tell me about the movie and what's gonna happen. He'd help me sort of deconstruct the movies.  But then he'd use it to talk a little bit about behavior.  Here's what you should expect or here's what's gonna happen or here's what it's like being a black kid in a white society.  Here's some of the challenges you're gonna face.  And so my brother [Lawrence Gregory Bunch] doesn't have that experience and for me, it's really one of the most positive things I can remember, is having those moments of--I remember watching 'The Solid Gold Cadillac' [motion picture], and dumb movies, but the most important was--for that hour, it was just our time.  And it really was the kind of life lessons that many other people got sitting on the porch with their parents or--we didn't do that.  The other thing we did do as I got older was until I started playing sports, till I was playing in high school, the most important thing was dinner in the evening.  And because my parents were teachers, they were able to go ahead and have the kind of dinner that allowed us to talk.  And my father always felt it was really important for my brother and I to learn how to talk, to debate, to argue.  So every dinner was not just, you know, "How's your day today?"  It was more, "What do you think about this?  What do you think about what was in the paper?  What do you think about X or Y?"  And we were taught to make an argument.  And I can remember then getting in high school [Belleville High School, Belleville, New Jersey], and my father would have friends over, and they would have conversations.  And my father would encourage me to debate.  And I remember winning a debate with an adult.  And this adult looked at my dad and said, "How do you let your child talk like that?"  And I remember my father saying, "I raised him to talk like that."  So in a way those dinners really shaped who I am as an intellectual, who I am as somebody who believes in debating and, and making an argument because of him.
Speaker 1: And your brother, do you remember the time that he was born?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your thoughts about it as a--?
Speaker 2: When I was--when my brother was born, I remember that again--now, remember I'm fighting every day.  There were a couple of bullies in the neighborhood that I used to have to fight.  And I remember thinking, I can't wait until I have a baby brother 'cause then he can help me fight these bullies.  That's my earliest memory (laughing) of having a baby brother.  I didn't realize it'd be years before he could help, but, you know, having a baby brother.  And so that's my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 16921
Speaker 1: In fact, there were more blacks in Belleville [New Jersey] when my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] went than when I did.
Speaker 2: Okay, well--there were more!
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: So what happened to them?  Do you know what happened?  Do you think they moved to Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: I think they moved to Newark.  I think the community became more and more middle-class.  Some got pushed out.  I think they moved to Newark.
Speaker 2: Wait, the--but the--but you're saying the community got--but I thought it was getting--it was like--even though it was becoming--okay, yeah, I understand.
Speaker 1: It was becoming more, you know, when these different groups are coming in, they want to keep it, you know, when I go back there now, there are no blacks anywhere near where I grew up.  It's all Italian.  So I mean I could see that, what would happen if there were a few black families, if something had happened or they moved or somebody died, they'd sell it to another black family.
Speaker 2: So your identity as a black person is coming from--,
Speaker 1: Family.
Speaker 2: --family.  And then you are going down South.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, during, mainly during summers?
Speaker 1: Easter and summers.
Speaker 2: Easter and summers.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Once in a while Christmas, but mainly, Easter and summer.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But your parents [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr. and Montrose Boone Bunch] are really working and trying to survive too.
Story_ID: 16922
Speaker 1: Is religion a part of the family?
Speaker 2: It's very important, but my grandparents [Lonnie Bunch and Leanna Brodie Bunch] apparently were very religious so my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] so much was driven by the church.  Clinton Memorial AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church in Newark [New Jersey].  Again, that's where I was baptized.  That's where he was baptized.  And he spent every Sunday, and I think, I think it drove him crazy.  You know, Sunday school, church, the meeting after.  So my mother [Montrose Boone Bunch] was very religious.  I think he was.  Part of it was his scientific upbringing.  He used to always talk about that he believed in a God, but he believe in a mind more.  And so when I was raised, we would go to church, but it was clear that even by the time I was seven or eight, my father stopped going.  And then I'd go with my mother, but by the time I'm ten, eleven, maybe twelve, I'm thinking, now, "wait a minute, if he's not going, why am I going?"  So of this is a gender thing.  He's a guy, I'm a guy.  So I started going less and less to church after I was about twelve or thirteen.  But for me, the AME church to this day always remains very important to me and it's very important in part as I--after I became a historian, when I realized how much of the history is carried through the community activities, through the spirituals.  So it really was an important part of who I am, but it wasn't, it wasn't as central to the family as it was when my father was growing up.
Story_ID: 16923
Speaker 1: What was your elementary school, the name?
Speaker 2: It was--this town was very creative, it was [Belleville] Public School Number 5 [Belleville, New Jersey] (laughter). So, yeah, that's what it was, Public School number five.
Speaker 1: Anything besides the, you know, just getting to school and back, are there any other things in terms of influences there and your teachers?  So your teachers are all white?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was interesting because some of the influences were, there were times when I can remember things that told me, 'cause at times I would be angry about all these white people, tired of fighting.  And I can remember, and it shapes me to this day, I am always a person who picks the underdog.  And I can remember as a kid, especially playing sport, when kids didn't know me, and they would pick teams.  And I remember, "oh, God, they're not gonna pick me, they're not gonna pick me."  And then I'd be picked last or something.  And, and then after they knew that I'd be--I could play, then they'd pick me sooner.  And by the end of, you know, those days, I was the captain.  But I would always pick the kid who stunk because I remember what it was like to be left outside. And yet, just when I would feel like I'm so tired of these people, I can remember kids that I would play with that would do wonderful things.  You know, I never had any money, and so sometimes these kids would go play sports and then they'd go and buy a soda.  And I just remember this kid Joel Pesano, about fourth grade.  They were gonna play and I'm gonna walk back 'cause I don't have any money.  He says, "Lonnie, come on, let's split the soda."  And this whole notion of just splitting the soda, you know, people didn't want to have you drink out of their fountain.  I mean I had neighbors who didn't want me in their backyard, and so for this kid to sort of make that gesture, and maybe it was just a gesture, but it meant so much to me.  It helped me begin to think not everybody was the way I was thinking everybody was.  But I, I can remember the school being really important because, because I grew up with teachers, and I have respect for teachers, but yet, I can remember the racist attitudes of a lot of these teachers.  I can remember being in second grade with Mrs. Kane.  And I can remember her, she was very concerned that because I wanted to play sports on the way home, I'd throw a ball or whatever.  So we'd get our little papers, you know, I'd fold it up and put it in my pocket--well, other kids would.  But she would grab me, shake me and I remember one day she threw me against the desk and knocked the desk down.  Everything fell on top of me because I had folded the papers.  Nobody else got that.  I'll never forget that.  But there were other teachers--it was interesting.  Most of the white Northern teachers had a hard time with me.  They just didn't think that--they thought I was taking somebody's space.  And I can remember in being in fourth grade, the teacher saying, first day of school, you know, who are the kids.  And, and one of the things that always impressed me--it took me years to figure this out, I thought I was such a smart kid.  That's why the first day of school all the teachers knew my name.  (Laughing) I didn't realize it was just because I was the black kid.  But I was like, yeah, they know who Lonnie Bunch is.  But I remember the first day of school, the teacher asking where your parents worked.  And I remember saying my mother [Montrose Boone Bunch] worked for the Patterson [New Jersey] or the [New Jersey] State Board of Education.  My father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] worked for the Lincoln Park [New Jersey] Board of Education.  And the teacher said, "You must be proud of your parents being janitors at the public school buildings."  And I didn't get it.  And I remembered a week later, over dinner, saying that.  And my father stopped the conversation, we got in the car and went to the school right that minute.  And I remember him raising the riot--I was scared, but saying, you know, "You got to understand who we are and how you're going to treat us with a certain amount of respect."  And he would do that from time to time.  And so those are my memories of these teachers, some having real trouble with me, not happy that I was taking a slot of a white kid. But I remember my father, although he would really get on me if I, even I was disrespectful, he would always march to the school when he felt it was really important to let them know.  And he would always say, "I went to this school so you're going to treat us with a certain amount of respect."
Story_ID: 16924
Speaker 1: What are the family dinner conversations, you know, occurring?  And, you know, I'm thinking about the little girl calling you fuzzy wuzzy nigg--was it fuzzy wuzzy nigger?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, fuzzy wuzzy nigger?
Speaker 1: Did that ever--was that ever discussed with your parents?
Speaker 2: No, I never said anything.  I think partly it was--part of it was me, the notion that these things were embarrassing or that I needed to handle them myself.  But part of it was the family.  It would be part of my family's argument was that too many people have excuses, that you needed to take care of your life, and do what you have to do.  And I remember my grandmother [Leanna Brodie Bunch], before she died, used to say to me, you know, "Don't go out in the street, don't fight.  You're gonna be a, a proper gentleman, except if they call you nigger, then fight all of them," she used to say.  But my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] and mother [Montrose Boone Bunch], when she--we never had those conversations, really not until I was well into high school.  But as an elementary school kid, I don't think they ever had any idea, except maybe for sometimes the blood on my shirts, that I would fight a lot or that these things would hurt me.  And I can remember the pain, especially being in sixth grade when kids start to date.  And suddenly there're even parents who were friendly when I was in second grade, would suddenly say, "Don't come to the party.  Don't come to the house, don't do this."  And, and so, but I never had those conversations.  It was just something that I sort of felt I had to handle myself.
Story_ID: 16925
Speaker 1: What's occurring around dinner conversations?  What is the education and what are the topics of the day and--?
Speaker 2: Some of the topics are just, how do you work hard?  How do you make sure that you do well in school?  I remember many of the conversations about, well it's a given that you two boys will graduate college.  A lot of the kids in my neighborhood were just gonna be happy to get out of high school.  But that was a given.  So we'd talk about college a lot, what you'd do.  And my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] would talk about philosophy courses that he took or chemistry courses.  Our mother [Montrose Boone Bunch] would talk about education and teaching and reading.  So we'd do a lot of that, and while we wouldn't talk about books, which surprises me looking back.  We didn't really talk about books.  We would talk about current events. We'd talk about civil rights.  We'd talk about the space--you know, going to the moon and things like that.  And, and so we'd talk a lot about those issues and then we'd talk a lot about social justice.  What's right.  Not so much--I don't remember having conversations about the Civil Rights Movement, but I have--I remember having conversations about fairness and equity and more from a philosophical mode.  My father liked philosophy so it was always, "If two people were equal, and mistreated in a certain, is that fair?"  You know, and so we had those kinds of conversations.  So it was really a lot about thinking.  And then we would, we'd have conversations about the neighbors, the neighborhood in an adult sense, that there would be things that would happen and, that might be, put racial slights or family issues, we'd talk about that.  But when it came to specific things that affected me or my brother [Lawrence Gregory Bunch], I don't have ever, any memory of that at all.
Story_ID: 16926
Speaker 1: Do you think you were impacted, when you look at yourself, about the Italian culture that--really, didn't really embrace you so much, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the kind of thing that--I only went back to one reunion in my entire life.  And I remember going back to my twentieth or something.  And their memory was of how close we were.  And my memory was how separate we were.  But because you want to fit in, that it may not have embraced me, but there were times when I embraced it.  I knew the language.  I knew certain things.  And so I think those kinds of things shaped my experience.
Story_ID: 16927
Speaker 1: Can you just tell me though, what the young Lonnie Bunch was like?  Were you--I mean--you weren't a bully.  You were sort of bullied around, but you sort of stood your ground.  I mean, and what was going on in your head?
Speaker 2: What I was like was, and I'm still this way, and it's hard for people to realize, I was painfully shy, terrified that I'd have to talk to people, terrified that I'd stick out because when you're the one black kid, what you want to do is not stick out.  And so I can remember just, just, you know, having a hard time talking in class.  I mean I'd do it, but having a hard time talking in class.  What was I like?  I was somebody who loved reading and loved sports and would do both with great passion and recognized that sports allowed me to fit in 'cause I was better than just about anybody else in the neighborhood.  And so they had to, even if they didn't want me, they had to have me play.  And reading gave me--and that's how I think I first became, not first, but how history became part of my love.  History was the greatest escape I could ever have.  I would read these books, and I'd read everything. I mean I tried to read Frederick Douglass and I'd read George Washington [Carver], but I'd read Silas--(correcting) Elias Howe, who invented the sewing machine.  I'd read anything of history I could. And that would sort of use my imagination to think, what was it like, if I had lived in this particular period.  And, so I was really inquisitive, but I was very, very shy.
Speaker 1: Now, why are you saying of course I read Frederick Douglass?  You're in a town that, I mean--what do you mean, of course, you read (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: Because of the one thing my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.]  knew is growing up in that town, he knew how hard it must have been for him.  So I can remember at the earliest age, he would tell us stories that he had heard from John--John Hope Franklin's 'From Slavery to Freedom' because he must have been in that generation that had the first volume.  And he would tell us those stories.  And I remember my mother [Montrose Boone Bunch] telling us stories about family and, not so much slaves, but of early family history.  And so I just saw all of this as part of a mosaic that I wanted to read.  And, and as I think, you know, I've, I've said to you before, my grandfather [ref. to Lonnie Bunch Sr.] died the day before I turned five.  And so, so I was very young, but he used to read history books to me.  And I remember that he had a book that had pictures of kids.  And I think they were black kids and maybe a few white kids.  And he read to me and he said that the caption said, "unidentified children."  And then he said something to the extent that--and this picture was taken so long ago that these kids are probably dead by now.  And I remember just being a little kid thinking that how could kids that look like me be dead?  And then he said something that I'll never forget.  He said, "How could you--isn't it a shame that somebody could live their lives, die and just be listed as anonymous."  And so for me, while that's not what made me a historian, that notion of helping people to remember, of, of really trying to understand who that picture was in the photograph is what got me interested in history.  And I think that in a way, all I've ever done, all I've ever done is simply tried to make the invisible visible and give voice to the anonymous.  And I think it really stems from something as simple as my grandfather reading to me.
Speaker 1: And the sports, what sports did you--yeah, 'cause you say sports.  But was it baseball, was it football, I mean football--?
Speaker 2: I was, I was a pretty gifted football player and baseball player.  I could hit a baseball a country mile and catch it a--you know, and so, it was just something that I was really good at.  It wasn't something that I worked hard at.  I practiced, but I didn't work hard, but I was really good at it.  Couldn't play basketball worth a lick, but I could play baseball and football and those were the major sports in my town.  So that my concern at an early, people who didn't have kids, going to watch the team play.  So I knew that somehow because I could do that, that would also open some doors for me.  And I loved it, loved sport.
Story_ID: 16928
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first baseball game?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I, I don't know if I remember my first because the first were sandlot games.  I remember as kids, we'd go out as soon as school was over.  And I was the organizer.  So I'd say, "8:30 [a.m.] we're gonna meet."  And we'd meet down at that little circle at the end of the street, and we'd start playing baseball. And I can remember, you know, choosing sides, and we'd just play baseball all day.  And then I always thought, I came up with--I, I was trying, I was always trying to be inventive.  I was always trying to solve a problem.  And when we used to play baseball, there'd be these fights over was that pitch a ball or a strike and all that.  So I found in a, in a vacant--oh, God, I haven't thought of this in a hundred years, in a vacant lot, an old metal card table.  And so I cut it up in the shape of what I thought was a strike zone.  And I hung it up in front of a tree.  And so that way, if the ball hit it, it made a sound.  And so there was no debate.  And I'd get up every morning, hang that up, and we'd play ball.  And I remember the neighbors complaining, "There's that noise again."  We'd play ball every, every day.  And I can remember doing that at least through elementary school, playing baseball every time the summer was--every time summer began.
Speaker 1: And did you have a favorite baseball hero?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  I grew up in New Jersey, so we were [New York] Yankee fans.  And in those days, baseball players, except the great ones, lived in your neighborhood.  So I can remember reading my book as a third grader, peeking in on Bobby Richardson working in this insurance company or seeing Elston Howard, who was the black catcher, working in this hardware store.  So, so I loved the Yankees.  And I can remember the irony of ironies is that I thought Mickey Mantle was the greatest player in the world, and my friend, a little white kid, Jimmy Drexler, thought Willie Mays was the greatest baseball player in the world.  And so we used to have all these debates about who was better, Mickey Mantle or Willie Mays.
Speaker 1: Now--and what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played every infield position in baseball.  I was a good glove man, and in football, I was--in those days they called it an end and a wide receiver and then a, and then a running back.
Speaker 1: But you started playing baseball before you played football?
Speaker 2: Yes, my earliest memories are of baseball.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 16929
Speaker 1: When you went to elementary school at P.S. 5 [Public School Number Five, Belleville, New Jersey], what about--did that go up to high school or did you have a junior high?
Speaker 2: It went up to--when it started, it went up to eighth grade and then high school, but they changed it so that it went, by the time I finished, it just went to eighth grade, and then seventh, eighth, and ninth grade were in the junior high, and then you went to high school.
Speaker 1: And, and, and junior high was P--what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: It was called Belleville Junior High [Belleville, New Jersey].  It was the original high school that my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] went.  When they built the new high school, they made the old high school the junior high.  And that's when I first met other black kids.  There were a couple of black kids--.
Speaker 1: In junior high?
Speaker 2: In junior high in the whole school.  One who became one of my closest friends in life.  But that's when I also learned a lesson that just because you're black, you're not all in this together because these kids were from a poorer part of town.  So there was this notion that somehow I thought I was better than them, and, and all it was, was I didn't know these kids.  And I can remember--we were in a great crisis.  The crisis had to be eighth grade, eighth grade must have been '65 [1965], '66 [1966].  So it's--so you've got these race riots going on.  It might even have been '67 [1967].  And suddenly there was this--there were maybe eight black kids, maybe--nine counting me, and there were all these conflicts. And I remember these eight black kids who all grew up in the same neighborhood wanted to fight all the white kids.  And I remember they asked me, "Okay, whose side are you on?"  And I remember, I didn't know these kids.  I knew all these other kids, and so what did I do?  Became the peacemaker, trying to figure out a way to avoid those kinds of fights.  And, and that's kind of what I think I learned from the elementary school experience.
Story_ID: 16930
Speaker 1: Do you remember any discussion about the Voting Rights Act [1965]--when that passed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I can remember, my earliest--my father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] was very interested in politics.  So I remember him taking me on his shoulders as a seven year old to go see [U.S. President] John [F.] Kennedy land in Newark [New Jersey] Airport.  I can remember him talking about the [John F.] Kennedy assassination, talking about [U.S. Vice President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson.  I remember we had a lot of conversation about who Lyndon Johnson was, and could he trust a Southerner and, and all of that.  And I remember really that troika of watching [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and because when my mother's [Montrose Boone Bunch's] brothers lived in Washington [D.C.], I'd been to the [Abraham] Lincoln Memorial, I'd--so I knew this area where the March on Washington [D.C., March 18, 1963] was.  We weren't there, but we were watching it on TV, talking about what that meant.  And I remember my father talking about--and my mother especially, talking about the amazement of seeing black and white together, working for racial change.  And I remember my father making comments about--because in the '60s [1960s], in the mid-'60s [1960s], it's, you're all in the midst of the centennial of the Civil War.  So there's so much stuff on brave Confederates and, you know.  And, and I remember my father saying when the civil right, when the Civil Rights Act was passed in '64 [1964], all of those people who were celebrating the Civil War, I wonder how they're feeling now about this.  So I can remember early--at a very early age having conversations about what that meant and the historic ties to those moments.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when President Kennedy was assassinated?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I do.  I remember that we were in elementary school [Public School Number Five, Belleville, New Jersey].  And I remember there was a teacher nobody liked, Miss. Maszuka (ph.), big woman, mean.  And I remember that we were walking in the hall, and she was crying at her desk.  And we never thought a teacher was human, you know, they didn't cry, they're the teacher.  And so we knew something was wrong.  And then the principal called us in the auditorium and said the president was killed.  And I remember then, basically running down the hill trying to get home, not that anybody was there, but just trying to get home because--I had to wait for my kid brother [Lawrence Gregory Bunch].  And then running down the hill, trying to find out what this meant that a president was killed.  And I remember some of the kids saying, yay, this is a good thing, and some of the kids saying, we don't know what this means.  But I can remember running down that hill and then watching all of that on television, watching 'John-John' [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] and that whole thing.  I can remember that the whole family was glued--although candidly, I don't think we were as glued to that as we were glued to the March on Washington.  And the other thing I remember was really the, the landing on the moon [July 20, 1969].  My father, the scientist, made us watch that every second.  But that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: That was his--coming back--.
Speaker 2: That was his chemistry--that science, that's right.  I hated science fairs because that's how I had to do them.  You know, he was like, "Okay, what are you doing for your science project?"  "Oh, I don't know, Dad."  "Well, let's do this.  Let's make a volcano erupt and let's--."  I was like, "Dad, can't I just like draw something, you know?"  And so he would always make me engage in science, so--.
Speaker 1: Now, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--you mean when Martin Luther King was killed? I remember many things about that.  I was in high school [Belleville High School, Belleville, New Jersey].  Or, yeah, it was '68 [1968] so I was in high school.  And I can remember--I used to, I set the alarm and the radio would come on.  And it was always music.  And I remember that that day, there was all this sort of fun music, I remember.  And then I was--that night, coming home and putting on the radio and there was no music.  And I thought who, who messed around with my channel?  And it was really all about the King assassination and all that.  And it was the first time I had ever seen my parents' despair, that they just couldn't understand how that could have happened.  And I can remember very much that there wasn't much conversation around dinner.  There wasn't much conversation that night.  We just watched it, and we sat in silence.  And I remember going to school the next day and doing something I hadn't done in years, got in fights because the white kids would just say stupid things.  I don't even remember what they said, but I remember going, having fights about that.  That's my memory of that.
Story_ID: 16931
Speaker 1: What else is forming you at this time?  Now, you went to Belleville High School [Belleville, New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you aware of Newark [New Jersey] as a--I mean you're, you know, aware and what is the interaction between, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that my parents [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr. and Montrose Boone Bunch] recognized how crucial it was to be immersed in black culture.  So part of it was family, but a large part of it was my father's friends and their children.  So, you know, we'd go to the piano recitals, and, and in Newark [New Jersey].  Or my parents were always very big--again, I said, they were social, they were very big on having, you know, barbeques on Memorial Day and Labor Day and, you know, suddenly all these black folks would show up in Belleville [New Jersey].  And so that would be where I would sort of get immersed in music and get immersed in, in culture.  And my father had--they were cousins, but they were really like aunt and uncles 'cause they were, you know, fifty years old--older.  And they would throw a barbeque.  They lived in Newark, and they would throw a barbeque.  And I can remember sneaking into the backyard as an eight year old so I could listen to the men talk.  And that the men would talk about Jackie Robinson, the first I'd ever heard that name.  And they'd talk about baseball, and then they'd talk about, you know, discrimination that they experienced.  And then they'd chase me away.  And I can remember being twelve or thirteen when I snuck in and they said, "You can stay, boy".  And that's when I felt like I was really part of something.  So it was those sort of barbeques in a way that kept me connected.  But also a lot of what we did was tied to Newark.  The church was in Newark.  A lot of my father's friends lived in Newark.  Before the Newark Riot [1967], all the shopping was in Newark, so we were always down there doing that.  And, as I said, at least until--I don't know when he stopped, when  I was maybe twelve, maybe thirteen, he was tending bar in Newark.  So suddenly I was getting a slice of Newark that my mother never knew I was getting of what was going on in these bars.  So that was all a part of it.  And my father would talk a lot about work and what was going on there, and what he remembered as a kid.  I can remember some of the earliest fictional books I read were about Newark.  He would say, "did you, you ever hear about this story or that story?"  Or he would introduce me to somebody.  I remember he introduced me to these, you know, convicts basically, you know.  I remember this guy, Shootmore (ph.).  Shootmore was the biggest convict in Newark.  And he introduced me to him, and I remember thinking, how do you know a convict, you know.  And I was just really impressed that, I thought tending bar must be neat.  You get to meet all these cool people.  So, I was really tied to the culture through that, but I also knew, really from at least, at least the end of elementary school, I knew that that wasn't enough.  I knew that I needed to know more.  I needed to be immersed in it more and so that's when I would make sure I'd read things or I'd try to find ways to, to learn more about it.  And I think it was also stimulated by my mother as an elementary school teacher in the '60s [1960s], would then, you know, do Black History Month programs and do her bulletin boards.  And I remember as a kid helping her cut out, you know, pictures of Frederick Douglass and the like.  And so I think all of that was really of a piece, it got me thinking about who I was, what's the importance of that culture and, and how I was tied to it.  And maybe because of the connections with her family going South, these neighbors, I never felt disconnected from African American culture at all.  I always felt that it was a kind of lifeline that I always hung onto.  There were times I was pulled away, but it was always there for me to grab onto.
Story_ID: 16932
Speaker 1: But you said you even had your experience with interracial dating in high school [Belleville High School, Belleville, New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  There was--'cause I was this really a good athlete, right?  And--.
Speaker 1: And how many blacks are at Belleville High School?
Speaker 2: At Belleville High School, by the time I got there, there were probably maybe ten, probably four guys and six women, I think.  And none of them lived anywhere near me.  They all lived in the other part of town.  And I can remember then the whole notion of dating and what you do.  And my parents' solution was, well, we've got friends who've got daughters, and, you know, go to this cotillion, go to that.  Oh, no, there's nothing worse than your parents telling you to go out with the daughter--so that, that didn't work.  But a lot of these kids were just terrified.  They didn't want to have--some didn't want anything to do with you.  Some were afraid.  And I can remember that whole notion of really just thinking about that.  Is this something I should do?  And because this was a real mafia town, there were risks, not only were there fights, but the story I remember most was being this hotshot baseball player in tenth grade.  And this girl used to come watch me play, Denise Barrera (ph.).  And she was the first hippie in the town.  And she'd sit on the ground and watch me play baseball, and I was fascinated by her.  And we would call each other on the phone, talk, but really never beyond that.  It was, it was, it was not even--we didn't even get to chase.  I mean it was really, you know, pure as it could be.  And one day I was carrying my bag.  It was 1968.  I was carrying my bag with my spikes.  And these two guys who seemed like men--they must have been twenty-five, came walking up to me.  And I remember it seemed like everybody knew who they were, but I--and I remember all the kids, all the white kids parted.  And suddenly these two guys pushed me against the wall, put their arm against me, and said, "Are you going, are you going out with Denise Barrera?"  Now, I wasn't stupid, so I said, "No."  And they said, "well, we think you are.  Do you know who she is?"  "No."  It turned out she was the granddaughter of some big mafioso guy.  I didn't know that, and they said that "We will kill you if you don't stay away from her."  And I'm, you know, I'm fifteen, fourteen, fifteen.  And I remember that the next two days it rained and so it was no baseball practice.  And I remember walking home terrified.  Never told anybody.
Story_ID: 16933
Speaker 1: But you were talking about this whole experience, and you were saying--.
Speaker 2: And that this--when these guys threatened me, I remember walking home in the rain.  And I didn't realize how much it had scared me, but all of a sudden, I heard a car, and I learned--later it turned out that it was hitting a puddle, but it sounded like a machine gun.  I remember diving on the ground thinking I was gonna die.  And I remember thinking, this is awful, this is--there's got to be a better way than living in this town where, not dating, but even thinking about dating might get you killed.  And I remember I was terrified.  And so I remember going--suddenly telling my mother, "I think I feel like going down south."  So I remember going down south and spending part of the summer and, and meeting all these wonderful, young black women.  And, you know, just having a good time, but I remember that my whole junior year, I basically didn't deal with anybody.  I just didn't want to, I didn't want to have to deal with that.  And then by the time I became a senior, I said, "Wait a minute, I'm seventeen.  I'm this good athlete.  I'll do what I want to do."  And so then I said, I'd date who I wanted to date.  So that's when I suddenly reclaimed my space.  But for a year, I think I was really concerned about that.
Story_ID: 16934
Speaker 1: The Mafia thing, you said that there were--I don't, but made some allusion to things, you know, either experienced or talked about.  And I'm wondering what were some of those besides your own person--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Sure. Oh, sure--well, that's easy.  I can remember very early when, remember when you're a little kid and you do show and tell.  I can remember this kid coming in, with a picture of his father in the paper and it said, whatever his name was, was indicted for racketeering.  And that's something to be proud of. And I remember going--I was really, all impressed.  Your father's picture's in the paper.  So I remember going home and asking my dad what racketeering meant.  He said, "Son, let's sit down and talk."  And so I can remember from a very early age the notion of who was involved and who wasn't, who had status and who didn't.  And that was part of all of the conversations.  So it was just--I didn't think it was a big deal.  I always thought this was, you know, this is where I live [Belleville, New Jersey].  And I remember, I'll never forget this, going away and being in Washington [D.C.] when I was in college, and meeting a woman who was Italian.  So I started immediately talking to her in Italian.  She said to me, "What are you saying?"  I had never met an Italian that didn't know Italian.  And so it was really this town I grew up in that, like so many people, I thought that was the world.
Speaker 1: And did you--let's see what do I want to say--but that culture didn't really affect you.  Were there gangs?
Speaker 2: No, there were no gangs.  We lived in this, this--it was sort of--we never had any gangs.  There were--there was violence.  There was a kind violence where, you know, kids would fight and fight in horrible ways.  But it really wasn't gang violence.  And because I left there at seventeen, that's really when you would have experienced older kids getting into the mob and the like.  And not everybody was in the mob, but it really--let's just say it cast a shadow.  So I knew how to do that.  I knew, you know, I knew 'la omerta', the, you know, the secret codes.  I knew, I knew a lot of things because this is where I grew up. The kids would talk about it.
Speaker 1: What is 'la omerta'?
Speaker 2: 'La omerta' is the blood oath that you take that says you never tell the story that you're a member of the mob.  Things like, I knew that, you know, 'cause those kids told me that when we'd play ball or whatever.  And so I just knew a lot about that culture.
Story_ID: 16935
Speaker 1: Are there any other things forming you, anything we haven't touched upon that have formed, you know, in the high school--in, in these years, anything else 'cause it sounds part of, you know, your story, that you lived inside of your head in a lot of respects.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, but what, what else--is any person, any person you look up to, any other experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the other thing that formed me was, when I was in eighth grade and I met this other black guy, who lived in another part of town.  His name was Doug Brown, and we became the best of friends. We were both athletes.  He played one running back.  I played the other.  We'd talk for hours about girls and our expectations.  And so in a way, that relationship shaped me.  Now, he was--his family was from Newark [New Jersey] so there was a, more of a tie with that than I was, but I'd go down there and they'd be my surrogate family.  And we'd spend time and, and just that notion of what black guys could do.  And the notion of male bonding.  I think that really shaped a lot of who I was.  We were inseparable for years because, even though my things were different from his, you know, we'd talk about, you know, "Who do we date?  Who can't you date?"  And we'd laugh at songs like Bobby Taylor and the Vancouvers, 'Does Your Mama Know About Me', and we'd do all of those things together.  And I think in a way, besides my family, he was part of the respite.  He gave me, you know, we gave each other sustenance to survive this town.  I think those are the things that really shaped who I was.  And I guess the other thing would be my father's sister, his aunt--my aunt Alma, who died in '86 [1986].  And this was the most amazing woman, one of the most amazing women I've ever met, also one of the most tragic.  She grew up like my father and the parents were very strict on her.  You know, you're gonna be the epitome of black women, middle-class womanhood, but she wanted to have fun.  She wanted to do her own thing.  And she was wild, and would go drinking, and, you know, so she was--had some distance from her parents.  But when I was born, she'd keep me from time to time.  She, first of all, she wasn't married. Then she was married, and this guy was real cool, a fancy dresser, you know.  And she used to--I'll never forget, she would--my parents would go out for the evening.  And she was supposed to baby sit me.  So she'd say, "Griff, let's you and I go out."  And we'd go sneak up to Harlem [New York].  She'd take me to Harlem, and she'd put me on the bar and give me an orange soda.  And she'd just dance the night away.  And then we'd have to hurry back to beat my parents.  And the things was, "Now, don't ever tell."  And I never told.  And so that was a way that she would really, you know, help me, and, and she became in a way, all through high school and even college, she became the one adult person I could talk to about anything.  So I could talk to her about girls.  She didn't like white girls.  She'd always say that, you know, "Watch out for those heifers."  But she would always--we could talk about drugs or anything.  And so she, more than anything else became a kind of checkpoint whenever things were really bad.  And I didn't even realize this, that people that knew me from college, girlfriends, all talked about how I brought everybody home, but I brought them to see my aunt first because she was so important to me.  And she would--she cursed, she drank, she did all the things no other adult did.  And I talked to her about anything.  And I think so in a way, I would argue she's the other influence.  She would, you know, puncture my mother or puncture my father, and it was all, "They're being a little too pompous," you know, but--and so it was wonderful to have her as this, as this source of strength.  And she, more than my father, she was the one, especially by the time I got to high school, that began to tell me about that side of the family.  She was the one that took me to see her great uncle or took me to do this.  So my real interest in the Bunches and the Brodies, that side, really began through her because you see, and here what it is, my grandparents died in a way that was both romantic and tragic.  My parents--my--they were both in their seventies.  And my grandfather in the last years of his life was very sick.  I can remember in his house, I'd go in and, and bother him because he'd give me a nickel to go away.  So it was an easy way to get an nickel.  I'd go in there and make some noise; he'd give me a nickel.  So I just remember him as this big man who was sick.  And my grandmother was this tiny woman, if she, if she was four [feet] eleven [inches], she's lying.  And yet she was this bastion of strength, always just, what we have to do, let's do it.  And always teaching me about God and religion and making me recite the 'Twenty-third Psalm' [Ps. 23:1-6] and all these things.  She was the one who was sort of making sure I was getting the kind of right training.  So the whole family figured well, grandpa--not doing well, you know, he may die.  Woke up one morning and my grandmother got up and dropped dead.  And, and people were just devastated.  And I can remember my grandfather basically, walking through the house at night with my father and his sister holding him, crying out for his wife, saying, "Leanna, why did you leave me?  I'm supposed to go first."  I'll never forget that.  "Leanna, why did you leave me?"  And I would be terrified, but still fascinated.  And then two weeks later, he died.  So my father and his sister buried his parents--both parents within two weeks.  And he never got over that.  My father never talked about family, so it was really up to my aunt to do that.  In fact, it was my aunt--I didn't, I never knew for years where my grandparents were buried.  It was my aunt that took me.  And it really wasn't until I was in graduate school that my father would talk about his mother and father.  He was so devastated by that death, how quickly that occurred.  So in a way, she really kept the family alive for me when my father just couldn't.
Speaker 1: And it was that--also that need for connection that you also had.
Speaker 2: (Nods yes).
Story_ID: 16936
Speaker 1: Why not Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] for you?  How did that, and what--.
Speaker 2: They wanted me to go to Shaw--well, no, my mother did.  My father thought that Shaw was this tiny, little place and, and in fact, he felt that I shouldn't have gone to a black college because he says, you know, it's 1970.  You should be (unclear).  And he never understood this.  I was willing to not go to a black college initially.  In fact, I was gonna go to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. And got into Notre Dame, and they--,
Speaker 1: With football?
Speaker 2: I was gonna play, but I wasn't gonna get a scholarship, but I was gonna try it.  So I was gonna go to Notre Dame.  And I'll never forget this.  I got a letter.  It was like maybe April of 1970 'cause I was graduating that June.  And it said, you know, "welcome to Notre Dame.  As a black student, you'll probably need extra help.  If you sign up for this, you can,"--and I was livid.  Extra help!  I was as smart as any white kid, so I refused to go.  So suddenly, it's now April, and I'm refusing to go to Notre Dame.  So my Dad says, "Well, you got into Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Do you want to go to Howard?"  And I had never visited Howard.  But I knew it was this epitome of black education so I said, "Yeah, let's go."  So that's how I ended up at Howard, by tell, by turning Notre Dame down and--and then by going to Howard.  So they were disappointed because I think they felt that by 1970, we shouldn't have to go to a black college.  And I would argue they were probably right that I was one of that last generation of people who really, you know, saw the black college as being, you know--Howard was equal to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in my mind.  And so I think it's how I ended up getting--going there.
Story_ID: 16937
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your experience there because it's a much different experience than you've experienced to that point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean outside of just your family environment.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what is your interest, also, subject wise.  What do you--.
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: So, history--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I got to high school, history, the--we didn't have advanced placement history, but whatever it was called, the advance history.  I just loved it.
Speaker 1: And your grades?
Speaker 2: B plus student.  As in history.  But B plus student I would think because there wasn't--my parents put such emphasis on education, but nobody else did.  And so Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I went to Howard in part too, because, I remember saying, I was tired of white people.  I was just tired of trying to fit in, tired of the questions, tired of the dating issues, and I said, "I'll go to Howard."  And I was like first, "All these black people, this is great, I can't believe it, this is wonderful, all these women."  Oh, you know, I thought I had died and gone to heaven.  But then I didn't realize that it was still a very different culture than what I was used to.  So suddenly I can remember people laughing at the way I spoke, very proper.  I can remember the first Friday night in the dorm, 7:30 [p.m.], I'm knocking on my friends' doors, "Let's go out, 7:30, Friday night."  They're like, "Man, we don't go out till 11:00 [pm]."  I was like, "11:00?  Man, I'll be home by then."  You know, there was all these cultural things that I didn't have, have any experience.  But I, but it was really that kind of a challenge. It was both love, because I loved, you know, the courses, the things that I was doing, the people I was meeting, but it was also then very, very different.  And the notion that, you know, all white people were bad.  And I kept thinking, well, based on my experience, that's not true.  Or that you couldn't--there were some things you couldn't question.  You know, all the black people in history were great.  Well, let's talk a little bit about that.  But it was really an unbelievably fascinating time for me.
Story_ID: 16938
Speaker 1: Who was president [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at that point in 1970, it was--.
Speaker 2: Oh, what is his name.  It was one of the last of--those real light-skinned blacks that, not Mordecai Johnson, but--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right It wasn't--it was afterwards Mordecai.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It was the next one right after Mordecai Johnson, and I cannot think of his--oh, Cheek [James Edward Cheek, president from 1969-89].  By the time, I was--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh, Cheek.
Speaker 2: I think he was my sophomore year, yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh, you know, Cheek is still alive.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously, laughing) We're supposed to be interviewing Cheek.  I think we're interviewing Cheek!
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, interesting. Tell him I said, "Hi.  I was one of those ones protesting. That was me."
Story_ID: 16939
Speaker 1: I want you to describe--is the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] that you attended, you know, and at the time because it's--and the time period that we're in.
Speaker 2: It really is this transition.  It is a time when I think Howard still got a lot of the best African American students, but not all of them.  Kids were going to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and places that they didn't go to before.  I think that there was this, because it's 1970, there was still this great ferment of what being black was and what black power was.  And I can remember at Howard getting to know and getting involved with the Black Panther Party, things that you could never do.  And I can remember--I guess several things. I can remember first of all being amazed at the diversity of black experiences, that not everybody was like mine, but the array of, you know, inner-city urban experiences, rural experiences, and it really gave me the sense--and I mean, I remember meeting black folks from Oklahoma wearing cowboy hats.  I'd never met anybody who wore cowboy hats, but they were black people.  And so that really began to expand what I was, and it was the first time--I think that's absolutely right--that I ever met people born outside the United States, except for Italians.  So I mean I'm meeting Africans, and my best friend--one of my best friends was from the Caribbean.  And, and so there was this whole notion--I remember this guy saying to me, "Come home with me, says, you'll love the Virgin Islands."  I was like, "You can go to the Virgin Islands.  I didn't know you could do that."  And so there was this whole sort of wonderful opportunity to dip into blackness, to read, you know, Franz Fanon and read all of this stuff.  That was what was the best part of, I think at Howard.  And I remember suddenly very dark women being popular on campus and everybody wearing 'fros [Afros] and, and, you know, everybody buying dashikis.  And I bought my--I had this wonderful--I never wear much jewelry, never did.  But I had this wonderful necklace with a black power fist.  I knew, you know, that, I , I was there.  And, and I also learned about the generosity, intellectual generosity of many people.  A guy who's still a friend of mine was an exchange student from a college in California.  And he was a junior when I was a freshman.  And we began to talk just about reading and books.  And he took me to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] for the first time, which I will never forget.  And I remember walking in the Library of Congress, and we were the only black people in the place and seeing all these books and recognizing I can read any subject I wanted.  And, and I would just go back time and time again.  And this guy took me there.  He was, you know, and, and so the generosity of people helping you just try to think about what being black was and what you should read, what you should think about, was wonderfully exciting, wonderfully exciting.
Speaker 1: Now, who are some of your classmates that we might know or people on campus?
Speaker 2: Not a lot of people, not a lot of my classmates are the kind of people--there are a lot of people who are journalists, a lot of my, a lot of my classmates were journalists, you know, working at the ['Washington] Globe', the 'Washington Post', and a lot of my classmates were in the--were, were doctors.  So I had a classmates that are now doctors and dentists and the like.  But not a lot of the sort of big names that you might normally know.
Story_ID: 16940
Speaker 1: But I want to go back to the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] as if--'cause this is a time of ferment--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the administration is pretty conservative, right?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.  It was a time of, that there were still all these rules that we would fight against.  When I was saying earlier that we protested against [Howard University president, James Edward] Cheek.  It was really important to protest, partly because the university symbolized on the one hand all that was still wrong about America-- that you felt that the administration were either Uncle Toms or 'handkerchief heads', people who weren't progressive.  The rules, you know, women had to be out of your dorm [dormitory] by 11:00 o'clock [p.m.] and guys could only go on the first floor of the girls' dorm.  And so, you know, sexual independence was really akin to independence.  And, you know, like what do you mean I can't go on the girls dorm--not that I knew anybody, but I wanted to still have the opportunity to go in there.  And I can remember leading protests about that.  I can remember that the Howard [University] police--because we would protest the [Vietnam] War and other things, were very physically abusive.  They would push you and, and encourage you to get off the street.  And I remember we had nicknames for them.  One guy we called 'Wyatt Earp' 'cause he was always pulling out his gun to move us along.  And, but I remember that part of the times were discussions over the academic curricula.  We wanted to take things that were relevant.  So while there were some black studies, you were still taking--you know, I still had to take ancient Greece and ancient Rome.  And I'm--why am I taking that?  And so there was a lot of protest and discussion about that, that I wasn't learning, we weren't learning enough--in the capstone of black education, we weren't still learning enough about Africa or our own black experience.  So you had a lot of that was going on.  And then there was this, and candidly, one of the reasons I never joined the fraternity is that fraternities symbolized an old way.  And I can remember just being in awe, in a negative sense of, you know, fraternities stepping and doing all these things on a Friday afternoon.  I'm thinking, you know, you're acting like monkeys, at least that's the way I thought when I was a seventeen year old, acting like monkeys, doing these old traditions.  "Why are you doing that?"  And it just, it just struck me as something that was not modern.  And the other thing I can remember was the big fight over ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], that there was ROTC on campus.  And we're in the middle of the Vietnam War, and the only thing I ever saw at Howard where people were never late was when you had to get your 2-S deferment [educational exemption from the military draft], your student deferment.  You had to get that, within a certain window, the lines were long 'cause nobody missed that; 'cause you miss that, you went to 'Nam [Vietnam], at least that's the way we thought.  And, but I remember all of those fights and protests about ROTC on campus.  The thing that did surprise me at Howard, I was very active and I would organize some people in the anti-war movement.  But a lot of the blacks on campus didn't come down to the Anti-War Movement.  They said it was too white, or it didn't have relevance, but I remember thinking, even as a seventeen year old, how many black folks are on the front lines?  Why should we just let white people lead that fight?  We need to be part of that.  So I can remember, you know, from my freshman year, really encouraging people to come down to these demonstrations that were on the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.].  But again, very few blacks relatively, would participate in those kinds of demonstrations.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the issues being discussed, you know, among the group?  What are the concerns?  What are the issues?  The draft is, you know--.
Speaker 2: Draft and Vietnam, I would argue, was one of the most dominant issues.  Second issue was, and this was a little thing that Howard did very well.  Howard always sent students down south to do voting rights.  So there was a lot of conversation about voting rights, and what you should do--especially those of us that were from the North, down south, what should our roles be in the Civil Rights Movement.  And there was an awful lot of discussion about that.  Should you go south?  There were those who felt that because of Howard's long tradition of law school, the way to make the change was to get involved in that.  There was a strong core of [Black] Panthers.  And I remember, November of my freshman year, spending a lot of time with the school programs the Panthers had.  But I remember then, going back to town [Belleville, New Jersey] and talking about working with the Panthers and scaring these white folks to death.  I, "Oh, my God, what are you doing with the Panthers?"  And I, I couldn't even talk about the, the breakfast program and the school program.  It was just these gun-toting Panthers.  But my memory of the Panthers were, and this is where I, I learned a lot about how to call everything into question.  November of 1970, there was gonna be a big Panther demonstration on campus, big fight that we led a protest that the Panthers wanted to hold a march on the campus. Cheek and the administration didn't want to let them.  The students were marching to let them do that.  And we're all saying, this is great.  We won this victory.  Huey [Newton] and, and Bobby Seale were coming to the campus.  And I remember going home for Thanksgiving, so I missed the, missed the, the rally.  I came back and some of friends who were from California, they stayed, and I said, "How was it?"  And they said, "You couldn't believe what happened."  I said, "What?"  They just remember seeing Bobby Seale hugging Jane Fonda.  And I remember thinking, here we are at this epitome of black education and here's Jane Fonda, you know.  And I remember a lot of us thinking, I don't know about these Panthers, you know. But those were some of the kind of issues we'd fight about.  It was about militancy--whether you believed in--[Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was dead, but whether you believed that, that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and others had the way to do it, or whether we had really moved to a new way which was really a Panther way.  And I guess the other big tension on campus were the Black Muslims [Nation of Islam].  The Black Muslims were very influential at Howard.  And I can remember kids who came in as freshmen with me, by the end of our first year, were, you know, wearing their uniform and selling 'Muhammad Speaks' as we used, you know.  And, so there's--there were really those kinds of tensions.  There was a kind of integrationist tension.  There was a Panther group.  There was a Muslim group, and then there was a cultural nationalist group, looking more towards Africa and the Caribbean, but tended--but truthfully, most of those kids tended to be African or Caribbean.  So there was some sort of cultural bias that was going on or as a lot of people say, you know, these Africans.  And so you really had those kind of divisions.  Then you'd lay on top of that questions of gender--the whole notion of how black women should be treated, how black women demand equality.  And there was a lot of that because I would argue in the early '70s [1970s] there was a lot of objectification of black women, you know, certain imagery, certain hair, but not in leadership positions.  And so there was an awful of, of that going on at Howard as well.  So it was really a wonderful microcosm of all that was going on within America at that time.
Story_ID: 16941
Speaker 1: Now, what about the color issue?
Speaker 2: My biggest surprise at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was--and now, I swear this is true, but it may only be apocryphal.  But I remember that, being so amazed that they had the homecoming, which was something that my parents had always talked about, but I had never really experienced.  And experienced this homecoming in October and all these, you know, alumni are coming back.  And there's this great sense of being from Howard, and I remember the homecoming queen was this beautiful, very dark-skinned black woman, short 'fro [Afro].  This was a big deal, but I remember that she didn't get a date, but that the light skinned girls with the good hair and all that, they were still all the rage.  And so even in 1970, you had this color issue.  And I think it was very strong at Howard because it was unresolved.  So that you had, for example, at Howard you had--one of the big things were in the School of Fine Arts, where you had all of the sort of artsy people.  Many of them were very light-skinned women, and so there was this whole notion of, well, if you go to the art school, you're in that mode, and those of us in liberal arts were more for the [Black] Panthers and the like.  And, but you'd see that, and it would play out in the activities at Howard.  It'd play out in who--the acts that came, and who we went to see.  You know, I went to see Sly and the Family Stone, others went to see other things.  And I remember--one of my greatest memories at Howard was just the humor of black culture.  While I had seen it my whole life, to see it amongst all these peers was just wonderful.  And I remember, you know, freshman orientation.  They showed the movie 'Putney Swope', which was this wonderful movie about a black taking over an all-white advertising.  And we howled, we thought that was the funniest thing we'd ever seen.  And for years, I swore that was the best movie the world had ever seen.  My wife bought it for me for a gift about ten years ago.  It's one of the dumbest, stupidest, most boring movies, but in 1970, race was so at the surface, and just to have a story like that became so popular and so important.  And so I can remember all of those things happening at Howard.
Story_ID: 16942
Speaker 1: Who are your professors and how was--what--the history department, was--.
Speaker 2: The history department was very interesting.  John Hope [Franklin] had left, but he had come back, 1970, he was a visiting fellow.  So I had a class with John Hope in 1970.  There were a lot of African and Caribbean scholars.  And so I suddenly would read things on Latin America and a lot on slavery in the Caribbean.  So Eric Williams who was ultimately at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was there.  And you had some of the people that are still at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] where there, some of the Africanists are still there.  A guy named [Vincent] Peloso was brilliant Latin Americanist who really taught me so much about historical interpretation, and I hadn't--I ran into him about two years ago.  I hadn't seen him in thirty years, and told him, in, in part, I didn't become a historian because of him, but I learned about the subtleties of history.  He gave us an assignment as a freshman which was to go look at ten books on Latin American history and look at the way they talked about color--Negro, and black.  And it suddenly taught me, somebody who loved history, it taught me that history was still interpretation.  I really didn't realize that until I looked at that and saw how some books talked about people of color in a very negative way, others did not.  And that episode really got me thinking about the subtleties and ambiguities and nuances of history.
Speaker 1: And so what did you learn about historical interpretation?  That's--I mean that you said--.
Speaker 2: What I learned about was, first of all, I learned not just--this is what Howard was good at, I didn't just learn black history.  And while I learned those things, I also learned new lenses of understanding history, that it wasn't black history and white history, but that rather there were lenses of black life that illuminate all aspects of the American past.  That was really important to me.  I began to learn something that graduate school worked against, but as an undergraduate, I began to see some of the connectedness, that we, we all talk about as scholars, the Atlantic world, the Atlantic mind, but in 1970, nobody talked about that, except at Howard.  Suddenly I began to see the importance, you know, the Caribbean, Africa, and the New World.  So I learned a lot of that kind of thing.  And I also learned, candidly, because there was a lot of work that was being done by Frank Snowden on the black presence in the ancient world of Greece and Rome, you began to suddenly ask different questions.  Why wasn't that ever discussed?  Why don't we know that history?  So it really just stimulated this sort of real interest in learning about the past for me.
Story_ID: 16943
Speaker 1: Most of these kids, most of the white kids [from his hometown, Belleville, New Jersey], they didn't go to college.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I'm the third generation.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so for me, part of--.
Speaker 2: See you had a different background--.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I, I--,
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --I knew John Hope Franklin before I was out of high school--.
Speaker 2: That's what I was trying to ask you, I'm trying to understand, you know, well--.  But I, I mean totally had no clue, I mean none.  So I was totally devoid in that way, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was strange.  On the one hand, there were all these blind spots that I had growing up in these neighborhood, but--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --there were other things that were really important.  I mean I can remember my dad [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] sitting on the porch with me and, you know, a bunch of little white kids.  And I must have been, I don't know, twelve, thirteen, maybe fourteen.  And I remember my dad talking about, "Well, the key for you is to decide whether you're gonna go to law school or get your Ph.D."  And I remember the little kids saying, "What's that?"
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: And my father said, "Well, let me explain this."  And the one thing I always--you know, he, he mentored all these little, all these little kids I grew up with.  He would, you know, help them with their science, their math.  And I remember that--now, I remember, but at the time, didn't, it didn't mean much.  He would help these kids get into college and so I bet there's an awful lot of these little kids from Belleville, New Jersey that did go to college 'cause of my father.  But I bet they never really thanked him, you know.
Story_ID: 16944
Speaker 1: Ben [Benjamin] Quarles, when did you first come to meet him?
Speaker 2: 1970. Ben Quarles came to--there was some seminar--
Speaker 1: That's your freshman year?
Speaker 2: Freshman year.  There was some seminar at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and that Ben came and, and Howard Bell, who was also a specialist on black, in the Antebellum Period.  And I was very interested, always have been in black life before the Civil War.  And so I went to hear Quarles, and I was so fascinated by it.  And then Howard Bell talked about the free black community.  It was the first time I'd ever heard about the free black community, and so I went up to him and introduced myself.  And he said, "You know, the next time you're in Baltimore [Maryland], stop by."  And see, that's the worse thing you can say to me, because I'll stop by.  So you know I was in Baltimore, I stopped by, and he ran into Howard Bell and basically, ended up having conversations with them all through graduate school until both Bell and Quarles died, that they became really, not mentors 'cause I don't have enough time with them to be mentors, but they were beacons of what was possible.  John Hope [Franklin] was always the model, but he was so removed from me, whereas these guys were not that far away.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned from them about being a black historian?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I learned two things.  I learned that, I learned that I was part of a tradition of being a historian that means that you both had to be a good scholar, that you had to understand your discipline, but that your work had to be for a greater good, that it wasn't just enough to write the great book on black X, unless by doing that, you moved the race forward.  You participated in the struggle.  You were part of a greater good.  And that's something that, you know, when you hear historians talk, black historians, they talk about [W.E.B.] DuBois and [Carter G.] Woodson and John Hope Franklin and I would argue Benjamin Quarles.  But for me, I think one of the things I'm most proudest of is to be part of that tradition, to be washed over in this notion of recognizing how important the past is, but also how it is really this tool to help you fight a good fight.  And that's what I learned from these folks, that write the great book, do the great story, but make sure it's not just about you.  Make sure it's really about how does this move the country forward.  I've always been struck by this line from Carter G. Woodson, and while I may not always say to myself, I'm a direct link to Carter G. Woodson--I really think of DuBois or John Hope Franklin, but at the end of Woodson's life, he was interviewed by a journalist, who said, "You've done all of this, and, you know, why do you do it?"  And he looked at this reporter with an incredulous look and said, "I do history for one reason, to make America better."  And that notion of doing history to make America better is really what I think has been something that has shaped African American historians.  And only lately did white historians come to that.  And so I'm very proud of being part of that long tradition.
Story_ID: 16945
Speaker 1: This is the '60s [1960s], this is the, you know, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], Black Power Movement--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: There are people who have come along before who have been students of the culture.  And there's a new sort of looseness about, you know, sort of black scholarship around it.  And so--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of the black studies departments were sort of coming, you know, out of it.  You had already commented about, you know, there being some brain train.  But I wonder if you can comment on that period because, you know, there's the, you know, the Africa association that, you know, some of that was--well, you know, what is true, what's not?  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  I think in some ways, it's both an interesting time, and it's an interesting time to look back on because on the one hand, it really is a time that is shaped with a presentist notion. In order words that, the downside you might argue of my desire to see history making America better, is a need to make sure that that history is central.  And sometimes it may not always be central.  And so the challenge really is, and this is where the black studies forum has gotten in trouble, was the argument of, you know, shoddy, scholarship, you know, making everybody that had some hint of color was black.  Alexander [The Great] was black, this was black.  And even if it's true, not proving it, but making basic assertions of, of that.  And I think that what has happened, candidly, is I would argue that so much of that helped to move us along as a people and as a profession because it really made us think about connections.  It made us think outside of the box.  Now, what I hope we are now is at a point in historical scholarship where that thinking outside of the box now helps us really look at, is this really accurate?  Is this really correct?  What are the ambiguities?  In some ways, the 1970s was a time where within black studies, there was no ambiguity.  It was black and white.  It was simple this.  It was either that.  What we've learned now is so much of history is ambiguity.  It's not simple, that there are complex answers to these, to what we think were simple questions.  And so I think in a way, we almost had to go through that phase in order to get to where we are now.  I think the, the positive part about it is, that for people like myself, it's suddenly opened up a box of possibilities.  You could think about questions of race and gender.  You could think about the Civil War and suddenly the Civil War, which I hated growing up because all they ever talked about was Robert E. Lee and Ulysses S. Grant, suddenly that had meaning to me.  Suddenly, stories about the American Revolution, besides Crispus Attucks, suddenly it had meaning.  I began to understand it.  Suddenly, I began to think about slavery and how that both shaped my experience, but more importantly, shaped the American experience.  And in a way what that period did for us, is it really began, with all of its flaws, it began to create an opportunity to say, I'm not studying black America.  I'm studying America, that, that race is this lens--now, we haven't figured out how to do it yet.  But that race is a lens that shapes us all, that not just black folks have race.  And I think that a lot of those things that we're wrestling with now, only occurred because of that explosion of what was possible.  We used to always say that, when I got out of graduate school [at American University, Washington, D.C.], the notion was, if only we had gone, if we had gotten out of graduate school in 1969.  Anything we would have written about race in '69 [1969] would have been published.  You'd have forty books before you were forty because there was such a dearth that everything came out.  But I think now what you get is really better stuff, but I think you had to go through that.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, you're entering a discipline, you know a discipline that is not recognized in the larger community, really still is a discipline, right?  I mean African American--okay--.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and no.  What I, what I did is, and I remember thinking about this, I thought very carefully about where I should go and what I should do.  And my notion was that I was gonna go into a history department, not an African American history--.
Speaker 1: Instead of African American.  Okay, so why do you make that decision?
Speaker 2: Because--two things.  One is I was very interested in connections, partly because of my upbringing where I learned to straddle many worlds.  So I was really interested in what, what scholars now call 'the world they made together'.  And I wasn't sure I could get that if I'd simply went into an African American studies program.  Now, what I--so what I ultimately had to do was try to sort of take the best of both.  But I was really very fascinated by--on the one hand, I wanted to immerse myself in all things black, but I also recognize these things didn't happen in a vacuum.  And that if I'm studying, and I guess the best example was I remember taking a class at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] on, I think it was on the, the Antebellum Period.  And we were studying about Nat Turner and Frederick Douglass and all the things that--you know, Sojourner Truth, stuff that fascinated me.  But there was a, I remember being halfway through the course and thinking, well, why was there such a fear of Nat Turner?  What is this tell--what were the, what were the white southerners thinking?  How did this shape north of the--?  And I felt that in some ways, as much as some of the old history neglected black life and gave me an incomplete picture, some of this neglected the white world and also gave me an equally incomplete picture. So again, and, again, I really think this was part of who I was by the way I was raised, the need to straddle both worlds dominated everything.  It really--sometimes in a positive way, made me question, why I was learning X in a certain way.  But it also then made it--a friend of mine once used to, used to always say, "One thing you can tell about Lonnie is that if he's in his, if he's immersed in blackness, he'll want to go to whiteness the next day.  If he's immersed in whiteness, he'll want to go to blackness the next day."  So it was really this sense of trying to find that balance.
Story_ID: 16946
Speaker 1: What are you reading that's influencing you?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  Everything, I mean I can remember being fascinated by--that's when I first got into African American literature and started with the Harlem Renaissance.  So all things Harlem [New York, New York], all things Langston Hughes.  I can remember the great joy of coming home for, you know, spring break, and then deciding I'm gonna just spend the day strolling through Harlem.  And I remember reading all these books on Father Divine and finding in 1971, one of the--the Divine Hotel still being open in New York [New York].  And so, going to a Divine Hotel and talking to these--I think Father Divine was dead, but Mother Divine was still alive. And, and so I would read everything on Harlem.  I'd read everything I could about black soldiers, fascinated by that, in the Civil War, did, did a lot of reading on that, was very interested in that.  I read a lot on international issues of slavery.  I read Chancellor Williams, 'The Decline of the Great Race' [ref. to 'Destruction of Black Civilization' (1971)].  I, I read Eric Williams on slavery and capitalism [sic, 'Capitalism & Slavery'].  I read almost every piece of modern fiction--not fiction so much, but, you know, modern classics.  The 'Autobiography of Malcolm X', 'Manchild in the Promised Land' [Claude Brown], 'Howard Street' [Nathan C. Heard], began to read all of those wonderful novels, some written by Toni Morrison, began to wrestle with those kinds of questions, but was really fascinated by people like Zora Neale Hurston and Charles Chesnutt.  So I really began to immerse myself in that literature.  And then I was also in that period just fascinated by this, the new voices coming out of Africa and the Caribbean.  They weren't new, but they were new to me.  Suddenly reading [Kwame] Nkrumah [president of Ghana], suddenly reading the poets from the Caribbean.  And one of the great joys, candidly, for me, I just was lecturing in Liverpool in England last week, and one of the great joys was meeting a man named John LaRose, who was part of the Caribbean arts movement in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  And so reading these people began to give me both a desire that, boy do I want to know more about issues of race, boy do I want to know more about issues of, of blackness.  But it also gave me at least a question to say, at some point, and I don't know when, at some point, I'm gonna come back to this interconnectivity.  I want to come back to a global way of understanding history and race.  Now, I didn't--I couldn't articulate that, but I knew that interested me.
Story_ID: 16947
Speaker 1: You did a thesis [while a college student at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: (yes)
Speaker 1: Your subject was?
Speaker 2: Was on antebellum black leadership in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and why did you choose that subject?
Speaker 2: I'm always interested in a lot, but I'm interested in optimism in the African American community.  And I really started out by asking the question, why is it that with the treatment of free blacks, why didn't more people go back to Africa?  Why didn't more people go to the Caribbean?  And I began by doing a lot of writing on, you know, the whole notion of emigration, 'cause that's what I initially was gonna write, write on.  I was gonna write on the Back to Africa Movements and all of that.  But then the question was, not what did they want to accomplish, what do they want to do when they go back to Africa, but why did so many people reject that?  So then it  got me into this question of leadership.  Who leads the black community?  And that's when [Benjamin] Ben Quarles and Howard Bell were so crucial. They introduced me to something called the Negro Convention Movement, the Colored Convention Movement.  I had never heard of that.  Suddenly, I'm reading this, and it is just the most wonderful stuff, partly because what that material did was, it said, there were other leaders besides Frederick Douglass.  I had only heard of Frederick Douglass.  And suddenly it got me questioning to say who were the leaders?  What does it take to be a leader?  And why there then issues of local concern, more important than even issues of abolition.  And that's when I began to be fascinated by this free black community.  What were their lives like in the North?  Who were they?  How'd they get there?  Who led them and the best free black community in the period before the Civil War, was Philadelphia.  It was the largest, it was the most vibrant.  Some of the smartest leaders, some of those involved in the, you know, Underground Railroad, all came out of Philadelphia.  So that's what interests me.  I began to write about that.  And I was really just interested in why is it that despite what people face, there's an optimism, a belief in what was possible in America.  And that question of optimism and possibility has really shaped all of my writing.
Speaker 1: Now, how large was the community that you--I mean at, you know, the antebellum, you know, the free (unclear) and what period then are you researching, and--,
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, the time period--over what period, and what are you finding? Are you finding there were some key people involved in that, that--?
Speaker 2: You mean key scholars or key--?
Speaker 1: No, key, key Philadelphians, black Phil--okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, what I'm interested in is the period of 1830 through Civil War, okay not Reconstruction, but through the Civil War.  And what I was fascinated by was that there were four million slaves in 1860.  There was probably eight hundred thousand free blacks in the South and about six hundred thousand in the North.  And I couldn't figure out, who were these people?  How did they live?  And so I then became fascinated by looking at these [Colored] Convention [Movement] records to see who some of these people were.  And that's when I first learned about James Forten, this sail maker in Philadelphia who basically, you know, bankrolled the Negro Convention Movement.  I'm thinking who in 1830 is this black man?  Who is this?  That's when I began to first hear about Paul Cuffe in New England.  And who are these people?  And suddenly I began to see that there were historic black communities and that Philadelphia was one of them.  And I really then began to look at these folks.  I began to look at William Still and his role in Philadelphia.  I began to look at black women.  I was very interested in--the question I was asking was, what are the sources of leadership?  First off, first what's the condition of the community?  What are the experiences they faced and what are the kinds of leadership styles they choose?  And then the questions was, in my mind, if I'm looking at these Convention Movement records, and there are all those debates and fights there, and by the 1850s Frederick Douglass is involved, and he's losing.  He's not winning.  He's not carrying the day.  And I'm thinking, wait a minute.  Frederick Douglass is the only person I've ever heard about.  Of course, he should be 'the leader', you know.  But suddenly I'm reading these things that, H. Ford Douglas of Philadelphia is important or this person, Jervis of Philadel--of, of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And I start to say, well let me figure out who are all those leaders.  And in essence, I began to look at question of did being an abolitionist involved with the white abolitionist community help you or hurt you?  What were the sources of leadership for women?  Were there positions within the community that women could occupy, a kind of non-ascribed leadership.  Or was all leadership, was it based on professional education, a few denter--dentists and doctors and, and all of that.  And so I, ultimately I was asking the, the question of how much is leadership from within?  In other words, looking locally at Philadelphia issues at local issues versus how much of it is a national leadership.  And what I argued is that there was no national leadership, that for white America, there were people they identified like a Frederick Douglass, but that there really weren't black national leaders.  There were local leaders who really were the most influential people in the community and that we, of historians, have missed them.
Speaker 1: And can you just talk just a teeny little bit about the Negro, the Negro Convention, just a teeny--.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God, it's the most wonderful thing.  Beginning in 1830, Philadelphia free blacks and then others began to say, you know, we need to figure out a way to come together, to see what are common issues--first, common issues in Philadelphia, then Pennsylvania, but then throughout really the nation.  And so what you have is beginning in 1830, you have a series of infrequent meetings that are in essence, for lack of a better term, a black congress.  People come together.  And first it's very small.  It's some people from Philadelphia, it's some people from New York, some from New Jersey, a couple from Maryland.  And then once they began to get a national movement that really meets annually, from about 1835 through the Civil War, and they meet in Philadelphia, New York, Cleveland [Ohio].  And then you began to state meetings where there was just the Pennsylvanians or by the 1850s, just Californians meetings.  And what they are, are they're a great source because first of all, they, in these debates, really lay out what the issues are.  For example, in Pennsylvania, a big issue in the 1830s is that blacks could vote in the 1830s, but in 1835 Pennsylvania wanted to pass a law taking the vote away from blacks because there were too many moving in, etc.  And so I had never heard about that, but this was the issue that dominated them.  So I began to think about that these were the great ways to really understand, for lack of a better term, cause remember this 19--you know, '70s [1970s], what the average people thought about.  And so that's what I did, and that's what this [Negro] Convention Movement really was.  And it really lasted annually through the Civil War, but then even infrequently until the 1880s.
Speaker 1: And did you say--'cause at that, it's the early 1900s or 1910, 1900's that Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]--aren't the Jack and Jill and Boul and those groups, you know--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause they all came out of Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's the only reason.  Philadelphia, I would argue is one of the most sophisticated African American communities, more so than New York [New York], more so than Chicago [Illinois], obviously, Cleveland.  Boston [Massachusetts] rivals it in some ways, and so that's why a lot of that comes out of this.  There's both a history--these things that were created then, but they were traditions that they could build upon.  You weren't starting from scratch.
Story_ID: 16948
Speaker 1: You leave Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and you go immediately into, okay, into graduate school--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, no, okay.
Speaker 2: What I did is--now this is one of those embarrassing things, I fell in love with a girl.  And she went to American University [Washington, D.C.], and I was so in love, I was a little dissatisfied with some of the classes I was getting at Howard 'cause I was still early in my tenure.  So I wasn't getting all the classes I wanted.  But I was in love.  And so the notion was, well, if you're going to go to school in Washington anyway, let's go to school together.  I met two faculty, a woman named Dorothy Gandose [ph.] at American University [Washington, D.C.] who sat down with me and talked about--I think she was the first, not the first, but one of the first people to talk to me about what is, what does really being a historian mean?  What does it take to be a historian?  And she sat down with me, I, I remember it like it was yesterday, she--because I was with this girl.  And I remember asking, said, "Let's go to the history department if I'm thinking about transferring because I know if my parents are gonna understand it I'm gonna have to make an argument."  So I went to the history department and just said, "Is there a professor here?"  And this woman was, you know, in her seventies or something.  And she sat down with me.  And she was a nineteenth century historian.  I loved the nineteenth century and we talked for hours.  And she just talked about, "How well do you read?  Do you like reading?  Do you want to do this," and, "If you really want to come here, here's some of the kind of African American material, some of the American history that you'll want to explore."  And I was so fascinated by that, and I was also so in love that I said, "All right."  I remember going home and saying, "Dad [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.] and Mom [Montrose Boone Bunch], I think I want to transfer."  And my folks, who, not that they were disappointed in my choice in Howard, but were sort saying, "Well, okay, then where do you want to go?  Do you want to go back to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]?"  I said, "Oh, no, I just want to transfer in the city [Washington, D.C.]."  They thought I was insane.  "What are you doing?"  But I basically knew my parents well enough that they would--if I could make an argument about what I'd learn and they would buy it.  I knew if I said I was in love, they'd think I was crazy.  So I didn't go down that road.  But this is where I learned, I learned to respect my parents.  They said, "You know, this is your choice.  Maybe you're making a mistake and maybe not.  But if this is something you really want to do, do it."  And so that's what I did.  So that's why that I went on and got my B.A. and went through, went through American University.
Speaker 1: And went through.  And you went through--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But it was love.
Speaker 1: It was love.
Speaker 2: It was simply love. I'm not gonna lie.
Speaker 1: It was love at--(laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not gonna lie.  You know, love that didn't last long, but it was love (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you got your--so you're saying your last year--was it last year?
Speaker 2: Last two.
Speaker 1: Last two--1970 to--.
Speaker 2: I did, I did, I did 1970-71, 1971-72.  I was at Howard.  '72 [1972] to '73 [1973], 1973-'74 ['1974], that's when I got my B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay, at American, okay.
Story_ID: 16949
Speaker 1: So you're on a track, really?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean this is, there was no wavering in you, about what--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) There was some conversations with my parents [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr. and Montrose Boone Bunch] about should I go to law school.  And when--and so the deal I cut was that as I was finishing up my B.A., I said, "Well, I only want to go to graduate school, but I'll tell you what, let's--I'll, I'll also apply to law school, just to think about it."  But when I then decided what I would do is--'cause I'm a pretty methodical guy, so I said you know what you do, take some, take a law school course.  So I took a law school course.  I don't know if I audited.  I don't remember what I did, but I took a law school course.  I don't even know where it was.  It might have been Georgetown's [University, Washington, D.C.] law school, and hated it.  Just hated it.  And said now I'm gonna spend time in graduate school and money, why don't I do something I really love.  And so I remember sitting down with my parents, said, "I really want to go to, to graduate school."  And they said, "Well, let's be honest."  All they thought that you could become is a teacher.  And in their mind, while they knew they had a noble profession, they felt they never made the money, never got the respect.  And they wanted something better for me.  Secondly, they were worried about, you know, there are a whole lot of un--unemployed historians.  And I remember my mother saying,"Now, we're not gonna pay for your life forever."  And, but there was the kind of arrogance or confidence of youth.  I just felt that, I didn't know what it would take, but I just felt that I could make a good living out of history and, you know, again, this is the '70s [1970s].  So part of what we're trying to do is, do what makes you happy, not what you're supposed to do.  So I remember that, I remember saying well, yeah, if I did what I was supposed to do, I'd go to law school.  But what really makes you happy is history because nothing throughout my whole life, academically, fascinated me, made me happy, gave--nurtured me, just kept my interest, than history.
Speaker 1: Now, are you thinking at this point that you want to go on to get your Ph.D. or was it gradual, master's and--?
Speaker 2: No, I thought I'd go on.
Speaker 1: You knew that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And who is--now at American University [Washington, D.C.], are there important people there, you know, historians and--?
Speaker 2: There, there were a bunch of people who came through, John Hope Franklin was there for a year.  There are--there were some very young white historians who were doing nineteenth century work that was cutting edge.  A guy named Alan Kraut and so I was really interested in, in working with them.  But the other reason why I decided to stay at American was, the best thing [Washington] D.C. has is the consortion.  You can take courses anywhere.  So I took courses back at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in graduate school, at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] , at G.W. [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.]. It really gave me a flexibility that I really found fascinating.  But also again, love, I finished my B.A. and got into Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].  Said, well, I should go up to Cornell, but this woman I was in love with was a year behind me.  So I turned down Cornell (laughter) and stayed in Washington [D.C.].  So you know, who says that your life is always the way you plan it.
Speaker 1: And this wasn't Maria either--?
Speaker 2: No, no, within, within three months after I started graduate school, that relationship was over.
Story_ID: 16950
Speaker 1: Anything else about American University [Washington, D.C.].  I was trying to talk about sort of mentorship.  Was there anyone really mentoring or were you fighting?
Speaker 2: I was fighting.  I, I realize--as we were saying earlier--for me, I would have given anything to recognize the opportunity of mentorship, of coming to school with John Hope Franklin or something like that because first of all, I'm really of that generation that there aren't a whole lot of people yet besides a John Hope, besides a Ben [Benjamin] Quarles, that were really providing that, that kind of mentorship in, in the [United] States.  It's a very, it's a fundamentally different world now.  I mean it's, there're, you know, there're more good people that you can shake a stick at that can help you become who you want to be.  And secondly, I just didn't know, one, how important that was, and it just wasn't on my radar screen.  So if you don't know about it, you just go ahead and do the best you can because for me, the notion was just the opportunity to immerse myself in the subject.  As long as somebody would give me that freedom to do that--as long as there were books to read and collections to explore, I was a happy guy.
Story_ID: 16951
Speaker 1: You started working at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] your, you know, really around--at the same time you're finishing up your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: '78 [1978].  I finished.
Speaker 1: '78 [1978]. --And can you tell me how that opportunity came?
Speaker 2: You know, it's funny.  It's, it's--people have asked me, did you plan your career?  And I say, all I ever did, planned to do was do history, didn't know where that would take me.  There was never any--there was never an inkling in my mind that I'd ever work in museums.  Now, I liked museums, spent a lot of time in them as a kid, but candidly, my claim to fame in museums was that in 6th grade I knocked down a suit of armor at the Metropolitan Museum [of Art, New York, New York].  That was it.  I wasn't somebody who loved museums with a great passion.  I was finishing up graduate school, looking at teaching and what road I was going to do, and recognizing that I was finishing up in the wrong time.  So, it was that I would miss a school year and everything, and so there would be a period before I could go teach, and wasn't sure what I'd do, thought I'd just, you know, do some adjunct teaching here and there.  And there was a woman that was in grad school with me.  Her name was Joan Challinor.  Her husband like the number two guy, the head of science at the Smithsonian.  And she had--obviously, she was ahead of me.  So she'd seen me grow and she said, "You know, I've heard you talk about the public and how important history is."  I, I used to always say "History is too important to be left in the hands of historians."  "And so I heard you talk about it;" she said, "did you ever think about the Smithsonian."  I said, "No."  And she said, "Well, why don't you do me a favor?  Go down and talk to my husband and then talk to the head of the Smithsonian," S. Dillon Ripley was his name, "and see what's what."  Well, you know, I had been living on a graduate stipend which was about to come to an end.  I was already hungry.  So I thought, okay, what could it hurt?  So I went down and met with her husband who was in science and I didn't know much science, and then met with the head of the Smithsonian and was struck by the interest in making scholarship.  Now, they weren't historians--making scholarship accessible to a public.  That interested me.  And then they said, "Go talk to the head of the [National] Air and Space Museum," and that was Michael Collins, the astronaut that circled the globe while the other two [Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin] went down on the moon.  Well, first of all I went cause I was fascinated.  I'm gonna see this guy, you know, my God, this guy stood up there while everybody else went down.  How's, how's he feel about that?  So we went in, and I knew nothing about aviation.  I had some book--studies on technology, but I didn't know anything about that.  And we just started talking.  We talked about, as he said, "You know, people ask me what's it like to circle to the moon?"  And he said, "You know, you're right.  I never got to the moon, but I'm only one of about eight people who ever circled the moon.  That's good enough for me."  And I was fascinated by the guy.  And he said something that years later was so, was so prescient, he said--we were walking around the building, and he took to the, to the storage area, and he said, "See that plane?  That's the Enola Gay.  That's the one thing that should never be out in the public, for public display."  So after years later, when I'm in the midst of Enola Gay crisis, I thought, I wonder if he was right.  But he talked to me, and he said, "Look, you're just starting out in your career.  Why don't you come to work here because we're really interested in questions of race and technology and education.  That's what you're interested in."  And so they hired me as a historian/educator, and they basically said, "I want you to do a couple of things.  One is, is there an area that you want to begin to research and write?"  And I thought, well, sure.  Race and gender and technology,  I'm interested in, in those questions.  And, didn't know much, but began to work on early black aviation--basically, did some things that were mainly race.  And then writing some pieces that were considered really important for beginning to raise, not just technology for technology's sake, but what aviation meant to African Americans.  And it really was back to this notion of how African Americans proved their worth in a broader society, and that if blacks could master aviation, which was really sort of a mystery, if they could fly as high and as fast as whites in the air, then maybe equality would follow on the ground.  So that's what I was interested in.  So that gave me a chance to write about that.  It gave me a chance to think about suddenly what happens when you're at the National Museum.  Suddenly, I'm this kid.  I'm twenty-five, twenty-six, you know, and suddenly people are returning my phone calls.  Suddenly, I'm able to do these things, talk to the great scholars, talk to [Senator Edward M.] Ted Kennedy.  Suddenly, I'm realizing, this isn't bad.  And what's not bad about it was the opportunity to have millions of people engaged with the subjects you love.  But the most important thing, candidly, that happened in my time with the Smithsonian was meeting my wife.  That's the most important thing.  You know, and, and the story is a simple one.  I was doing this research on early  black aviation and was going on a research trip for a couple of days.  I think I might have been going to Ohio, in fact.  And somebody I worked with said, "Lonnie, did you meet the new intern?"  And I said, "I don't wanna meet a intern.  I'm a scholar.  I got work to do."  So I went off and did my thing and came back about a week later and walked a different way to my office.  I'm really a man of rituals.  I always go the same way, but I walked a different way because I'd hadn't seen anybody in a week or ten days.  I see this beautiful African American woman.  And I said, "Well, who was that?"  And he said, "Dummy, the intern."  So I immediately then offered to share with her the great wisdom that I had after being in museums all of like three months.  And that walking to the right instead of to the left, changed my life.  And so while the, the Air and Space Museum in some ways got me thinking about museums and what they can do--and obviously that led to a career, it really gave me the opportunity to meet somebody who really has been more important than anything else in my entire life.
Story_ID: 16952
Speaker 1: Were the holdings of the [National] Air and Space Museum [Washington, D.C.], was there a lot represented in terms of African Americans that you found there?
Speaker 2: There was a lot on blacks--the Tuskegee Airmen--a lot on that.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So at this point, they had already--they had--do you know when that--
Speaker 2: At this point, part of what I was hired for was to help work on the exhibition.  They had a small piece.  They had an airplane and a little exhibit which went up in '75 [1975].  I think it was a bicentennial-driven thing.  And so then part of what I was doing was working on the broader history of aviation because in those days--I won't bore you with all the details, but that people who were interested in race and technology focused just on the Tuskegee Airmen.  And while I was interested in that, I was really interested in barnstormers.  I was interested in black men and women from Bessie Coleman to William Powell to, you know, [James] Herman Banning, I was interested in the people who went before.  And where that idea came from was one of the joys of the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] is that many of those Tuskegee Airmen either were, came through or were involved.  So I can remember having interviews with 'Chief' Albert Anderson--Alfred Anderson, who taught the Tuskegee Airmen how to fly.  And I said, "Where'd you learn?"  He said, "I learned from these early barnstormers."  I said, "Nobody's ever talked about these people before."  And I talked to some of the Tuskegee Airmen, and they would say they would say they learned from X and Y and so that got me interested in that.  And so--and plus, because I was a nineteenth century historian, the closer I could get to the nineteenth century, the better off I felt.  And so I did some writing on race and technology in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], but there really wasn't a collection that could talk about that.  So I did some of the collecting on that.  This was in the, this was the late '70s [1970s], so some of those folks were still alive.  So William Powell, who was a pioneer in aviation, was from Chicago [Illinois].  His daughter lived here so I interviewed her.  There were some of the early pilots who were here in Chicago especially.  So it gave me a chance to sort of travel around the country doing research.  It gave me a chance to recognize that a subject that might seem very narrow, would have this broad appeal.
Speaker 1: And you--during that time, isn't there, you know, in the '70s [1970s], there was a lot of sort of looking, from an oral history standpoint, at non--underlooked sort of--(unclear).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And so--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Okay, you know, there was funding for it.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  There was--but part of what happened at the Smithsonian, candidly, was, and I always say that I was there because of [U.S. Senator Edward] Ted  Kennedy.  Around the time of the bicentennial, some blacks from Massachusetts--the Air and Space Museum opened for the bicentennial, okay.  So there was already an Air and Space Museum, but it was in other buildings.  So its own building opened in, you know, in '76 [1976]. And so many--some, some Massachusetts African Americans said to Ted Kennedy, where is our story?  And Ted Kennedy called a hearing asking about race and technology 'cause the first response was, well, there wasn't any.  And he had a hearing and people testified and then they said in the Air and Space Museum and here's these stories.  So I was hired in part to collect the oral histories, to begin to see were there stories and to begin to think about are there objects to help tell those stories.  And the one thing that the Air and Space Museum had that no other museum had, was they had all the airplanes in the world.  So you could always find an appropriate airplane.  So--but that really all came out of this desire from scholars to find out how the other half lived.  And to begin--this was a period of--I would argue rather than a period of synthesis, it was a period of discovery.  It was a period of saying, there's so much African American, so much history that we've forgotten, that we don't know, that hasn't been publicized, that hasn't been written about.  Let's get all that to surface, and then we'll figure out what to do with it.  So this was part of getting all of that, that to the surface.
Story_ID: 16953
Speaker 1: And what are groups and organizations that you're a part of, and I'm talking about historic, and historical organizations at the time.  Was that--?
Speaker 2: Several, I think that, you know, you're always involved in the standard historical organizations, the American Historical Association, the Organization of American Historians, which is for people studying America.  That's the mainstream organization.  But I'll tell you, the one that gave me the greatest sustenance was The Association for the Study of Negro Life and Culture, because in some ways that organization then--it's fallen on troubled times, but that organization then was really the best of what African American scholars want.  It had those university scholars, librarians who loved history, the general public who loved African American history.  It really was the sense that history is for everybody.  So I love that organization.  It--that's when I, that's how I began to meet some of the scholars that we talk about today, the Clem [Clement] Prices of the worlds and the Jim [James O.] Hortons.  I met them through that initially.  But it was also where it, even though I don't think it was done explicitly, it helped me become comfortable with this interesting dilemma.  You're a scholar.  You're supposed to be in the university.  You're supposed to write just for your peers, and if you are a popularizer, that's something to be looked down upon.  But that organization helped me realize, or at least feel comfortable, that you can do both.  That again, my theme, you can straddle many worlds.  And so that for me, this gave me the opportunity to say, I can both be a good scholar, but I could also care about what we now would call popular discourse on historical subjects.  So those were the organizations that really helped me.  And then I think, really, I can't understate the value of the 'Journal of Negro History'.  The 'Journal of Negro History' just--from 1915 probably through the '80s [1980s] was the place to go.  And I can remember some of the great moments of my life just saying, "It's Saturday.  I think I'll go to the library and I'll read 1917.  I'll read everything that was written in 1917."  And at--and within a couple of months, I read the entire journal and thought, my God, the array of ideas, the possibilities of scholars that really just shaped, in some ways who I--it became a bible that I drew sustenance from.
Story_ID: 16954
Speaker 1: And now, so you're there [National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C.].  You do this, you know, for a year, right?
Speaker 2: --about a year and a half, right.
Speaker 1: And then this opportunity comes at--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now, do you seek that out?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  I think it was probably because I was still wrestling with that ambivalence about if you're a scholar, where are you supposed to be?
Speaker 1: Now, do you get--you get married in the meantime.
Speaker 2: Not yet, not yet.  So I'm still, and as my wife put it, having fun.  So I'm having fun, and I'm trying to figure out--well, two things.  One is, as much as I'm enjoying the stuff I'm doing at Air and Space, that's really not my field.  It's really sort of starting from scratch, the learning the technology stuff and everything.  And I really wanted to stay focused on the stuff I care about.  But it was also this question of, should I teach?  And I was a really good professor.  So I don't remember how I first heard about the job, but, yeah, I probably pursued it because there's a part of me that is unbelievably competitive.  So whatever I go after, I want to win.  I want to be able to say, no, but I want to win it.  So I got the job offer and the other thing that kicked in was, I had been in Washington [D.C.] for nine years.  And was feeling I had outgrown classmates, people had moved on, but here I was still doing the same things.  So it really was that confluence and Maria, who I ultimately married, was going to take a job in upstate New York, so she was leaving.  So, you know, it would seem to me to be the right time to go.  And so I went up and, and taught at UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts] and loved it.
Speaker 1: Now, there was an interesting group of people, right, at that time?  U of Mass has, had assembled an interesting faculty, right?
Speaker 2: There had been, there was an array of people.  There were scholars of the presidency like Stephen Oates, big name whose really important.  There were--Emory Tolbert was there for a while.  There was Augie Meyers' colleague--Bracey, John Bracey, still there, was there.  Martin Kilson, who did the work on, on slave revolts was there.  Just an array of, of amazing people in that system.  There was the DuBois Center [W.E.B. DuBois Department of Afro-American Studies] which had just wonderful research materials.  And it was a place that, with the campuses at Amherst, Boston [Massachusetts], and Southeastern Mass [Massachusetts], what you had was really this wonderful regional place that had some of the best scholars in the country, and then plus, being, you know, close to Cambridge [Massachusetts] and Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], it was really an intellectually exciting place to be.  And I had probably one of the best times of my life because I loved teaching.  I really thought I was gonna be Aristotle or Plato and we were gonna have, you know, kids would be around all the time.  I just taught history, but I'd also help them figure out their lives.  And I always tell the story that after I got married, which was my second year of teaching up there, I used to always have a lot of students who I would mentor.  And I'd say, come by the house and I'd help them get internships, you know, to, in [Washington] D.C. and things.  And I remember I got married, one day Maria came home and there were all these beautiful women sitting around the house.  And she said, "What's this?"  I said, "These are my students."  She said, "No--new day!"  So, so I mentored in a different way after being married.  But, and I just loved it.  I just, I just loved it.
Story_ID: 16955
Speaker 1: Two things hit me that I didn't realize.  One was I had actually taken a pay cut from the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] to go to UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts].  But I was just so in love with being a professor, but that became an issue because I'm, suddenly I'm married.  And secondly, my wife didn't really like Massachusetts.  And so we were trying to figure out what's what.  What should I do, when then, I got a call and people said--from California, said, "We hear you're this quote 'young hot shot' who is from the Smithsonian who knows about African American history and museums, and we're creating," at that time, which was the first and only state-funded African American museum of history [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California].  And I said, "What does that mean?"  "It's history and culture."  I said, "What does that mean?"  They said, "Well, first of all, it's state of California.  That means you'd be a government employee," that there is a kind of, you know, in those days, physical, fiscal certainty that came from being part of California.  And I said, "But I'm not California historian.  I haven't--I've never written about California.  I mean I've read stuff on the west, but I know about Buffalos [Buffalo Soldiers].  I don't know anything about California."  And I said, "The only thing I know about California is the Watts riot" [Los Angeles, California, 1963].  And they said, "Well, would you come out and talk to us?"  So I remember going out and talking to people and realizing--partially being scared, realizing that they were talking about, you know, starting this institution and building buildings and, you know, hiring staff and thinking about--and I didn't know all this stuff, didn't know this at all.  But then they started talking about the possibility of what could happen, of really sending a message that African American history is worthy of state support, that using California as a lens to understand what it means to be an American.  All these things that just interest the heck out of me.  So I came back and talked to Maria and said, "You know, what do you think?"  And Maria had a cousin in California, and said, "You know, let's go."  That's where I--part of it was, we're really--twenty-eight, twenty-nine, I can't remember.  And I said, "Let's think about it for a month, and then we'll make a decision."  A month goes by.  We decide to do it.  We say, yes, we call, great. The next day we found out Maria's pregnant.  So we really don't know anybody but this one cousin.  So we're saying well, should be change our minds.  And, you know, I didn't believe that how adventurous we were, and I said, "Well, let's go."  So by the time the school ended, Maria's six months pregnant, and I'm driving across country in an old [Ford] Mustang without air conditioning.  And, you know, we drive to Chicago [Illinois].  It's my first visit to Chicago then, and, you know, she had a cousin here who said, you can't take this pregnant woman in a car without air conditioning.  We had no money.  And so they gave us a, a baby car seat, you know.  And so we pick up things as we went.  We drove across country, and, you know, we got to the desert.  And Maria said, "It's a tad hot."  And I said, "Okay, we'd better figure out what we're gonna do."  And so we'd drive at night and stay at Motel 6, you know, you know.  And what happened basically, had the best time.  Learned a lot.  It was a--I always say the Smithsonian taught me how to be a scholar/curator, and California taught me how to be a curator and leader of the, of a cultural institution.  And so in a way, my ignorance really allowed me to get in the middle of things that I probably shouldn't have been. And it allowed me to learn everything.  I had to really conceptualize exhibitions, had to retool as a scholar and ended up writing books about Los Angeles and Northern California.  And thinking about all black towns of California.  I had to really retool.  Now, the good news was, because I had urban history training, at least the general issues and themes were things I understood and knew, but I had to really put it into the California context.  I learned how to read blueprints, how to deal with contractors.  All these things that now serve me in good stead.  And it was just wonderful because I always tell people that we built the building, and opened the museum two weeks before the 1984 Olympics, with my big opus on the history of blacks in the Olympics ['The Black Olympian, 1904-1950'].  And it was really one of the hardest things I ever had to do, to conceptualize it, to do it, to, to work with all these people.  But I can remember that the day the building opened, there were four thousand people in the building waiting, and the mayor, the governor, and a woman comes up to me just before the program begins.  And she says, "I want to tell you, I never believed, despite all the changes in the civil rights, I never believed that it was possible that stories of black people would be central to the cultural life of this state.  And I want to just thank you."  And there was a sense of celebration and spirituality that I've never felt other than the birth of my children since then.  And it was really where it cemented for me that this nation, again, straddling two worlds, the academic and the public, was really not only the right thing for me, but it was in essence, my calling.
Story_ID: 16956
Speaker 1: Who were the primary originators of this [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California], you know, politically and who were the people you were working with, 'cause this is something from scratch?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Two people, one you've heard of, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke and another woman named Aurelia Brooks, who was a kind of, really the wife of a doctor who cared about culture and basically got involved back really in the [U.S.] bicentennial, saying what are we doing on issues of race in California?  Brought together, there were several different groups.  They were looking at an art museum, a history museum--brought those groups together and began to put pressure on the state.  If you remember, the speaker of the house was Willie Brown [former Speaker of the Assembly, State of California House of Representatives].  So there was Yvonne who was in [U.S.] Congress initially, and then came back to be [Los Angeles] County commissioner, which is very, very powerful in, in California.  Willie Brown, Tom Bradley is Mayor of L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So you've got the stars in line and then what happens is, Jerry Brown is the governor, very supportive of it, but having trouble getting it through all the systems.  They elect a Republican, George Deukmejian, who basically says, "I understand why we should have this museum."  And he then works with Jerry Brown, I mean with Willie Brown, getting it through the system.  So that basically, what has happened is that you have an institution that really gets a lot of support from a variety of people.  And that's what it was.  And those were the political people, but the key person was Yvonne Brathwaite Burke in true, a political sense.
Story_ID: 16957
Speaker 1: What is curious to me is that because you were there [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California] five--six years--.
Speaker 2: Six years [1983-1989].
Speaker 1: But what's curious to me is your scholarship and institution building at the same time.  And I, I'm curious about the scholarship because it would seem that the institution building would have been so overwhelming.  Yet you did, you know, you had two good, two important books that came out of that, the one on Los Angeles--Los--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Los Angeles, 'Black Angelenos: [The Afro-American in Los Angeles, 1850-1950'], right.  Well, you know, candidly, part of it was a conscious strategy.  I said, okay, if I am creating an institution, what do I need for legitimacy?  One is good scholarship.  Two is state-of-the-art exhibitions.  And then I thought a lot about strategy, media strategy and all of that.  And so I just basically sat down with, you know, other people.  It wasn't--I'm not gonna say it was just me, but sat down and said, "Okay, here's the strategy."  And part of the strategy was, candidly, open with a major exhibition on the Olympics ['The Black Olympian, 1904-1950'] to capture the international attention.  Don't do anything on California initially.  Do national stories.  The history of blacks in the military.  Then move towards California because that would then give you time for your scholarship to catch up. 'Cause I couldn't have really done all the research and writing right up front.  And I was also convinced in those days that, one, because I was twenty years younger, that I could do that.  And that I could straddle those worlds.  So I would get up early and write.  Then I would go to the museum and do all that.  Then I'd come home and write.  And, and in the middle of that, having my first baby, and then my second baby.  And again, I think that it was really a time that I'll never have that energy again.  It was also a time that I had the most amazing wife [Maria] who in some ways even with her own career, put some of her own interests on the back burner to carry this weight, to carry these babies and to do there, be there when I'm traveling around the country trying to do research and trying to think about this.  And so it was, if--I didn't realize, candidly, until you said you wanted to talk to me, I didn't even think about how much I really accomplished during that six year period.  It didn't cross my mind.  It just we were trying to get to a goal, and here was my vision.  So I think it really was a time that convinced me, it--obviously, it made my career--it also convinced me of what was possible.  It, it didn't silence the doubts that we all have, but it made me think, God, if you can accomplish this, anything is your oyster.  And so that's what it did for me.
Story_ID: 16958
Speaker 1: The first book was 'Black', 'Black'--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) ['Black] Angelenos: [The Afro-American In Los Angeles, 1850-1950'].
Speaker 1: Angelenos.  The title, how did the title come about?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  I was very interested in the fact that the California experience was very, very different.  And part of this difference was the Spanish.  And while I was doing research, they always talked about Anglos, but what was interesting is Angelenos, a lot of blacks called themselves that in the nineteenth century.  So I just simply said, all right, let's do it this way, which would really refer to its connection with Spain, with Mexico, which is very different than most of the stuff I had ever written about.  And so it was also just a catchy title.
Story_ID: 16959
Speaker 1: What are you finding about this community [Los Angeles, California], and how is it affecting your scholarship?  I mean 'Black Angelenos' ['Black Angelenos: The Afro-American in Los Angeles, 1850-1950'] does go back sort of to where, you know, your nineteenth century--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: At least it starts there.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that in a way what happened to me is that I'm always trying to again think about things in a global perspective.  And I didn't realize that's what I was doing, but that's what I was trying to think of.  And the California experience was so different in some ways because of the Mexican and Spanish involvement, because the initial migration of black people was from the South to the North, rather than East to West, as we traditionally think about California.  The first black Angelenos were Mexicans.  And so for me, it really made me think about things in a very different way, and it made me think, even thinking about teaching American history.  For example, I began every course in African American history by saying, "The first blacks in America came in 1619 in Jamestown [Virginia]."  No, they didn't.  They came 1535 in Mexico, but I was an American historian and didn't even think about that.  So to begin to think about that and, and read things differently, and because I read Spanish and speak a little Spanish, I was able to do some research in Spanish records. And so suddenly I saw all this black presence in Spanish Mexico, and it really just helped me think things a little differently.  Secondly, California was so desperate for really understanding its history.  The Oakland Museum [of California, Oakland, California] which is the best history--one of the best history museums in the country was really only eight, nine years old at the time.  So there was this great interest in history in California, especially beyond the 1849ers, the pioneers, you know.  It was like, let's look at others that, who came for the Gold Rush [California Gold Rush, 1849].  So there was great interest in the media in what we were doing.  There were a lot of people, because California's history wasn't that old.  So there were a lot of people still alive that I could interview, descendants of people and the like.  And there was a lot of material to collect.  And what I did was, I said this was going to be a place that was ripe with scholarship, but ripe with community.  So I spent a lot of time on the scholarship, but I spent a lot of time working in communities.  So, for example, to do the 'Black Angelenos', because there was also gonna be an exhibition, I set up opportunities for me to go to every church in, in southern California basically, and talk about what I wanted to try to accomplish, what kind of artifacts, if you've got in your house.  So it both stimulated the kind of objects that would allow me to tell a show, but more importantly, it stimulated new research opportunities and it made the museum known.  And, candidly, building on the success of the black Olympians.  That, that was so popular because the eyes of the world were focused on L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and suddenly for everybody to see that.  And it was the kind of show that was much more sophisticated, much more costly than you'd ever see a history show until that point.  And I remember John Kinnard, who was the creator and the head of the Anacostia [Museum & Center for African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.] of the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.].  He remembered me when I was at the Smithsonian, and came out to see 'The Black Olympian' show [sic, 'The Black Olympians: 1904-1950'] in '84 [1984], and he said to me, he said--he grabbed me with a bear hug and said, "Boy, you've just made your career."  And in a way that show set a pattern, and, and Spencer Crew and I always talk about this, that his career was made by Field of Factory [sic, 'Field to Factory: Afro-American Migration, 1915-1940', Smithsonian exhibit]. In some ways, my career was made nationally in a bigger way by 'The Black Olympian[s]' show.  And so that show quickly gave the institution credibility, the media began to pay more attention, funders paid more attention.  It gave me credibility, and then gave me the flexibility to work on 'Black Angelenos' and some of the other work that I did.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that show come about?  Was it just because of the Olympics?  I mean what was the--.
Speaker 2: There were conversations before I arrived that, if we're gonna try to get this thing done around the time of the Olympics, should we do something on the Olympics?  But when I got there, there were some sketchy ideas on doing all the black people who were ever involved in the Olympics.  And I immediately said that's unwieldy.  It's gonna be hard enough to do the American experience because after I started doing some research, you know, I thought I knew about the Olympics.  I knew about Jesse Owens, you know, I knew about the Black Power Olympic [medalists, Mexico City, Mexico, 1968].  I'm amazed at what I didn't know.  The, the early events of 1904 and 1908, how they--who they represented.  What, what they symbolized--the role of women in the Olympics?  Black women beginning in 1928 and then 1932, the real important role of black women playing in 1948.  I mean suddenly, there was so much, and because there wasn't a good archives, the U.S. Olympic Committee would say, well, "We don't have things based on race."  And they didn't have much.  I had to then actually go, track down individuals.  So I was calling Lacrosse, Wisconsin to find out about the first black in the Olympic, and I was having trouble finding information.  Then it dawned on me.  The one thing I knew is that universities always kept information cause they, 'cause you were gonna get the--'cause they wanted to bill you and they wanted to get you as alumni.  So I found out that a lot of the early blacks had gone to colleges.  So then I went to Wisconsin where the first black went and was able to get his high school--his transcript, which told me where he was from in Wisconsin, which then got me into Wisconsin.  So it was really painstaking research, but it really allowed me to really get all this data that no one else had ever bothered to collect.  And so it really was less about--thinking about it now, it is amazing that we were able to pull off the scholarship, the research and the institution building, but at the time, it just seemed that here are the steps I have to take to make this work, so let's figure out how to do it.
Speaker 1: And this is, I mean, this is an urban institution too?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: This is an area that is not, you know, historically, people think of African American history in the South from, you know, East Coast cities.  And so, and so you're finding a lot of receptionists, what you're essentially seeing a lot of virtual research, that you had no--.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  But there was some anecdotal stories, some research that was, like we were talking about the early black studies.  Some of it was good.  Some of it wasn't so good.  So it was really a very fertile ground for someone like myself because there was so much that it gave me a chance to really immerse myself and to think.  And I had thought about a strategy that said, okay, once we get credible, credible from 'The Black Olympians', then the notion is, now, let's turn our attention to California.  But let's not try to do black California.  Let's, let's do that as part of an overall project that looks at L.A. [Los Angeles, California], San Francisco [California], the Inland Empire [Riverside County and San Bernardino County, California].  So it really allowed me to think about a strategy that would allow me both to serve the state, but also because it was a state-funded institution and that the majority of legislators were not African American, and I needed to go testify every year. So I figured out that I should be doing lectures in Merced [California] or you should be doing some programs in El Centro [California].  So I had to really to think about that.  And a lot of it, I'm not gonna take credit for it, came from people like Maxine Waters, who was the Chair of the [Democratic Party] Budget Committee in those days.  And Maxine said, "If you're gonna be successful, you've got to show up in places besides L.A. and Oakland [California] and, you know, San Francisco."  So it was really just trying to think about--I had a blank canvas and to think about all right, how do I paint in that canvas.
Story_ID: 16960
Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn though about doing original research in community where--you know, because you're saying like with the 'Black Angelenos' ['Black Angelenos: The Afro-American In Los Angeles, 1850-1950']---.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Angelenos.
Speaker 1: That you were asking people to bring things outside, you know, of their home, what they had.  So what are the pluses and minuses of that?
Speaker 2: You know what I learned, I learned--and I used to say it was just museums, but I think it's more than that.  I learned that you can't tell the history of a people without wrestling with, engaging and living with the living community.  And I learned that for me, the opportunity to see where people's memories were about these, to see their stories, not to accept them unmediated, but to use that as part of the work I do.  And then it really was, an outgrowth of all this community-driven stuff, the oral history stuff, it was, it seemed to me that part of what I always did was using the tools of tools of folklore--I didn't know I was using the tools of folklore, that I was really saying, I need investigators.  I need people I can interview, maybe to not give me the data that I need, but they can just give me some trails that I can then follow in more traditional research.  And what that allowed me to do is it allowed me very quickly to be well known throughout the state of California.  And it allowed me very quickly to then think of an array of research projects, some of which I gave to other people to do or other museums.  So it really gave me this really great sense of how to tap the living community to help tell the historic community.
Speaker 1: But are there dangers in that type of--.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are the dangers?
Speaker 2: I think there are several dangers.  And one of the dangers is this kind of presentist look.  And that is the notion that being black in Los Angeles [California] in 1980 is the same as being black in Los Angeles in 1880.  And that in a way that it's a fundamentally different world.  I think also it puts you in the position of sometimes then having people disappointed in your research, in your scholarship because they're expecting different kinds of interpretations. It also raises the question of victimization because one of the challenges is if you begin to work with communities, and they're gonna expect that you're gonna do famous, first, and positive images.  And when you try to tell them a story ripe with ambiguity, they say, "I don't--that's not the story I wanted to hear.  I'm tired of being told we're victims."  And on the one hand, you don't want to just tell, paint people as victims, but the other side of the coin is, if you create a mythical, middle class black world, then you are not doing good history.  So that all of those are part of the challenge.  Other downsides, candidly is, it's also--it's much harder to do history that way.  The time that it would--that it took to work with people, to determine people to interview, to do the interviews, to think about it and do it, it took an awful lot of time.  I was fortunate that there was such excitement in the university community of work I was doing, that I was able to get good graduate students, other academics.  So I was able to put together teams to help do some of the research.  So that helped.  But those are all downsides.  And the other downside is that if you're looking so much to the present, sometimes you'll lose your way looking back.
Speaker 1: And what were the Maulana Karengas saying about--I'm just saying because that's a force out there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, crucial force.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: One of the things I did was make sure that I knew who the players were.  And Karenga was--is a major force out there.  And, candidly, when I was doing this in the '80s [1980s], Karenga was kind of out of favor.  Kwanzaa had picked up, but it hadn't picked up the way it is now.  And he was sort of an old cultural nationalist.  Oh, you want to talk about the late '60s [1960s], talk to Karenga.  So it wasn't as big a deal as say, it is now or it had been earlier.  But my notion was that those were part of my audience.  And so I did spend time, I would do lectures for Karenga and others.  So, but what I think there was a notion was that and this was always the interesting question which is how radical is your history gonna be?  How much of an edge are you gonna have? And I know that people--some people criticized the "Black Angelenos' because they felt that it didn't have as much an issue of poverty, for example.  I think it did, but I think that was a legitimate criticism that people could make because people mistake I think--not now, but then, the notion of optimism, the notion of possibility wasn't really a major theme in African American history.  It is now.  So when I was wrestling with it then, I can remember the first NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities] proposal I wrote in California got rejected.  And somebody said, "He believes in this myth of the California dream."  And I said,  "You missed the point.  The point is that these people believed in the myth of the California dream, not that I believe in it."  So the next time around, somebody got their grant.  But initially it was, you know, oomph, they believe--he is believing the myths.  The other challenge was, candidly, most of us who wrote about African American History didn't write about the West.  Or if they did, they wrote about cowboys and Buffalo Soldiers.  So suddenly I was talking about something very, very different.  And that was outside the, the realm.  And people were thinking, is, is he making this stuff up?  Is this really true?  Are these questions really that interesting?  How important is it?  So what I had to do, something I didn't realize, which was I had to make the field legitimate.  And that was something I hadn't anticipated.
Speaker 1: Right.  So how did you go about doing that?  That's what I'm saying.  You, you were talking about how you approached it from sort of a grassroots, getting the information out, but how, at the same time, are you legitimizing it?  Is it because of the institution that you have with you?
Speaker 2: It was partly the institution, but it was really getting other scholars.  What I did was I found out who is thinking about this?  So there was a guy who was doing work on blacks in Portland [Oregon].  Another guy who was doing work on--who had done Doug [Douglas] Daniels or who had done work on blacks in San Francisco [California].  I began to then frame this, not as simply western history or California history, but as urban history.  And so what I did was began to make an argument that for too long history is in these silos.  You do western history, you do urban history, you do black History.  Well in L.A., it all comes together.  So in a way I began--and I didn't realize, I didn't articulate this as well as maybe someone who've come behind me have, but I basically said, this is a new history.  And it is taking the best and the challenges of each, of each discipline and melding it into this kind of new urban history that is cognizant of region, cognizant of race, cognizant of myths.  So that's where--that's how I think we did it, is that--and now, that's a, it's an unbelievable--it's hot field, western history is one of the hottest fields, western urban history's one of the hottest fields.  So I think that, I think I had a little bit--I don't claim that--but I had a little bit in helping that move to where it is today.
Story_ID: 16961
Speaker 1: What were the fundamental differences that you--or were there differences between, you know, let's say the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] history that you had researched or to the extent you're research--well, you don't do back as far as (unclear), but sort of, in that--in this community that made up, you know, besides them looking for the California dream, what were the fundamental differences in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I do think two of them are obvious.  One is that people move north for, for hopes and opportunity.  But it was never as articulated as clearly as the California dream.  Okay, so I think that there was this kind of articulation and there was this boosterism.  You know when the 'Chicago Defender' [African American newspaper, Chicago, Illinois] did that, that was considered rare and unusual. Well California had been doing that from that period, even later.  So there was that notion.  And that the other thing with that was, different was the whole Mexican influence.  That--to understand the black experience in California, you've got to understand the relationship with blacks and Mexicans and black and really, Chinese.  And so that's very different.  I think that similarly, there are known commonalities.  The commonality of what happens when you hit a critical number.  What happens to race relations in the community?  The kind of residential segregation and restricted covenants that we see around the country, that plays out in California.  Although it's interesting that every state, every city claims that it led the fight against it, which they all worked on it, but California was really in the leadership position of lifting, fighting residential covenants really very early.  I think another thing that makes it different is that you look at New York City [New York] and you've got some immigrant population, but you've mainly got a kind of East Coast, North Carolina, South Carolina.  Here we've got an Alabama, Mississippi, maybe Tennessee.  California, you got  it all.  So that you've got--there's regional variations.  And I was struck when I was first doing research on black Los Angeles [California].  When I first saw the Louisiana Club  I said, "Okay."  When I saw the Alabama League, I said, "Hmm."  Then I saw the Tennessee, and that, that it was both representatives from all over, but that that regional identity became so important, and how to integrate that regional identity with the California identity was part of the interesting story.
Story_ID: 16962
Speaker 1: Why not stay there [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California]?  Why, because opportunity came calling or--controv--I mean.
Speaker 2: California, I, I loved California.  I loved having it on my license plate.  I loved writing about it.  I enjoyed it.  But I had daughters [Katie Elizabeth Bunch and Sarah Maria Bunch], and I really felt, with my wife [Maria Marable Bunch], that L.A. [Los Angeles, California] wasn't a place you'd want to raise healthy women in terms of the image of women--.
Speaker 1: But they were still young, I mean--
Speaker 2: But they were still young.  They were still young.
Speaker 1: About what, about five, six?
Speaker 2: Katie was five, was five and Sarah was one.  And we talked about that.  That was part of it.  But the other part of it was, the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] came after me.  And the Smithsonian is kind of like Ivy League.  Once you're there, you're one of their own.  And I was just doing the work I was doing.  I wasn't looking for a job at all.  And Roger Kennedy, who was the head of the [National] Museum of American History [Washington, D.C.] called me and said, "We'd like you to think about coming to the Smithsonian."  And I said, "No, I'm happy."  A guy named Tom Crouch who worked with me at the [Smithsonian National] Air and Space Museum [Washington, D.C.] called me and said, "Look, this is really an important time at the Smithsonian.  We'd love for you to come back.  It would be great.  Think about it."  I still wasn't interested.  I had talked to Spencer, I, I'd gotten to know Spencer Crew a little bit.  And we started talking--.
Speaker 1: And Spencer had come when?
Speaker 2: Spencer had come--let's see, Spencer was there for twenty years so I think Spencer came probably in 1982, maybe.  And so he was there for, you know, several years before I got there.  And we talked.  He said it'll be a good place, but I wasn't convinced.  And then, candidly, Roger Kennedy called me back.  And he said something.  He said--part of it was that even though I had been successful, there was a part of me that has those doubts, you know, am I really good enough to be at the Smithsonian?  I mean I was there before, but I didn't know what I was doing.  Now, I certainly know.  Am I really that good?  Well, I guess he, he heard that in my voice.  And he called me up, and he said, "Lonnie, you don't have to prove anything to anybody.  And you deserve to paint on the biggest canvas in the world."  And I talked to Maria [Marable Bunch, wife].  She said, you know, "I really don't want to spend the rest of our lives in California.  She loved Washington [D.C.].  We met in Washington.  Before we even came back, the Smithsonian offered her a job.  But it was really hard for me because I really liked California.  And the first year or so back was hard because I felt I was going back.  I had lived there before and I had, and I had felt like that.  But--so that's why.  That's what did it.  It was the opportunity to play at the Smithsonian, the opportunity to sort of work with the best people, to do the toughest questions, to get the broadest audience, to really, candidly, the opportunity to help shape the way Americans view America's past, was both humbling, daunting and a challenge that I couldn't turn my back on.
Speaker 1: Now, can we just put this in context.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause it's 1989?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1988 when they're talking to me about it, so I go back in 1989.
Speaker 1: And now the president is--it's under--.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, the president?
Speaker 1: President of the United States.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  It's--.
Speaker 2: '89 [1989] we're under [George Herbert Walker] Bush.
Speaker 1: Bush, okay.
Speaker 2: Bush comes in and gets elected in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: But economically, we're sort of--we had the--but there's money there.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Economically, we, we had some cutbacks at the federal level, but nothing that was visible.  So there's still money there.  There is the--we're about to go into the Gulf War [1991].  So there's this real interest in what America is, and its history.  And there's interest in that.  The Smithsonian is, is about to, a couple of years hence, celebrate its 150th anniversary.  So I knew there would be attention on that.  So you've got all of that going on, but it was a very positive time.  And it was a time where California was still going well so there wasn't a reason for me to leave.  But I'd accomplished a lot.  There were--not that there weren't new challenges, but the building was up and running.  I had done an array of exhibitions.  I had done--candidly, I had underestimated.  I thought I had established a pattern that would be there forever.  I thought that this was a good time to leave because I had taken this institution where--it was at the promised land--that it was not just a player in African American museums, it was a player in American museums.  So I figured whoever replaces me, they'll just take it along.  And I had a vision of that institution, that it was an African American institution, but that it would also, once a year explore issues of Latino culture, diversity.  So I had this real vision of what it could be.  And I left all that, wrote all that out, said, this is what it could be.  So I thought it would really, so I wasn't worried about what I was leaving.  And I worried about where I was going, but it was still--it was a federal agency.  So there were all these things that said, give it a shot.
Story_ID: 16963
Speaker 1: The Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] at the time, how many blacks are at the Smithsonian, on the level that you're at?
Speaker 2: Okay, at the level I was on at the time of the Smithsonian--.
Speaker 1: Because you're hire to--say what you're hired to--.
Speaker 2: I was hired initially as the head of political history.  So all of the national stuff on the Presidency, First Ladies, all that would be under me.  So that was part of the appeal.  At the time, the Smithsonian, the Smithsonian is a place that power is in the curatorial ranks.  If you're a curator, you have the power.  You are--that's the glamour position.  That's the position with influence.  So I came, for example, as a--as a curator.  I was automatically asked to bring in two other junior people to work for me.  So that was the power in those days.  And in the curatorial ranks, the [National] Museum of American History [Washington, D.C.], there were probably--not overstate, there might have been fifty curators.  And of those fifty, not counting myself, in the curatorial ranks, there were two, Spencer Crew and Bernice Johnson Reagan.  And then I came, a guy was in music, but he only stayed a year or two. There was one other, but that was about it.
Speaker 1: And Bernice, how long had she been there at that point?
Speaker 2: And Bernice had been there in the Folklife [Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, Washington, D.C.], in the music area for many years.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, during the, the--.
Speaker 2: The program for African American culture.  But Bernice had been there since the bicentennial.  So Bernice was the senior person.  They had done some hires that brought Spencer in and Faith Ruffin, but she wasn't a curator, great scholar, but in the Smithsonian hierarchy, she wasn't a curator.  She was an archivist.  But she was one of the major players there.  And then me.  I brought on Rex Ellis from Colonial Williamsburg [Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia]. There was a guy named Anthony Brown from University of California Berkeley [Berkeley, California], he was an ethnomusicologist.  We brought him there.  So part of what my goal was to bring in senior people, to bring in some junior people.  I had brought in a bunch of young black scholars, researchers, who have since gone on to other museums and the like.  But it was still a very small group.  And then when it came to leadership, beyond that, in an administrative load, there wasn't any.
Speaker 1: Right. Okay, that hasn't really changed--?
Speaker 2: It changed with just Spencer and I.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then--this is when you moved--.
Speaker 2: Moved up.
Speaker 1: Moved up, okay.
Story_ID: 16964
Speaker 1: The first project I began to work on [at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] was a major exhibition on the history of nineteenth century America with a major part being slavery, called 'Communities in a Changing Nation' ['Communities in a Changing Nation: The Promise of 19th-Century America'].  And so that got me, and that got me thinking about slavery again.  So besides the kind of personal stuff, it was now part of a job I was doing.  So that got me engaged in slavery, and that was from the moment I got there.  But two--something happened, and what happened was, '90 [1990] marked the time that the Smithsonian got its first of its major budget cuts.  So for the first time, not only did some staff leave, but that there wasn't the easy money to do exhibitions.  And when the corporate community heard this was an exhibition that talked about slavery, whoa Nellie. So I ended up trying to think creatively how I could pull this off.  Now, there were other curators working on parts of it, but, you know, leadership came to me.  I took it, whatever.  And I began to work with some people, and there was an idea about--the Japanese government came to us and said, "We'd love to have a show on American culture."  And they wanted a show on, you know, technology and things.  And, and ultimately, I got involved and said, "Let's do a much more complicated show, but let's also negotiate budgets and contracts."  And so what I did was I negotiated a major endeavor.  It was a three-year endeavor in Japan that I ran, that was a seventy-two million dollar project in Japan.  And that seventy-two million would pay for the show, but all of the extra money would go to the Smithsonian that would allow us to do then the show on the nineteenth century.
Speaker 2: So that's how you financed this?
Speaker 1: That's exactly how I financed it.  I did the show in Japan.  And initially, the notion was, "just do the show, Lonnie."  But then I got myself--I was never very good at settling.  I always wanted to do something special so then I began to think about, well, rather than do what the Japanese want, what, what should we be doing?  So I began to think about a show that would work in Japan that would really help the Japanese, but a show that looked at diversity and America as a work in progress.  So I began to take that question and began to play with that and did this massive exhibition in Japan.  I mean massive.  It was hundred thousand square feet.  I brought Apollo capsules and the Wright Brothers' planes and, you know, jewels and treasures and it became a amazing moment in Japanese-American relations.  And so that's what we did there.  And that allowed me to pay for the show that would become the nineteenth century show.
Speaker 2: Now, you said it allowed you to pay for the show meaning that the success of it allowed for you or the money came--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I negotiated a, a ceiling that said, okay, it's gonna cost, you know, seventy-two million [dollars] to do this show.  And the deal was, if the Smithsonian did it for more, we'd have to pay the difference, less, we keep it.  So it was a lot of stress, a lot of pressure cause the administration wasn't sure they'd want to do this, and then if they were going to do it, they would say to me, you know, "Lonnie, you know, you'd better bring this in under budget."  And so there was a lot of pressure on me, a lot of pressure because it was also the first--see, one of the reasons I did this was this was the first time the Smithsonian had ever done a major exhibition of its collections and taken it outside of Washington [D.C.].  And I was trying to think of ways to help the Smithsonian rebuild relations with a congressional community.  The Smithsonian used to have all this support.  Well, a lot of these people died, retired, [U.S. Congressman] Sidney Yates from Illinois, they were all gone.  So there wasn't the sort of support for the Smithsonian.
Story_ID: 16965
Speaker 1: The project on slavery, it comes from who, what?
Speaker 2: The project on slavery [at the National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.] came from me and other curators who wanted to do a major exhibition on the nineteenth century.  And I said, you can't do a nineteenth without doing slavery.  So I took the lead at the nineteenth--at the slavery, but ultimately, I became in charge of the entire project.  And so part of what I did then was, do some of the work I needed to do, had other curators in place, and then I took the best of other people to work on the Japan project ['American Festival Japan '94'].  And it was a wonderful--I would argue I have been the luckiest guy because most people get one major endeavor that either changes them or they get to change the profession.  And I've had three or four--the opportunity to build the institution in California [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California], The black Olympian exhibition ['The Black Olympians, 1904-1950'], the work on 'Black Angelenos' ['Black Angelenos: The Afro-American in Los Angeles, 1850-1950'].  This Japan show transformed, I would argue, both me and also the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.].  And around it, it contributed to my global look sense.  It gave a kid from a small town in New Jersey carte blanche to live in Japan, to learn Japanese, to do all of this stuff.  So I've just been unbelievably blessed and lucky.
Speaker 1: And it came at a time that America had never dealt with the what, the internement issues of things having to do with--okay.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Exactly.  Exactly.  And see the Japanese wanted--the Japanese called it once, they said the problem they were having with me was that that they wanted a show that was light, that was all light.  And I wanted to show darkness.  And I said, "Well, America's greatest strength is illuminating the dark corners of its past.  And that I was able to give them a show that straddled both those worlds.  So they saw a Wright Flyer [airplane], they could ooh and ah.  But they suddenly learned about the Ku Klux Klan.  They saw these amazing old cars the Smithsonian had, but suddenly, they also learned a little bit about issues of poverty and discrimination.  So it was really one of the hardest things I ever did because it was both--I had a good team of twelve people, initially, and I ended up with thirty, but I had to negotiate the contracts.  And when you deal with the Japanese, it's very hierarchical.  So it was, my Smithsonian team and the Japanese team, but it was really me against the Japanese head.  And I was, at that time, the youngest person on the Smithsonian team and the Japanese are having trouble, and I'm young and I'm black, and so it was a harder issue for them.  And there was a lot of pressure from the Smithsonian.  Then there were other pressures.  This is the early '90s [1990s].  So what's happening is, Japan is loaded with dough.  There's this great fear of an anti-Japanese backlash.  So there's some people saying, "Why are you even doing this?"  Then there are people in Congress who were pushing me to say, we're only gonna do this if the Japanese allow American companies to build it, because we want to get into the Japanese market.  And I remember going on the hill saying, "I'm just a poor historian, trying to do my work.  You're asking me to solve the problems of the, of diplomacy?  If you can't, why do you expect me to do it?"  So I had to--not that that was every day, but part of the job was holding off Congress at bay. Part of the job was then negotiating all the, and the, and the logistics, the contracts, getting things into Japan.  Japan has rigid rules against guns getting special permits to bring in guns.  Feathers, [Native American] Indian material came in.  I mean so all of these--while I didn't do every piece of it, it was all under my control.  And I had people that I assigned different tasks.  So it was really the time of my life in terms of both the challenges, because we've got to go over there, and I'd be there for a month.  And we'd meet every day, negotiating, fighting.  I had to work with translators.  I had to use a little bit of my Japanese.  And the Japanese were so good at negotiating because initially, they would do these meetings and they held them in rooms full of cigarette smoke 'cause none of us smoked.  And they would use that to try to pressure us to make decisions.  So I had to negotiate to get the cigarette smoke out.  It was every--it was just an amazing opportunity that I'll never have again.  But it was really something.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you have a facility for languages, Lonnie--.
Speaker 2: I figure--.
Speaker 1: I think you do, because you've like--I've missed along the way where you learned how to speak Spanish.  I missed it along the way, and spoken a little Japanese.  (Laughs)  I got the Italian.
Speaker 2: But part of the Japanese was, candidly, to do this, I knew this was gonna be so hard.  And I was trying to do a couple of things.  One was break down the hierarchy of the Smithsonian.  I didn't want people just looking to me for answers, 'cause I didn't have them.  So I said, what we'll do, if we're gonna try to tell American culture, an American story in Japan, we'd better learn Japanese culture.  And the best way to learn culture is language.  So I brought a Japanese language instructor to the Smithsonian three days a week.  And, and it, every Monday, Wednesday and Friday at eight o'clock, the whole team met, and we learned Japanese together.  And I did that, in part, for team building.  I did it in part to instill in them--to see me stress and struggling so that we're all equal in this, and they feel comfortable correcting me.  And I also did it because I thought it was, candidly, one of the perks I should give the staff.  So then when I organized these, these meetings, I would take every week--'cause Japanese would work us to death, oh, God.  But I would take every weekend, you know, and then I would take the staff to a special place.  We'd go to Kyoto or we'd go to Nagasaki.  We'd go to Nikko and, and basically, it became an opportunity for us to bond.  It became an opportunity for people to see Japan because people were working so hard that I wanted them to have some perks as part of this as well.  So these are just sort of some of my strategies on how you work together.
Speaker 1: And that show opened--.
Speaker 2: That opened in June or July of '94 [1994].  It opened in the Makuhari Messe [Nippon Convention Center, Inc.] in Chiba [City] just outside of Tokyo.  And it drew 15,000 people a day.  It was an unbelievable success.  We did the major exhibit, plus we did a musical festival with it because I wanted people to understand American culture.  So we brought, in fact, Billy Branch and the Sons of Blues from here, I brought him to Japan.  We brought an array of American music. One of the staff said to me, "Lonnie, if they felt America was based on the music you chose, you chose blues, you chose gospel, you chose a variety of other things."  So that was really interesting to me to be able to figure out how to do that.
Speaker 1: And so did you--a lot of people don't understand that the Smithsonian has shows outside the country.
Speaker 2: They hadn't had much.  Most of the relationships were ad hoc.  So if somebody had a relationship in England, they'd do something in England.  But my goal was to force the Smithsonian to think about Asia and Africa in a, in a coherent way.  And it really was just testing what was possible for Smithsonian in the future.
Speaker 1: And when you--so that show opens and your time is done and it's time to come back.  But you come back with success.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But some great success.  [President] Jimmy Carter opened the show.  And [Vice President Walter] Mondale was the Ambassador.  So a great success, but also some criticism because here was this great show that was in Tokyo, it wasn't coming to the States.  But what I did then was say, now, I said, I can't do this because I'm, I'm done.  But what I'll do is let some of my staff who worked on this provide the leadership at creating the first Smithsonian traveling show.  And to celebrate its 150th, they took a lot of the stories we did, a lot of the ideas and made a different show, and traveled that around the state.  So when the Smithsonian then in, either '94 [1994] or '96 [1996], I can't--'96 [1996] I guess, celebrated it 150th, all the exhibitions ultimately were shaped by that work.  And then there was an added benefit that we began to ask questions about what does it mean to be an American, and for the Japanese what I realized, that's equally valid for the Americans.  So that began to shape the way we did work at the Smithsonian.  So it really had a major effect.  It gave us the money to do the slick show on the nineteenth century, which opened to pretty good acclaim, but it also helped me change the way the--the kind of questions the Smithsonian asked.  And it laid a foundation for changing the way the Smithsonian does its work.  So it was really important.
Story_ID: 16966
Speaker 1: And you've talked--I've heard you talk about the slavery project [part of 'Communities in a Changing Nation: The Promise of 19th-Century America'] and how you were forced to, you know, even do a survey.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, because people were nervous, as you referred to it, about the whole issue of slavery.
Speaker 2: Right, so I come back.  And I say, "We've got the money, now let's do it," and people were saying, "Well, but you know, slavery is really tough.  Should you do it?"  So we did the survey that basically said that something like 89 percent of white Americans said slavery has nothing to do with them or that their ancestors came after slavery so--or that it's simply an African American story, so why do I have to learn about it.  But even more shocking was the fact that something like 78 percent of blacks felt they were embarrassed by slavery and that it was a story the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C] shouldn't tell.  And that--while some people said, "See, Lonnie, don't do it," that convinced me that it was really important to do.  So I just said, full speed ahead.  You know, by this time, I'm the associate director of the museum [National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.] so all the curators report to me.  All the collections report to me.  But, and somebody else had mentioned to me, "Well, geez, Lonnie, you've got your own agenda."  And I said, "Anybody who's in a position has to have a vision of what they want to accomplish.  If you consider that an agenda, then I'm like everybody that sat in this chair; I've got an agenda.  But if you're telling me because I'm African American I shouldn't have an agenda, then you're not--then you're, then you're wrong."  So it was a good struggle, but we got the show opened.  And it was really the first time the Smithsonian really put on one of its major floors conversations about slavery.  Was it as big and sophisticated as I'd want?  No.  Was there much more room to do other things?  Absolutely.  But I thought it was important--part of what I think is important in my own career is opening doors.  And I think this opened the door of beginning to look at slavery.  And I'm not gonna argue that it then led to [former Virginia Governor] Doug Wilder, etc., but it really made it more credible for these institutions to begin to look at this kind of a question.
Speaker 1: But also did--'Remembering Slavery' [radio documentary] came out of that, right?
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And this is--as part of that, had the [WPA, Works Progress Administration] slave narratives really been--I mean they had been looked at and they had been written about, but--
Speaker 2: But they hadn't, they hadn't been touched like they are now.  And I used them as the center of, one piece of what we were doing.  So then this led to the 'Remembering Slavery', the, as you know now, there's been a variety of books, some of which I've been involved with, many I haven't.  But really used the Slave Narratives, bringing those to a general public.  So I think all of that is for the good.  And in a way, part of what happened when I was in Liverpool [England] this last summer, was really talking about this question of how should we remember slavery?  And what are the opportunities for global connections by looking at slavery?  So I think that in a way, part of what the Smithsonian does is legitimize projects, legitimize research, legitimize possibilities.  If there's a--if the Smithsonian thinks it's important, so should we.  That's why I thought it was crucial for us to do this kind of a show.
Speaker 1: And in many ways, correct me if I'm wrong, it took back to your former roots.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  In a way, it got me so excited about slavery, it allowed me of doing, while I was doing this, my father's sister died.  So that's when he said, you know, I'm the last one in my family.  And I said, Dad, let's go do our own genealogy cause he couldn't remember his grandfather's name.  So I brought him to Washington [D.C.].  We did some genealogy.  We went to North Carolina.  So, since I was doing research on slavery anyway, I tied it to my own family.  So it really brought some conversations with my father and I about his parents that he had never shared with me.  And so in a way, it really allowed me to, to, to do something I had never done, which is use all the skills I have to also help my own family.  I've always focused on other people and other people's needs and other projects.  So this was a great opportunity for me to do just that.  And, and it really has been wonderful.  It's allowed me for my daughters, to write up some histories for them--now, they're not interested in it now, but, you know, twenty years from now, they'll--if they ever find it, they'll be glad that I wrote those things up.  So that's been, all for the good.
Story_ID: 16967
Speaker 1: What was some of the surprising finds, you know, out of the whole, you know, the slave narrative?  What did you find that was sort of surprising about that, and how sophisticated and unsophisticated were the narratives themselves?  How reliable a source?  You talk about--.
Speaker 2: I think that's an important question.  I think that the WPA, [Works Progress Administration] slave narratives have to be looked at with a critical eye.  Some of the slave narratives, as you know, were collected by white interviewers.  And so sometimes that prevented some of the former slaves from being as critical as they want and studies suggests that those narratives that were collected by Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and black interviewers, there's a much more critical, radical edge.  They talk more about violence and the like.  But also these were taken at the end of people's lives, so they're really looking at memory.  And so you've got to really begin to cross check those against other things.  What I find is, where they're very powerful, is less about the concrete examples, but more about the descriptions of spirit or meaning or what this means to them.  I mean I'm always struck by--some of these narratives that I've never forgotten.  I mean, I think that--there's one by a William Prescott from South Carolina who was asked about slavery and isn't it amazing that, you know, it's been dead for so long.  He said, "You know, it's amazing that sure enough, soon no one who was a slave will be alive."  And he said, "What's sad about that is, that they will remember that we were sold, but they won't remember that we were strong."  And it's that kind of thing that I think encapsulates slavery, it gives it a different spin.  And really it gives me the sustenance to say, you know, as tired as I am, these folks kept going.  I can keep going.  And then the one from the narratives that I always use, is a guy, another guy from South Carolina said that, when he was asked about slavery, he said, "You know, you've got to remember that slavery is not over.  It is in our courts, it's in our roads, it's in our minds, it's in our hearts.  It's in the way we do things."  And then he said something I'll never forget, he said, "It's in the way we do things all the day, every day.  All the day, every day."  And in a way, the notion of why we need to think about slavery is because it really does shape so much about race relations, so much about who we are.  It's shaped by things we don't know.  It's kind of like James Baldwin said, "Americans are trapped by traditions that they don't even know exist."  And without grappling with slavery, we're trapped by a tradition we don't know exist.
Story_ID: 16968
Speaker 1: So your views on the reparations [for slavery], given the research you have done?  I've never heard you talk about that.
Speaker 2: And you know, it's interesting.  When I was in Liverpool [England] and London [England] giving talks, people asked me about it.  And it was the only thing I was unprepared to answer.  I was surprised at myself.  My notion is I don't really care about reparations.  What I care about is acknowledgment and discourse.  Acknowledgment about the centrality of slavery, that it has shaped this country in ways beyond the plantation.  I'd love see discourse and dialogue about the contemporary meaning of slavery.  If that is only done around the reparations discussion, then I'm all in favor of reparations.  But I'm less interested in actually saying, pay money as a way to apologize.  Now, candidly, there are a lot of people who feel the only way a government can really apologize is by paying money.  If that's the case, if that means something the people, then I, I will support that notion.  But candidly, nobody's gonna get rich from reparations.  And for me if we can really create this conversation, that would make me happy.  But as I told you, I've been struck by conversations that I had with [President] Bill [William J.] Clinton when he said that the--one of the biggest surprises of his career is the backlash he received when he tried to apologize for slavery in Africa.  So that tells me both how important it is, but also, how contentious it is.
Story_ID: 16969
Speaker 1: Are there other things that you're proud of at your time at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I'm proud of the fact that I brought in a lot of young people that I mentored.  I'm proud of, beside the Japan show ['American Festival Japan '94'], the--I've proud of the presidency show ['The American Presidency: A Glorious Burden'].  I'm very--I'm very, very proud of the work we did to create the exhibition and the book that I coauthored around that, is really one of, I think, the important achievements of my career.  And why it's important is because, first of all, African Americans don't write about the presidency.  And I thought it was important to raise some of the questions.  And also the way the book is written, I was really interested in the cultural side of the presidency, which is, yeah, I'm interested in how Herbert Hoover won in 1928, but I'm really interested in what this means for people.  So I think I'm very proud of those notions.  I'm, I'm very proud of things that people don't see.  I'm very proud of the fact that one of the things I think I did at the Smithsonian was, was set a standard of excellence, but also set a tone of how we deal with people.  When I was running the Japan project, I said to people, "We're gonna be under a lot of stress.  There's gonna be no yelling.  There's gonna be no condescension.  There's never be the bosses talking down to the workers."  And then for me, part of what I want to do is set a tone of how people should work with each other.  And I was very proud that I think I've been able to do that at the Smithsonian.
Speaker 1: And the presidents project though had--now when did--how did that originate though?
Speaker 2: Oh, what a, what a tangled web.  The--when the presidents--the Smithsonian got a new secretary, Lawrence Small.  He came, let me see, about-about the year 2000 or 1999, I can't remember which.  And he had strong opinions about what the Smithsonian should be, some of which I very much disagreed with.  But one of the things he did, which was really great, which was an outsider's eye to say, what's there and what's not.  And he said, you know, you in American history have a major exhibition on the first ladies and next to nothing on the presidency.  Now there were reasons for that, but I thought it was a really smart thing.  And then he said, okay, but we've got to do this in a very quick time because the election of 2000 and--when did [George W.] Bush--the election of 2000 was coming up.  And, so this must have been '99 [1999].  And said, "Lonnie, we want to pull this off."  And I said, "You know, we can't do this."  But then I realized, well, the secretary's gonna want this to happen.  And the only way it was gonna happen is if I take this on, even though then I was the associate director, doing a lot of administration, the notion was I know how to do this stuff.  So I said, "All right.  I'll take this on, but I need to have some of the best people in the Institution, and I need to be able to focus on this."  And I did some of the administrative load, so it's when my California [African American Museum, Los Angeles, California] experience still served me in good stead.  But an exhibition like the American presidency should have taken three years.  And I would argue we had it up in fourteen months.  And it was because, not of me, but because I was able to bring some of the best people on board, was able to sort of work with them, to conceptualize this, to do all the logistical work, and it is, I think, a great success.  There are people who were angry about the show because they think it was me giving in to what the secretary's vision is.  But my notion was, one, he was right.  Even if he was wrong on other things, he was right on that.  And two, it's a different kind of presidency show than we would have done if somebody else did it in 1970.  So I'm very proud of being able to do something under an amazing time constraint, being able to work with some of the best people in the country, and being able to sort of look back and say, I'm really proud of the things I put on the floor of that institution.
Story_ID: 16970
Speaker 1: Why leave when you were, you know, as you say, the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C,] is the--you know, on the large canvas, painting on the large canvas, you're a senior person there.  Now, the new leadership, is it more commercial?
Speaker 2: That's, that's right.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) And more business, business-focused?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Business-focused. Why leave?  I ask myself that question a lot.  I think part of it was timing.  I think that I had turned down a lot of jobs to leave the Smithsonian, turned down a lot of good jobs.  But two--I think three things happened.  First of all, I had just written a major piece looking at diversity and leadership in American museums.  And I was devastated by how few people of color were in positions of real leadership and directors.  And when I took away Mexican museums, black museums, Asian museums, and said, "Okay, how many people of color are in mainstream museums"--I hate that term, but in, you know, non-ethnic specific museums?  It was something like less than 1/2 of 1 percent.  I thought that was abominable.  So I had been getting all these offers and when they called me here, and I said, "Nah, I'm not coming to Chicago."  People called me and said, Lonnie, your article is so important, you've laid this bare.  People follow you.  If you can go to Chicago with its tortured racial history and take a, take a good modest institution and make it great, you're, you're opening the door for others.  And while I never defined myself as a pioneer.  I never--I'm not arrogant.  I'm standing on too many other shoulders.  I know in a way that part of the reason I took this was to make it easier for those to come behind me.  I know that.  I think the other reason was that I was, I had just turned forty-eight and was trying to figure out, "Okay, what do I do when I grow up?"  And I love the Smithsonian and loved it.  It was--while I had criticism of things and there were things I wish I had did differently or better, I was a happy guy.  But I also knew how to do it.  And there was a part of me that said, if I had just turned fifty-eight, I'd stay, but at forty-eight, I thought there were other challenges I'd better take, 'cause if I start coasting at forty-eight, you know, all you can do when you coast is go downhill.  And I think that was part of it.  I think the other thing was, and this is hard to admit, there's a part of me that really wants to take on the most difficult challenges for the profession, for myself.  I want to do that.  And coming to Chicago [Illinois] is a hard job.  And I was willing to do that because I wanted that challenge.  Now, candidly, if the timing had been off six months either way, I'd have said no.  And, candidly, there's been a whole lot of times since I've been here saying, "What am I stupid?  Why did I leave the Smithsonian?"  Partly because of the international stuff that I love so much that I've only been able to scratch the surface on here.  But those are the candid reasons why I left.  And I think also, candidly, while people thought I left because of the new guy, nah, I had done battle with him and was able to do the presidency show.  So he felt that I was a valuable asset.  I think it was because, in part, I wondered if I'd ever, under this new leadership, get a chance to run the entire Institution, because I wasn't one of his people.  I was very different.  I had done battle with him.  So I wondered about that. Didn't have an answer one way or another, but I felt this was a chance.  And then, candidly, and it'll be interesting to look ten years from now to see where we are, I have never thought about how to maneuver my career and get to X and Y.  I just thought I'd do good work and that's enough.  There's a part of me that would really--I love the Smithsonian.  I really do.  There's a part of me that would like to run the entire Smithsonian, that would like to send the message racially, but I would like to be the first person, the first secretary that really is of the culture.  The only way I was gonna get a chance to do that was to come here [to the Chicago Historical Society].  Only way.  Now, and now, my notion was come to Chicago and you can stay forever.  It had to a place I could stay forever.  But it also had to be a place that if there was ever that shot, this would put me in good stead.
Speaker 1: Well, that even speaks to black, you know, blacks' movement in corporate America, that they often have to go out or be on the board, to even come back and run the organization.  It's very hard to work--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 16971
Speaker 1: I want to ask you what you want to accomplish here [at the Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, Illinois].  And then I want to move on to just a little more, you know, discussions about public history, urban history, you know, the thing.
Speaker 2: Part of what I want to accomplish is I want the Chicago Historical Society to be considered a place of value by the residents, locally and nationally.  By that I mean I want it to be seen as a place that is excellent in all that it does, but that it also provides an opportunity for you, the general public, to dip into the reservoir of history and to use it to help you live your lives.  It has to be, again, the phrase I always use, it's about the greater good.  It's not just enough to do a great exhibition.  It's got to be an exhibition, it's got to be a project that really has transformative opportunities, that has a contemporary resonance so that we can help people realize, as [James] Baldwin said, that history is as much about today as it is yesterday.  That's one of the things.  I think I also want to really transform the physical look of the place.  I want to think about interesting questions like should I create a second space in the city or in the suburbs?  Should I create a museum, a second museum that looks at history in children?  So there are a lot of ideas I have.  Is it gonna all be successful?  Probably not, but I think part of the challenge is in this environment, what can I really accomplish? Because, you know, basically, six months after I got here, everything fell apart.  But I am confident and optimistic, unbelievably ambitious and, and believe that we can transform this institution.
Speaker 1: But you've all--you're learning also the difference.  This is your seond sort of local--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --institution, one where you had a very healthy budget and a clean slate--.
Speaker 2: That's right. Right.
Speaker 1: And another where you inherited an institution with--.
Speaker 2: With a dirty slate and a bad budget (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs) I wasn't gonna say it that way!
Speaker 2: I'm an honest guy.
Speaker 1: But what have you--you know, because it's all--one thing is that your skills have built one onto the other.
Speaker 2: Right.  What I've learned is a couple of things.  And some of it's not all--I mean on the one hand, candidly, I think we've done so well.  I think that the place is much visible.  I think the city has embraced me personally.  I think that there is an interest, if not an excitement, that wasn't there before.  I think that most of the staff have a sense of possibility and know that whatever criticism they have of me, I'm also a believer in helping to make their lives better.  But I think that I've learned some things, some of which have been painful.  I've learned that one of the greatest strengths I think I'll always have is I'm always able to make people better, either via passion or mentoring or training, to make them better.  And I've learned here that I'm not always able to do that.  And so I've had to do some lay-offs, some firing, things that I always interpreted as a failing on my part.  Now, that's not fair, but that's how I interpret it.  So I had to learn, and I'm learning how to be tougher because my whole notion--and this goes back to being the kid that nobody chose--my whole notion is that I will go out of my way to make people work to make it better, to give people a chance.  I don't cut people off at the knees unless they really deserve it or really, you know, are rude and, you know, have no respect or are useless.  But there's a part of me that probably needs to be a little tougher in terms of changing people, and not, not hurting when they hurt.  When I had to lay people off here because of the budget cuts in January, first of all, I laid everybody off personally. I don't ever let other people do the hard work. Did I want other people to do it? God, yes! But that's the job. And that hurt me. I didn't sleep for weeks.
Story_ID: 16972
Speaker 1: I want to ask you questions about this whole area of public history and even--it's sort of development because you have been really on the leading edge of on a lot of things, whether it's urban history, public history before they were really given terms for that.  And so can you talk about sort of your, you know, that, that whole thing and how it sort of converged in the museum environment?
Speaker 2: It's interesting, it's an interesting conversation because twenty years ago, thirty years ago, if you worked at a museum, you were a failed academic.  So the notion was that public history was second-class citizens.  The notion of being a popularizer was really the kiss of death in a major university.  Some of that has changed, not all of it.  Some of that has changed.  What has changed is that even university scholars have recognized that part of what they want, is they want the public to engage with their ideas.  They want a way to use their ideas-- (door knock).
Speaker 1: That's okay, can you get that. (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I understand that.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the whole discipline of, you know, of public history and how, you know, you were saying, how at first, you known when you started with the museums that--.
Speaker 2: That basically, the issue was that I think the profession has evolved to recognizing that not only is engaging the public, making your work accessible to the public important, but I think many people have begun to realize that that ought to be one of the goals.  And I know that many university presidents now see that, which is why the public history is really one of the fastest growing disciplines within the academy.  But I think that part of the issue here is, much like African American studies, how to make sure that you, in your desire to make accessible, that you don't lose the scholarship,that you don't use the nuance.  And that's a challenge because people when they first think of public history, they think of exhibitions and they say, well, oh, it took me five hundred pages to write this story, and you're telling me, based on labels that you have, that you've got to tell it in thirty pages.  And I think that that's one of the challenges.  But for me, as somebody who has both written books and done exhibitions, candidly, I think it is equally as difficult to write a book as it is to do an exhibition because not only is there the challenge of making it accessible, but you're also now working in a visual medium.  So there're all these other skills you have to work--that if I give you a script I write in an exhibition and you read it like you would a book, certain things will pop out. But when I give those same words on walls with objects and images, they take less impact.  And the greater impact is in the visual realm.  So you really have to be much more creative to make this work.  But I think the real challenge is, and this is where I'd like to see American museums go, some countries, like especially the UK [United Kingdom], there has been a real discipline for at least a decade of critical writing and careful thought about the role of public history, the role of museums.  I would argue that American museums are behind a bit.  I have, in my own career, spent a lot of time writing about museums just because I felt not enough people were doing that.  And in some ways, you can't become a real profession until you have this body of literature that you can draw from, that you can get guidance from.  And, hopefully, that's where the field of public history and museums are moving.  And if that happens, then it's all for the good.
Story_ID: 16973
Speaker 1: Where does urban history fit in the whole, you know, between, you know, public history, urban history, well, oral histories as well, you know, oral history.
Speaker 2: Urban history is, what we realize is and so many of our people are urban dwellers, the notion of sort of marrying urban history with public history is very, very powerful, especially because so many of the major museums are in urban centers.  So that what you're really getting I would argue is in museums, more thinking about marrying urban history with public history than many other disciplines.  And I think the good part of that is that urban history is such a seasoned and mature discipline that it really is capable of being maneuvered and jostled by the needs of public history without losing its scholarship and its impact.  I think a newer discipline might have troubles as we try to sort of integrate public history with whatever that discipline is.  I think the best thing about, that is happening with public history and urban history is that, two things are happening.  One is it's forcing urban history to deal with more contemporary issues, you know, the history in the last twenty years say.  And that's been very interesting because what's it, also has forced both museums and scholars to do is to really make the historical connection between say the new city and the cities that we traditionally write about or explore in museums which is the sort of migration or post-migration city.  But suddenly, you end up saying, what is this new urban experience in light of new immigration, in light of different needs, in light of different political leadership?  So that's really kind of interesting to me.
Story_ID: 16974
Speaker 1: I want to ask you who you consider the dean of African America studies in this country?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the dean is John Hope Franklin.  Here's no doubt about it.  I think that I'm still amazed at how prolific he is at his age.  I think that whenever I spend twenty minutes with him, I come away feeling unbelievably ignorant, that there's so much more he knows than I'll ever know.  But I think that there are some brilliant people who are the next generation.  I personally think Darlene Clark Hine is unbelievably brilliant.  I think that her thinking about race and gender and to some extent, region is really spectacular.  And I'm, I'm a really big fan of hers.  I think that whatever one's criticisms may be of [ Henry Louis] Skip Gates, I think that Skip has really done inter--interdisciplinary work that's really important.  I think that the literary theory, the literature material he's brought has really invigorated some aspects of African American history.  I think that he in some ways, and, and I don't think he's trying to do this intentionally, but in some ways, when you look at the sweep of what he writes and thinks about, it reminds you of [W.E.B.] DuBois.  That there's conversations about literature, about song, about history, about theater.  And, and I think that's really important.  I think that one of the challenges for the profession, whether it's the historical profession, the African American history profession or the museum profession, is to break down the silos and to begin to really help us understand the interlocking nature of all this.  So I think those two are really important.  I think there's some other people who I just think are crucially important.  I think that Jim [James O.] Horton, at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.], has really pioneered at, I think, at sort of marrying academic history and public history.  I think his work with the [National] Park Service, his work over slavery, is some of the most important and thoughtful work that's being done in the, in the country.  I think that he's one of the people that I respect a great deal in that regard.  So those are just three of the many people that are doing wonderful work.
Speaker 1: Okay, and if you could trace the history of sort of African American studies, and I want to go back to your saying that, you know, where, and where do you think the next stage is?  You know and I want to go back--not necessarily go back, but I want to remind you that you, you know, said that I had chosen to be a historian because I didn't want to be limited.  You know, but in the whole, because in this whole thing of trying to sort of mainstream this history that, you know, create a place for it.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that in some ways, the evolution really bodes very positively because I think there have been a lot of people who have done what I did and much better, to be able to try to straddle the worlds of history and African American history.  And I think that what is happening is really two things.  One is, there are new attempts to create lenses into America through the prism of race, through the prism of African American culture.  So it's not just the black X or the black Y, it's really helping people begin to think about how race generally shapes all of our experience.  And I think that's really important because whether it's the conversations on liberty and race that people like Eric Forner (ph. UNABLE TO VERIFY NAME) have written about.  All of that really, all of that really elevates the conversation of race in the minds of some, and it really provides fundamentally new insight.  A good example is all the news sort of white studies, this conversation about how the Irish became white and what this really does, is really takes African American history and makes it useful for all these other ways, all these other disciplines.  I think the other thing that is, I can't point to it and say, it's coalesced yet, but I do think that part of the future for African American studies, African American history is the global nature.  I think in some ways, as we as a, as a world, but really as a nation, wrestle with the impact of globalization.  We suddenly can see in African American history, some of those steps being taken, whether it is beginning to look at the relationship of the Atlantic world, beginning to look at the role of race in the European context.  There's a lot of new studies on the Dutch and race and the British and race.  I think that in a way, this is gonna be a wonderful ladder that crosses many boundaries and that binds much together.  I would think that's--I think it's a very important, very positive thing that's coming out of African American history.
Speaker 1: With some of these trends that you see, do you see any dangerous trends?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there's always possibilities of problems.  I think that one of the trends becomes--I feel that African American culture is really one of the best lenses to understand what it means to be an American as there are attempts to new--to look at other cultures, the pressure of the rising Latino and Asian community, and rightly so, calling for more attention to those cultures.  I'm not convinced that those cultures have all had the same impact as African American culture, and I think so one of the challenges is that you're beginning to see more of a struggle of over to say, whose influence is more important?  And I think that's a no-win situation for everybody.  That's a danger.  I think another, I think another danger is the fact that, one of the things that has happened is that there was a lot of struggle on, who can tell African American history?  In the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] there was this whole sense that well, maybe whites shouldn't be telling that story.  Then as the '90s [1990s] evolve, you had fewer African Americans going into graduate school, people began to see the vibrancy of African American history, which  people recognized one of the most vibrant areas of the discipline.  So I think there's some questions now about, you know, who owns African American History.  Should anybody own African American history?  And my own view of it is, I remember in the '70s, this debate, Charles [Harris] Wesley, the great scholar who was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for many years, wrote an article that he was concerned about many white scholars writing about African American history.  And my notion was that we need multiple perspectives.  So I have no problem with a variety of people writing about African American history as long as there is always a strong core of people of color wrestling with it.  And so my fear is, as fewer people go to graduate school, I, I don't ever want to get to the fact where we're back to where very few people of color are writing about race 'cause I think that--while I don't think they have a monopoly on wisdom, the insights, the personal issues help to bring a richness that makes the profession stronger.
Story_ID: 16975
Speaker 1: And your thoughts about integration, as someone who has been a child of integration, what are your thoughts about that and whether it's been a good thing, a bad thing, whether it's possible to have a colorblind society, you know, from, and, and you know, the thing is that history, when people say things that are repeated in history, history is a lens for the future.
Speaker 2: There is no way in the next hundred years that we'll have a colorblind society in the United States.  I think that's naive.  It's a wonderful hope, but I don't think it'll happen.  Race is too ingrained, too central to the way we define almost everything.  I think the question in my mind is what's the role of integration?  I am a firm believer that society is better when there is greater integration, in an economic sense, in a business sense, in a social sense.  And so I like the notion, some of the changes that has occurred because of integration.  I think that the best thing I can say is that for the first time, many people are realizing what is also lost with integration, that some of the black neighborhoods, the black culture, the black sense of community, some of that is gone.  But I don't want to overstate that because I think one of the myths is that all these black neighborhoods were perfect, wonderful utopian moments that were destroyed by integration.  I don't think that's true.  But I do think that's what's happening now is we, we're getting a wiser group of people who can begin to recognize what are the benefits of integration and what are the dangers or drawbacks of integration?  And I would hope, a more sophisticated society can approach integration in a different way.  But the question that one ought to ask is, as a society, are we moving towards integration, even slowly, or are we not?  And I think of talking to my oldest daughter [Katie Elizabeth Bunch] whose now a junior in college and listening to her talk about going to University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina], where there's so relatively few African Americans at the prime school for North Carolina, and because there's so few, it's almost like because there's not a critical mass, there is still this tendency to self segregate, to feel comfortable.  And so I don't know what the answer is.  I know that on some levels, you can point towards greater integration in, in some areas of housing, greater integration in some areas of business, but I think you could point to a place like Chicago [Illinois] and really look at a lack of integration in areas of housing.  Some of the traditional cultural areas, the church, schools, still very segregated.  So I think that it's hard for me to say one way or another. But if you're asking my own preference, my own preference is moving towards an integrated society that's much more sophisticated, much more cognizant of what is gained and what is lost.
Story_ID: 16976
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns, you know, for the black community. You know, what--.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what my biggest fear is. There are people like you and me who have gotten through a window of opportunity, whether it's a window that we forced up or our parents forced up or the government forced up, there's a window.  And I look and I see this sort of group of people, roughly our age, who are middle-class solidly.  And I worry about the opportunity for those who aren't middle-class in that solid way.  I worry about it every time I drive down North [Avenue], through Austin Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois].  I worry about it every time I think about the number of kids my daughter [Katie Elizabeth Bunch] tells me who drop out of UNC [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] 'cause they can't afford it.  So I worry about the opportunities that we fought for and benefited from, not being passed on to the future generations.  I worry a lot about class divisions within the African American community.  I think that we could interview a hundred middle class blacks and we could talk about the work we do, the involvement in different programs and that.  But I really think that I worry about that chasm between segments of our community.  And at a time when we could really use more concerted effort, we find more chasms, more things splintering us apart.  And I guess the other thing I, I worry about--worry's too strong a word, one of the things that I think I'm looking at with interest, is the impact of the opportunity of people to embrace a biracial or triracial heritage.  What does that mean when more people can check that box rather than black or white?  And what's that, what's that gonna call into question?  How do we as a society handle that?  What does that mean to an African American community who traditionally would benefit from those numbers by it being checked as black?  Suddenly, they're checked as something else.  Does that hurt our political, social and cultural sense.  So those are some of the things I think about.  I worry about drugs.  I worry about AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome].
Story_ID: 16977
Speaker 1: What has been interesting about your story is that you knew very early on, knew what you wanted to, or you had a love very early on.  And when you look at your path, you know, and the child that you were growing up in Belleville, New Jersey, and the person you are today, is there a person still you want to be?  What I'm asking is, you know, life is, you know, you've stayed in an area, charted a path that is much different than what--'cause you wanted to teach.  And you said I was very good at teaching.  And teaching isn't--I mean teaching  you may do in other ways, lecturing and things like that.
Speaker 2: I, I--I think, I think you put your finger on what was an interesting question.  Now, that I sit here, half a century old and begin to think about what's the future bring.  Part of it is a little frightening because when you look back and you say, well, I didn't imagine that I would take these paths.  And most of them have been very, very positive, but didn't know that.  So you don't really know what the next decade or two holds for one.  I think that for me, the hope is that, really two things happening. That I can find a way to never lose the flame or the passion of history, that sometimes as you take on more administrative loads, take on leadership, so and fundraising, the administration things get in the way, and I mean they get in the way, it becomes harder to find the time to do your love.  And what happens is, and I would argue one of the most interesting things that I think about is because history has been my love almost as long as I can remember, then what happens when history becomes your love and your work.  And so the issue that I began to think about is what do I do to rekindle some of those moments of passion?  I'm always amazed when people say to me, what do you do for a hobby?  I don't have a hobby. I don't have play golf.  I read history, but at a certain point, maybe you need that separation to recharge your battery.  So I think one of the questions I'm wrestling with is, what does that mean for the future.  The other thing though is I really do think, and God I hope this doesn't sound egotistical, but I think that living the live, learning how to straddle many worlds, learning how to confront wrong, learning how to fight the good fight, I think that really--those are the kinds of skills that I look for in people that lead cultural institutions, that lead any institution.  So part of what I'd like to do is to continue to lead institutions, maybe the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago, Illinois], maybe the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.], but lead institutions so that they're all in the struggle to fight the good fight, that they're all in the struggle to make America better.  And so I think if I was--ten years from now or fifteen years from now looking back, if I could say that the work I have done has made America better--the institutions I have led are better institutions because of both their contribution and because of the way we've changed the way people interact, then I will think I have lived a good life.
Speaker 1: Well, you've answered my last question.  So we'll stop there.  It was a legacy question, so that's essentially what you mean in terms of living your legacy.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Exactly, I think that, I think the other though if you were asking me my legacy, I think that, there are really two levels.  One is--the legacy I worry about is the legacy I've left my children [Katie Elizabeth Bunch and Sarah Maria Bunch].  Have I helped these kids find their love?  Have I made sure that I've done as well as my parents did to provide the skills, the strength and the love to wrestle with life.  I worry about that because, in part, unlike my parents, most of the time their career never got in the way of family.  In my life, career has, from time to time in very dramatic ways, gotten in the way of family.  So I, I worry about that.  The other legacy is simply that I would really hope that I left a legacy where people care about history, care about African American culture, recognize that it's central to all our experience and recognize what I think it is, which is the lifeblood of who we were and who we are and who we will be.
Story_ID: 16978
Speaker 1: This is 1954.  It's Woodland, North Carolina in my grandparents'  house.  It's the only picture that really has me, my parents and my grandparents.  So that's me as a baby on my mother's lap.  That's my dad sitting on the floor, Lonnie, Jr.  Behind him at the top right is my grandfather, Lonnie, Sr., the sharecropper, or as everybody called him, they called him 'Doc Bunch'.  And then my grand, my maternal grandparents, John Boone and his wife, Flossie Boone and this is their house.
Speaker 2: Can you spell Boone?
Speaker 1: B-O-O-N-E.
Speaker 2: And can you spell Lonnie Bunch too.
Speaker 1: Lonnie is L-O-N-N-I-E, Bunch, B-U-N-C-H.  And my mother is Montrose, M-O-N-T-R-O-S-E.  And my grandmother is Flossie, F-L-O-S-S-I-E.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch as an infant with his family at his maternal grandparents' house, Woodland, North Carolina, 1954; (Front row, L. to R.): Lonnie Bunch, III, mother, Montrose Boone-Bunch, and father, Lonnie Bunch, Jr.; (Back row, L. to R.): Maternal grandfather, John Boone and grandmother, Flossie Boone and paternal grandfather, Lonnie 'Doc' Bunch, Sr.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16979
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures of my mother [Montrose Boone Bunch] and father [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.].  This is taken in the early '60s in our house in Belleville [New Jersey], and it's at the end of one of their numerous barbeques.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's parents, Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr., and Montrose Boone-Bunch, Belleville, New Jersey, ca. early 1960s.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16980
Speaker 1: This is the only picture I have of my paternal grandmother.  This is Leanna [Brodie-Bunch] who died suddenly and changed the way our family interacted, but she was the woman who believed it was really important for me to know the Bible.  And she was very hard on what she expected a young, middle class black child to be.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's paternal grandmother, Leanna Brodie-Bunch, n.d.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16981
Speaker 1: This is my oldest daughter, Katie [Elizabeth Bunch], whose always had that wonderful look of joy and mischievous.  She is now a junior in college at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's oldest daughter, Katie Elizabeth Bunch, n.d.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16982
Speaker 1: This is my daughter Sarah [Maria Bunch].  This was when she was in fifth grade, taking in--taken in Herndon, Virginia.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter Sarah Maria Bunch, Herndon, Virginia, ca. 1997.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16983
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures.  In my household, this picture was taken probably about 1960 or maybe '61 [1961] in Belleville, New Jersey. And that's my little brother [Lawrence Gregory Bunch] in the front of the picture and me and my dad [Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr.].  And my dad always did the ironing in the house.  So he taught us early about how to blur gender roles.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch (top left), his brother, Lawrence Gregory Bunch, and their father, Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr., Belleville, New Jersey, ca. 1961.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16984
Speaker 1: This is my wife, Maria [Marable Bunch] and I on the Champs-Elyses [Avenue] in Paris [France] in 1995.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch (left) and his wife, Maria Marable Bunch, on the Champs-Elysees, Paris, France, 1995.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16985
Speaker 1: This is my paternal great, great grandfather, Robert Lee Brodie.  He lived to be 110.  This picture was taken of him about 1959, and it was taken in Neuse, North Carolina, which is must outside of Raleigh [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: So when was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born in 1856, I think, yeah.  And I remember him.  I met him.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's paternal great-great-grandfather, Robert Lee Brodie, Neuse, North Carolina, 1959.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16986
Speaker 1: And then this is his [great great-grandfather, Robert Lee Brodie's] mother.  This is Jane Dunn who was basically born a slave in the--she was born in the 1820s and, in fact, she was an adult when she was freed, and we found records of her getting a marriage bond in 1866 to, to cement a relationship that she had for many years.  And this picture was taken of her in 1913.  And it's taken, again, in Neuse, North Carolina near Raleigh [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Can you spell Neuse?
Speaker 1: N-E-U-S-E.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's great-great-great-grandmother, Jane Dunn, Neuse, North Carolina, 1913.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16987
Speaker 1: This is a picture from one of the most important moments in my career, the American Festival [American Festival Japan '94].  This is the team from Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.]  that worked with me in Japan.  This picture was taken in 1993 at the Smithsonian.  In the lower--seated is, in the lower left is Steve Lubar who was a curator of technology.  Seated next to me and to the right is Ellen Hughes, who is an expert on sport and with me, they were the intellectual leaderships of the project.  In the--standing from left to right, Michael Kerrigan who was the head of design of this project, Amanda Young who was an expert on aviation history.  Next to her is Harold Closter who is an expert on American music.  Next to him is Catherine Perge, who is an expert on logistics, getting things shipped, getting it to Japan.  She was responsible for getting everything from an Apollo capsule to a small rock to Tokyo [Japan].  Next to him--next to her is Jim Brody, who is--was one of the research assistants and next to, next to her is Ellen Dorn who was the project manager.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch with colleagues from the Smithsonian Institution who worked on the 'American Festival Japan '94' exhibit, Washington, D.C., 1993; (Front row, L. to R.): Steven Lubar, Lonnie Bunch and Ellen Hughes; (Back row, L. to R.): Michael Kerrigan, Amanda Young, Harold Closter, Catherine Perge, Jim Brody and Ellen Dorn.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16988
Speaker 1: This is again, another one of the highlights of my career.  This was the opening of the Black Olympian ['The Black Olympians: 1904-1984'] exhibition at the California Afro-American Museum [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California].  It opened in June of 1984.  This is taken in Los Angeles.  This is some of the people involved in the opening ceremonies.  To the left is Wyomia Tyus, who was a gold medal runner in 1968.  Next to her is Larry McCormick who was the sort of oldest black newscaster in Los Angeles.  And there's myself with Al Gray [in the background], Aurelia Brooks, who was my partner in creating the institution.  Next to her is John Carlos of the famous Black Power Olympics.  Next to him, next to him is Barbara Farrell, who won a gold medal in 19--in 1968 Olympics and next to her is Louie Robinson who co-curated the show with me, who was here in Chicago for many years as an editor with Ebony Magazine.  And his--he's the father of Robin Robinson.
Speaker 2: Oh, he is.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm, Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: I remember her talking about her father one day.
Speaker 1: He's the best.
Speaker 2: Is he still alive?
Speaker 1: He's still alive in California.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch with others at the exhibition, 'The Black Olympians: 1904-1984', Los Angeles, California, June, 1984; (L. to R.): Wyomia Tyus, Larry McCormick, Lonnie Bunch, Aurelia Brooks, John Carlos, Barbara Farrell, and Louie Robinson.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16989
Speaker 1: This was taken in our Oak Park [Illinois] home my first Christmas here.  So that was 2001.  This is my immediate family.  My daughters are at the edges, Katie [Elizabeth Bunch] to the left, Sarah [Maria Bunch] to the right.  And in between is my father, Lonnie Bunch [Jr.], and my mother, Montrose [Boone] Bunch.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's parents and daughters at Christmastime, Oak Park, Illinois, December, 2001; (L. to R.): Daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Bunch, father, Lonnie G. Bunch, Jr., mother, Montrose Boone-Bunch, and daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16990
Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Sarah [Maria Bunch], taken in August of 2003 in San Diego, California.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, vacationing in San Diego, California, August, 2003.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16991
Speaker 1: And this is a more familiar pose for my daughter, Sarah [Maria Bunch].  Sarah is a gifted athlete who has represented the United States at an early age in England, Australia and New Zealand.  She is a very gifted soccer star.  This picture was taken in 2003 in Oak Park, Illinois where she was playing against another high school team.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, in her soccer uniform, Oak Park, Illinois, 2003.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16992
Speaker 1: And this is Sarah [Maria Bunch] again.  This is taken in Manchester, England in the year 2002, where she was representing the United States, playing against teams from England, Ireland and Iceland.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, playing soccer in Manchester, England, 2002.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16993
Speaker 1: This was taken in August of 2003.  This is my wife, Maria [Marable Bunch], to the right and my youngest daughter, Sarah [Maria Bunch].  This is a day we returned from shopping in Tijuana [Mexico].
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's wife, Maria Marable-Bunch and daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, taking a break from vacationing in Tijuana, Mexico, August, 2003.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16994
Speaker 1: One of the most important things about our family is that we try to do family vacations every year.  This was a family vacation of 2002.  This was in New Mexico and that's Sarah [Maria Bunch] on a peak somewhere outside of Taos, New Mexico.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, on a visit to Taos, New Mexico, 2002.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16995
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures.  This is a picture of, of Katie [Elizabeth Bunch] as a baby and I.  This is taken probably 1980--oh, I'd say 1985, '86 [1986].  This is taken in Santa Monica--Santa Barbara, California.  That's in front of the Santa Barbara Mission.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch with his daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Bunch, Santa Barbara, California, ca. 1985-1986.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16996
Speaker 1: My wife, Maria [Marable Bunch] and Katie [Elizabeth Bunch].  This was taken in San Francisco, California in 1986.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's wife, Maria Marable-Bunch, and daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Bunch, San Francisco, California, 1986.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16997
Speaker 1: And this is Katie [Katherine Elizabeth Bunch] all grown up.  This is taken on the night she graduated high school from Herndon High School, in Herndon, Virginia.  This was June 15th, 2001.  It's taken in front of our house in Virginia.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Bunch on her high school graduation day, Herndon, Virginia, June, 2001.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16998
Speaker 1: And this gives you a sense of the personality of Sarah [Maria Bunch].  This was taken in Kona, Hawaii in 2001 on a family vacation.  And though she couldn't drive, she convinced me into renting a convertible and she wanted to show her friends that she was cool enough to be in a convertible.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, on vacation in Kona, Hawaii, 2001.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 16999
Speaker 1: And one of the most interesting things is I, I think my ancestors must be smiling because they have a child--this is Sarah [Maria Bunch] who also surfs.  So it's very interesting to see this black kid surfing.  And that's she and her mother in our Oak Park [Illinois] house, looking at her surfboard.  In fact, just three weeks ago, in August of 2003, when they dropped her older sister [Katherine Elizabeth Bunch] off at college, unbeknownst to me because I was in England, they snuck away so Sarah can do two days of surfing on the Atlantic Coast.  So when I was called to pick them up at the airport, I had to pick up her surfboard.  And there's nothing more astonishing than watching the looks on people's face at Midway Airport [Chicago Midway International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] to see three black people, one of them carrying a surfboard.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's wife, Maria Marable-Bunch (left), and daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, Oak Park, Illinois, ca. 2003.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17000
Speaker 1: One of things that's really important for me is the time we spend together at holidays.  And so we've always, wherever we've lived, tried to get to New York [New York] for Christmas.  And we have a series of pictures probably taken since the girls were babies, taken in front of the angels here.  These are the angels at Rockefeller Plaza [sic, Rockefeller Center, New York, New York].  And this was taken in the year 2001.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's wife and daughters, New York, New York, December, 2001; (L. to R.): Lonnie Bunch's wife, Maria Marable-Bunch and daughters, Sarah Maria Bunch and Katherine Elizabeth Bunch.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17001
Speaker 1: And again, part of our Christmas celebration, this is Sarah [Maria Bunch] to the left, Katie [Elizabeth Bunch] to the right in blue, taken at our Oak Park [Illinois] house in 2002.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's daughters, Sarah Maria Bunch and Katherine Elizabeth Bunch, Oak Park, Illinois, December, 2002.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17002
Speaker 1: And this is probably my favorite photograph of the family.  This is taken in Washington, D.C. probably in 1991.  It's taken at Frederick Douglass' home.  It's in the parking lot of the Frederick Douglass home.  And that is me [Lonnie G. Bunch] to the left, my wife, Maria [Marable-Bunch], in back, Katie [Katherine Elizabeth Bunch] standing in the center frame and Sarah [Maria Bunch] to the right.  And I love this because it really captures the family and it's a rainy day with the colors of the umbrella with a little bit of our red car showing up in this picture as well.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch with his wife and children on a visit to Frederick Douglass's home in Washington, D.C., 1991; (L. to R.): Lonnie Bunch, daughter, Sarah Maria Bunch, wife, Maria Marable-Bunch, and daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Bunch.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17003
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in--at the Akasaka Shrine in Tokyo, Japan in 1992.  This is at the end of a week of negotiating with the Japanese.  And this is some of my team.  At the very end is [Steven] Steve Lubar who was a curator at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.].  This is Steven Nash who was a designer and two other people who were sort of Smithsonian staffers, myself [Lonnie G. Bunch] and [Ronald] Ron Becker who was a contractor for the Smithsonian.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch (second from right) with members of his staff from the Smithsonian Institution on a visit to Tokyo, Japan, 1992.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17004
Speaker 1: And this is me with the love of my life, [wife] Maria [Marable Bunch].  This picture was taken in 1999 and it was taken in Tyson's Corner, Virginia.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch with his wife, Maria Marable-Bunch, Tyson's Corner, Virginia, 1999.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17005
Speaker 1: One of the things that's important to me is to provide leadership in the museum profession.  This is the, the Accreditation Council of the American Association of Museums, whose job it is to accredit museums.  And this picture was taken in Washington, D.C.  This picture was taken in 1999.  That is to the left Tom Livesey (ph.), a museum director from New Mexico, myself [Lonnie G. Bunch] in the blue sweater, a woman named--oh, her name has just left me, Freda, Freda Nash, who was director of a museum in North Carolina.  Jim Peterson, who was director of the Minnesota Science Center [St. Paul, Minnesota], and  [Arthur] Art Wolf who was the director of a museum in New Mexico.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch (second from left) with other members of the Accreditation Council of the American Association of Museums, Washington, D.C., 1999.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
Story_ID: 17006
Speaker 1: This is just a small portion of my mother's [Montrose Boone Bunch's] family at one of the numerous family reunions that we have.  This picture was taken in 1998.  It was taken in Norfolk, Virginia.  And you just get a sense of the diversity of the family.  While its roots are in the African American community, it's a much more diverse family as a result of changes in American life.
Speaker 2: [Lonnie Bunch's mother, Montrose Boone Bunch's extended family at a reunion in Norfolk, Virginia, 1998.  From the collection of Lonnie G. Bunch.]
