Story_ID: 91308
Speaker 1: Okay. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My name is A'Lelia Bundles.  It's A-, apostrophe capital L-E-L-I-A.  Last name is Bundles, "B" as in boy, U-N, "D" as in David, L-E-S, like of joy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: My middle name is Perry, it's my mother's maiden name.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: P-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And you're named for your mother, right?
Speaker 2: I'm named for my mother and my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother was the first A'Lelia and then my mother was A'Lelia, my mother's mother was Mae, my mother was A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles and I'm A'Lelia Perry Bundles.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, there's three A'Lelia's in my family.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 7th, 1952 in Chicago, Illinois in Michael Reese Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am Director of Talent Development for ABC News and that is a job that I have after having been a producer with NBC and ABC for many years and then Deputy Bureau Chief at ABC, but I currently am Director of Talent Development.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are also a writer?
Speaker 2: I am also a writer.  I am the biographer of my great-great-grandmother, Madam C. J. Walker and also of my great-grandmother, A'Lelia Walker.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 13th, it's actually Friday the 13th, 19--sorry, Friday the 13th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: In your home?
Speaker 2: In my home, yes, we're in Washington, D.C., in my home.
Story_ID: 91309
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one, and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Salmon [laughs], of sustenance food and aside from Salmon, I love sweets, so, you know, I like chocolate.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple, absolutely purple, unequivocally, purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and summer, when the days are long and the weather is warm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like any place that has a beach.  I love the Caribbean.  Would like to do that every year, and don't, but I like the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hmm, no, you know when something may come to me as we--as we talk, but there's nothing that I use as a watch-word.
Story_ID: 91310
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you about your family history.  Can--how far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's mother [Mae Walker Perry] side of the family, I can go to the 18th Century, to the 1700s.  On my mother's father's [Marion Rowland Perry, Jr.] family, I can go probably to the early 19th Century.  And I need to clarify that, my mother's mother's biological family, I can go to the 18th Century.  My mother's mother's adopted family, I can go to the early 1800s.  And my father's [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] family, I don't know as much about my father's family, so I would say really just to sort of post--just post-Civil War [1861-1865].  I can't really go back much farther than that for that family.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we know that your famous ancestor is Madam C. J. Walker-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we'll talk about her in more detail when we talk about the book, but, are there any stories about--about your family?  Any songs or stories passed down from the slave period that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: You know there's nothing that I'm aware from the slave period but I, but I can tell you this, in my mother's [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] family, in my mother's ancestor's family, there were a lot of free people of color and my grandfather, my mother's father, had lots of stories and anecdotes about people in his family.  So I know for instance that my grandfather's grandfather was a free person whose family had come across the river in Ohio, to Ripley, Ohio.  He subsequently moved to Memphis, Tennessee after the Civil War and then went to Arkansas and was elected a state legislator and was the superintendent of prisons in Arkansas.  He had--because he had lived in Ohio when he--after--when reconstruction began to fall apart and there was a big backlash, he moved his wife and four children to Oberlin [Ohio] where the four children went to school.  So I do know the legacy of that family.  My father--my grandfather's father was Valedictorian of his class at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and his mother went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], so I have great stories there.  And my mother's mother's biological family, I know through other people's research, that one of her great-great something grandfather's fought at Valley Forge in the Civil War, I mean in the Revolutionary War [1775-1783], so I can trace that back.  And then I know that my mother's mother's family was part of a group of free people of color from North Carolina who migrated to Indiana in the early part of the 19th Century, in the 1830s, and created something called, "The Robert Settlement".  It was the Roberts and Hammond and other families who were free people of color who felt pressure to move from North Carolina into Indiana.  So there's quite an interesting history about them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now your ancestor that moved to Arkansas-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --what part of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: He moved to Helena, which is Phillips County and Phillips County was a majority black county during the--right after the Civil War and a lot of black people owned property and there was a lot of political power for African Americans in Phillips County.  Now, today, it is one of the poorest counties in America but at the time it seemed to hold a lot of promise for African Americans.
Speaker 1: I think a lot of them are in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I think--(laughter).
Speaker 1: John Stroger, the Cook County Commissioner is from Helena.
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: And from what I've heard, he's brought most of Helena with him.  I mean, his staff, really--it's like-
Speaker 2: It's interesting.
Speaker 1: --a whole country bringing their people, you know, into the--
Speaker 2: Even now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, cause after, you know, sort of post-World War One [1914-1918] and then post-World War Two [1939-1945], I didn't realize that that migration was still continuing--
Speaker 1: Yeah-
Speaker 2: --in that.
Speaker 1: --another Helena person was telling me the story how, if you're in Helena, your parents tell you, study hard, the schools--one day you can go to Chicago and work for John Stroger (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's funny, that's great.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: It's Helena, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 91311
Speaker 1: Okay, what about on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father's [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] side of the family is from Kentucky and, as I say, I know, I know less about them but they were from Horse Cave, Kentucky, and I just haven't done as much research.  There's a family reunion coming up and I'm always learning stories from them, but my father's parents [Samuel Henry Bundles, Sr. and Ellis Davis Bundles] moved from Kentucky probably around 1910 or so, sort of pre--pre-World War One [1914-1918] and my father's father worked on the railroad, he was a laborer on the railroad, a very resourceful man.  He and his wife had nine children and the wonderful stories about him that my father tells--my grandfather put all of his children to work and he--most of the men who worked on the railroad in Indianapolis [Indiana] were German and they called my grandfather, Heinie (ph.) because his name was Henry but he was very, very light-skinned.  Not a very well educated man but a very resourceful man.  And he convinced the railroad to let him take the railroad ties, after the railroad ties had become damaged, he convinced the railroad to allow him to take those off and he would cut them up.  They were covered with creosote and then he would sell them as kindling.  He also was a root doctor and he would--he had all kinds of potions and apparently there was some portion he had that a lot of the white men who worked for the railroad, who had venereal disease, would come by the house for whatever this cure was.  So he managed to take care of his children and his family.  He never learned to drive but he always owned a truck so that he could have people--somebody drive to haul his--the produce and whatever other kinds of goods he had managed to collect and was reselling or--or making.
Speaker 1: Hum, okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was--when I was growing up, it's very interesting, my mother's [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] from this, you know, very well-known, very prosperous family with the great legacy and Madam [C.J.] Walker's a millionaire and my father is from a very humble family.  The house that I remember visiting, my grandparent's house when I was a little girl, was a two-bedroom house that didn't have indoor plumbing and had a potbelly stove-- This is in--
Speaker 1: --in Indianapolis, on the South Side of Indianapolis.  They called this part of town, "Love Town".  Almost everybody who lived in this area was--had migrated from Kentucky.  And when I would visit my grandparents on Sundays, we would go outside in the back and pump.  My grandmother would pump the well for water and I remember one weekend, my parents must have gone out of town and I spent the weekend at my grandparent's house and I took a bath in a number two tin tub.  There was an outhouse.  I remember that wasn't a particularly pleasant experience but it's interesting to me that even, you know, in the mid-late 1950s, that I was still able to have that experience and I actually considered that one of the rich experiences of my life, that I was able to feel what had gone on in a previous generation and also feel very fortunate that my parents came from very different backgrounds because it helps me have a balance.
Story_ID: 91312
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Can you tell us then about your mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles]?  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles, A'Lelia, "A" apostrophe capital L-E-L-I-A, Mae, M-A-E, Perry, P-E-R-R-Y, Bundles.
Speaker 1: And when was she born or where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born July 22nd, 1928 and she was born in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Okay.  Now, why Pine Bluff?  I mean, well, not that--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --you can't be born there, but that seeing that the family is--
Speaker 1: Well my grandfather [Marion Rowland Perry, Jr.]--my grandfather's family was from Arkansas.  His grandfather had settled in Helena [Arkansas] but his parents moved to Pine Bluff.  His father became principal of Merrill School which was the black high school in Pine Bluff and he also owned a number of businesses, including a dry goods store and a funeral home.  So, my grandfather and his brother grew up in Pine Bluff, Arkansas and when it was time for them to go to college, they went off to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] and then after they finished school, at various time-- Lincoln, Missouri or--
Speaker 2: No, Lincoln, in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Pennsylvania, okay.
Speaker 2: Lincoln in Pennsylvania.  So when--when they finished school, my grandfather went to law school and his brother went to embalming school and at various times my grandfather lived in Indianapolis [Indiana] because he was working with the Walker Company, or in New York, but would always periodically go back to Pine Bluff.  And when it was time for my mother to be born, he and my grandmother [Mae Walker Perry] were living in Pine Bluff because that was where his family business was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what--what was your mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was great.  A really wonderful spirit.  She was very, very smart.  She majored in Chemistry and German at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] so she got the science gene that I don't think that I have.  She was also a lot of fun with a great sense of humor.  She was one of those people who could relate to everybody.  There were, you know, whether you were a Head of State, she could relate to you and whether you were the person on the street, she could relate to you.  My mother just had a really great manner.  Someone was telling me the other day that she said, oh, you know, I remember your mother's hand.  She had the most elegant hands and she--when she talked, the way that she used her hands.  So, you know, she was--she was great.  I mean, I could, on the one hand I could get all kinds of great advice about etiquette from my mother who knew where every fork was supposed to be and on the other hand, I could sit and listen to a Richard Pryor album with her and laugh out loud.  So she--she really was a--was a great person, very, very smart.
Story_ID: 91313
Speaker 1: Okay.  She [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] came out of a background that's fairly privileged in terms of money and opportunity and she went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: She went to Howard, right.
Speaker 1: Was she originally from Pine--
Speaker 2: From Pine--well she was raised in Pine Bluff but when she was sort of junior high, early high school age, her parents [Marion Rowland Perry, Jr. and Mae Walker Perry] had divorced and she--and her mother wanted her to have a little bit more, I guess to probably get away from her dad a little bit (laughter), wanted her to go to Finishing School and so she went to Palmer Memorial Institute in Sedalia, North Carolina and that was, you know, that was a great experience for her.  And from Palmer, she went to--she went to Howard and she graduated from Howard in 1949.  But, you know, she absolutely was from a very privileged background, though, she had been born right before the Depression [1930s] and so it wasn't as if they were swimming in money but they certainly had more than than most people.  And I remember years ago I was visiting Washington [D.C.] and I was in a taxicab, and on my way to the airport, and I had a taxi driver, and we started chatting and somehow Howard came up and he said, "Oh, I went to Howard" and I said, "Oh, my mother went to Howard."  And he said, "What was her name?"  And I said "A'Lelia Perry."  And he said, "Oh, we used to see her walking across the campus in that fur coat.  She had a fur coat and we would just go, 'money, money, money'", which made me laugh.  And, you know, and from my mother's standpoint, I think that there was a double-edged sword there.  You know, people made certain assumptions about who she was because of who her family was and maybe part of the reason that she related so well to a variety of people, that she didn't really want to be cast into a box, she really did want to feel that she could be friendly with everybody and that, you know, she certainly wasn't a snob but people might have assumed that about her but I think probably she bent over backwards not to be that way. Okay, now, what was the Palmer Institute?
Speaker 1: Oh, Palmer Memorial Institute, a wonderful place founded by Charlotte Hawkins Brown who had grown up in Cambridge, Massachusetts and had become friendly with the woman who was the founder of Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] and somehow persuaded the founder of Wellesley College to support her in establishing a school, a boarding school for black children, in Sedalia, North Carolina.  And in the '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], it really was a school where a lot of the black elite sent their children. And, you know, subsequently I met a lot of people who were at Palmer with my mother.  In fact yesterday, in the mail, I got a letter from a woman I had met a year ago in Cleveland and she--during the "Q" and "A" period after my speech, she said, "I went to Palmer with your mother" and went--in the letter that I received yesterday, she sent me a little calling card with my mother's name, "A'Lelia Perry" and on the back, it must have been something that they had exchanged at graduation because my mother said, "To so and so, you're really a lovely person and please write me over the summer."  But it was very nice to get that.  And that network of people still exists.  Nat King Cole's wife went to Palmer and I remember when my mother was on a visit to Los Angeles, Nat King Cole's wife had a TV show at that point and my mother was a guest on that show.  So I think that--that little network of people are still there.  They're aging now because Palmer closed, I would say, probably in the early '70s [1970s] or so but, you know, though they all know each other, the ones who went to Palmer.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 91314
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, tell us about your father [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.].  What was his full name and what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Samuel Henry Bundles. S-A-M-U-E-L, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Bundles, and he really goes by "S" Henry Bundles and he's a Junior, so "S" Henry Bundles Junior.  He doesn't use the Samuel.  My dad is one of nine children.  He was the seventh of nine children.  A really handsome man in his younger years.  Kind of looked like Billy Eckstine.  Had those light eyes and that wavy hair and really a smart person.  His parents [Samuel Henry Bundles, Sr. and Ellis Davis], as I say, were--his parents were not well-educated people but they were really hardworking people who wanted the best for their children.  And their eldest daughter managed to go to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] in probably mid to late '30's [1930s] which was really quite unusual and especially unusual for a family that did not have a great means.  And so there was at least a spark in that family of education being important.  And my father, as the seventh of nine children, with, you know, one baby after another, was sent off to school when he was just four years old.  I think there was a new baby and his mother needed to get him out of the house, so the story goes.  And he started kindergarten at a very early age and was--and was to everyone's assessment, a really bright child.  And so he moved along really quickly.  People liked him because he was cute and because he was smart and when he got to high school, he was getting to be a little bit mischievous and one of his teachers, a woman named Ms. Stout, noticed that he had quite a bit of talent but she noticed that he was getting into trouble.  And the story is that he was taking paperclips and flicking them at the lightbulbs and breaking the lightbulbs and she said she pulled him aside and she said, you know, boy, I'm not going to let you mess up your life and she really took him under her wing and he credits her with, you know, really saving him when he could have been a little boy getting into trouble.  Now I think that story may be exaggerated a little bit because he was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] so he was kind of, you know, heading along on the right--on the right path but this woman, Ms. Stout, is actually Frances Stout, is still living, she's in her late nineties and she says to this day that he was her best and her favorite student.  So, from high school in Indianapolis [Indiana] at Crispus Attucks [High School], he went to Indiana University, he was only 15 years old and he said he had joined ROTC because he didn't really have any money for a suit and that was one way to get a suit.  And he started at IU and then he ended up going to Hawaii during World War Two [1939-1945], came back to Indiana University and graduated from there, in the late '40's [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, he was a businessman.  He majored in Journalism which was something I discovered much later after I had started working for the newspaper in junior high school, but at that time, in the late '40's, [1940s] when he graduated from Indiana University with a degree in journalism, of course, there was a lot of racism and a lot of discrimination and when he came back home from Bloomington to Indianapolis and tried to get a job, the Indianapolis newspaper would--hired him as a circulation manager, which meant he oversaw some of the paperboys but they wouldn't hire him as a photographer or as a reporter.  And he subsequently went to work for The Walker Company.  After he and my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] married, he became--he was very, very good in sales but he also had worked for the "Pittsburgh Courier" and did a little stringing for "Jet" [Magazine] and after I had become interested in journalism, I discovered this--his interest in journalism so it was as if things had come full circle.
Story_ID: 91315
Speaker 1: Okay, can you reflect back on growing up and now, first of all, where did you grow up?  You grew up in Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Right, I was born in Chicago [Illinois] in 1952.  We lived in Chicago at 51st and Drexel, in an apartment for about a year and a half and then we moved to Atlantic City.  My father [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] had gone to work for the Apex Corporation which was another one of the black hair care companies.  At that point, my mother's [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] family was in the process of suing The Walker Company, and we can talk about that story later, but, my father went to work for Apex in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  We stayed there for about a year and a half and then once the lawsuit was settled, we moved back to Indianapolis in 1955, early 1955, and my parents both went back--went to work for The Walker Company, again.
Speaker 1: So, you were three?
Speaker 2: I was three and my mother was pregnant with my brother, Lance [Bundles], who was born in October of that year.  So I grew up in Indianapolis.  We lived in a house at 3841 Rookwood for about three years, until I finished kindergarten.  And then we moved--we built a house in 1958 at 6222 Grandview Drive and that's the house that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, if you could reflect back on growing up.  Give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, my neighborhood that I grew up in and then memories of my--of visiting my mother at work--the neighborhood that I grew up in on Grandview Drive was really pretty idyllic in a way.  It was a black suburb.  Across the street from us was a doctor, Dr. Thomas, and they had moved into a big farmhouse with columns on the front.  That was directly across from us and they had about ten acres behind their house.  And then next door to them was the Greers, Mr. and Mrs. Greer.  Mrs. Greer had been the art teacher at Crispus Attucks [High School] and Mr. Greer was from Texas and he had had a liquor store and had invested in some real estate and had parlayed that into buying about twenty acres and they had subdivided those acres into half acre lots and sold them to black professionals and school teachers in Indianapolis and so this was--we were surrounded by the coaches and the teachers from Crispus Attucks and the doctors and the dentists and the business people and then, that was Grandview Drive on one side, then on our side of Grandview Drive, there was a white man named Mr. Malter (ph.) who had bought this property and he subdivided it and sold it to black professionals and then sort of surrounding us was a more working class white neighborhood.  Well, of course, as we began to move in, they began to move out.  But it was--it was really--it was the kind of neighborhood where--there was a creek nearby and you could go catch minnows, you could leave your bicycle out, you could leave your door open and everybody sort of knew each other in that neighborhood.  And in--the connections with The Walker Company were really quite incredible because next door to us, to the left, was the DeFrantz family and their--the father of Mr. DeFrantz had been the secretary of the black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Indianapolis and he had been on the board of The Walker Company at one point.  Next door to the DeFranz' was the Ransom family.  The Ransom's father had been--the grandfather had been Madam Walker's attorney.  Two doors down from the Ransom's was the Ray family.  Mrs. Ray's father, Mr. [Robert L.] Brokenburr had been one of Madam Walker's attorneys as well and was the first black State Senator in Indiana.  So we really were surrounded by a great deal of history.  Now, you know, as kids, we weren't really focusing on that but as I reflect back upon that now, there was just--there were amazing people around us.  There was amazing history.  You know, and today, while we're--there's this argument of affirmative--about affirmative action, I just--it just--I just have to laugh at that because our standards were so high.  Our standards were always so high.  It wasn't about lowering standards and I think people whose agenda is to end affirmative action think that it's about lowering standards.  But I was always surrounded by people who really believed in excellence.  So that's--so that was the neighborhood that I grew up in and our school was walking distance even though we rode the bike.  Now the other thing I think that's probably key about this experience is that we were the only black people who, you know--our neighborhood was black.  It wasn't like people who moved to Westchester County [New York] and they were the only black family on the block.  We were surrounded by other black families and we were surrounded by a supportive community.  But once you went outside of that neighborhood, everybody was white.
Story_ID: 91316
Speaker 1: The schools that we went to were almost all white.  When I started first grade at Grandview Elementary School, the first year that that school opened, there were four black children in first grade.  There were probably about a dozen black children in the entire school.  And as I went through the school system, the Washington Township School system, we were always in the distinct minority.  When I was in high school, at North Central High School, there were somewhere around thirty-two to thirty-three hundred students.  Black students were less than five percent of the population.  Of course, that's changed today but at that point it was really quite obvious that we were in--in the minority.  It was one of the best public school systems in Indiana and so I got a very good education and my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] was very involved in my education.  She was President of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at Grandview, before I finished.  Then she was later elected to the School Board.  So, you know, no one was really going to mess with me because my mother was watching over what was going on and that was not true for all of the--all of the black students.  And, you know, and I was very fortunate to have well-educated, very accomplished parents who made education very important.  And so I always did very well in school and I was always involved in Student Council and working for the newspaper and, you know, other kinds of activities like that.  But it was, you know, it was a very, it was a really idyllic childhood.  I don't, you know, I don't know that--I know the neighborhood's not like that anymore.
Story_ID: 91317
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were little?  What kind of little girl were you?
Speaker 2: I liked to read.  I was definitely a reader and every summer I was always, you know, I was one of the people who got the prizes from the library.  From the school library you would go read a certain number of books and I loved to do that.  I liked to dance.  I, you now, the twist was a dance that was very popular when I was a little girl, maybe six or seven years old and I very quickly learned how to do the twist and then whatever dance came along, I was always learning the next new dance.  I really did enjoy that.  I liked to ride my bicycle.  You know, I think the typical--typical little girl things but I was a little bit of a bookworm mixed in with all of the other--with all of the other stuff.  I really did love school.  I really enjoyed the, you know, the sort of strokes that you get when you're a good--when you're a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the books I remember that I liked a lot was called, "A Wrinkle In Time", by Madeleine L'Engle.  That's kind of a classic. You know, I'm not remembering that many books from my childhood but I'll tell you a couple that--that were important, that sort of were pivotal for me.  One summer I was visiting my great-aunt, Alene (ph.) in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  My mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] would send me to visit her so that I would have the experience and sort of feel some of the magic of the childhood home that my mother had grown up in and, of course, in Pine Bluff, at that point, in the late '50's [1950s] and early '60's [1960s], everything was still segregated.  The movie theatres were segregated, the parks, the swimming pools, the libraries were segregated and my great-aunt always made sure that I knew lots of kids, that I met lots of kids and she made sure that I had a library card.  And I went to the library and the librarian there showed me a book called, "Black April" and it was really the first book I had ever read with a black girl as a character.  And I was probably, maybe eight years old, something like that, and you think that's--that's incredible because now you walk into a book store and there's everything from books for infants all the way up with black characters and with black images.  But that was really wonderful for me to find that.
Story_ID: 89173
Speaker 1: The library in my elementary school, I worked in the library, I was a helper in the library, so I learned the Dewey Decimal system very early on and I--I was very attracted to a series on biography.  And I must--I read about people like Knute Rockne, you know, I mean just--Elizabeth Blackwell--just--I just really was interested in people's lives and it didn't--I wasn't thinking about looking for any role models of color because there were no black people who were in that series except, I think, maybe Booker T. Washington or the peanut man from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, George Washington-
Speaker 1: George Washington Carver, you know, 'cause those were like the acceptable black people who could--who could have biographies and they were probably, they were really the token black people in that series.  And as I thought about that as time went on and as I began to really do the research for my book on Madam [C.J.] Walker, I did a young adult book that came out in 1991, long before I did the more comprehensive book in 2001, that--there, it's really--it was really sad that there were no stories that reflected who we were.  We couldn't pick up a book in that library and see our own image.  And so when I finally did read that book in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, in the segregated library, about Black April, I'm sure that had a really profound effect upon me, that there are books that black people are included in.
Speaker 2: Was the book about a little girl?
Speaker 1: I think it was about a little girl.  I don't even remember what the book was about but there was a little black girl on the cover and I had not seen that before.  Now, I wouldn't say, you know, I didn't grow up bereft of black images by any means.  My mother bought me black dolls when I was asking for white dolls and she was making sure that I had black dolls.  But just in terms of books, there just weren't really that many things being published that had the images of the black children.  I mean, "Little Black Sambo", but "Little Black Sambo" was in our library but I was embarrassed by that book because I--it didn't feel as if it was something positive at the time.  I mean, I can read that book now and sort of see, you know, see the irony of it but it certainly seemed like, well, if that's the only book in the library, then they're not trying to say good things about you.
Story_ID: 89174
Speaker 1: So, you spent a lot of time in the library?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was--I was definitely a reader.  I mean, I really did love reading.  I also loved music.  Now, I can't sing worth a lick.  I can't hold a tune but I always liked music and I became a DJ.  My parents [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr. and A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] loved music, you know, and that makes--this makes me think of another, another memory.  My mother loved Nat King Cole and Dinah Washington.  And some of my favorite memories are being at home like on a snowy weekend day and music is on the stereo and we had Harry Belafonte, live at Carnegie Hall.  We knew every word to that song, including "Hava Nagila" and "Day O" and everything else that was on there but that music was filling the house.  Nancy Wilson albums I knew all the words, the Nancy Wilson songs and the Dinah Washington songs and Nat King Cole.  And then, of course, there were my 45's.  You know, you would be getting up--45's were probably fifty cents at the time.  And Motown was really--just before Motown was happening so The Shirelles.  I remember listening to The Shirelles, really liking their songs.  And in our neighborhood, because it was a really relatively small enclave, I would say, as I think about this, maybe a hundred to a hundred fifty families, it might have been a little bit more than that, but there were--there were essentially, you know, about ten girls in the neighborhood who were close to my age but I was really the youngest.  I was--moved when I was six and then my friend, Judy, was eight and my friend Henri (ph.) was ten and her sister, Minette (ph.), was twelve and then another friend was ten.  And then a few years later, another family with four girls moved into the neighborhood.  So, I kind of followed and tagged along with the older girls.  So I would listen to their music and I would watch them dance with their boyfriends and I would, you know, learn to hand dance with the doorknob while they were practicing and I would, you know, I remember them listening to songs like, "Blue Holiday" and "Smokey Wilson", "Shop Around", and on the other side of "Shop Around" was a slow song, and I can't remember the name of it, but I remember my--my friend, Henri, who was also my babysitter, when she was babysitting, her boyfriend came over, her boyfriend Phil, and I was sittin' on the steps and watching them slow dance to this--to this other side of "Shop Around".  So I grew up loving music and loving to--loving dancing as well.
Story_ID: 89175
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So now where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school at North Central High School, which was a public school in Indiana and a really excellent public school.
Speaker 1: This was an integrated high school?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know, integrated to a degree.  It was somewhere between thirty-three and--thirty-two and thirty-three hundred students and less than five percent of the students were black.  Probably about the same percentage were Jewish but, you know, if--I don't remember anybody who was Hispanic or anybody who was Asian, at the time.  So, Indianapolis at that point was not a particularly diverse community.  I mean, it always had somewhere between fifteen and twenty percent black population but in the suburbs it was--it was much less.  So it was integrated but we were definitely in the minority.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, now thirty-three hundred students, that's a lot of-
Speaker 2: It's a big school.  It was a very big school and it was only three grades.  It was tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade.  It was a very, very big school.  It was a new school, very, you know, all of the labs were state-of-the-art, beautiful auditoriums and sports facilities, so it was really quite a good school--newspaper, there was a radio station, it was, you know, it was a really good education.  Now having said that, there were also bumps along the road.  I was--I had worked--I've been--I'd become very good as a high school newspaper reporter and had done that in junior high school.  I went to summer journalism camps at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and really was, you know, I knew that that's what I loved to do.  I loved to write and I--and I loved working for the school newspaper.  And I became co-editor of the paper my junior or senior year in high school.  I think it must have been my senior year.  And I was elected to Student Council as Vice President my, it must have been the end of my sophomore year, which was the Spring of '68' [1968].  And this is to me--this is one of the pivotal moments for me.  The day I was running against the son of the principal of the school, who obviously was white, and I don't--he had really had not been all that involved in school activities but I--as I reflect upon this, I think that the principal didn't really like me that much 'cause I was very outspoken and I think there was a little bit of jealousy, though as a kid you're not so focused on that.  You don't really know why people are treating you in the way that they're treating you, but his son ran against me and the son lost the election.  And that happened to have been that afternoon, later on that day, was when Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated.  And [Robert] Bobby Kennedy was in Indianapolis campaigning, my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] was working for Kennedy's campaign, and Kennedy made the announcement to people at a rally that King had been killed.  It was a little minor--minor riot in Indianapolis, not big in any way, not like in other cities.  And the next day when I got to school, I heard there were parents who were so upset about me being elected as Vice President of Student Council that they threatened to take their children out of school. So there was that kind of--
Speaker 1: Because of the riot?
Speaker 2: No, because of my election.  I mean, it was like, I guess it was, you know, they were mad about Martin Luther King and I repre--you know, whatever, having a black kid as Vice President of the Student Council, represented some erosion of their power and their control.  I mean, it was really pretty irrational to me but there was-
Speaker 1: Do you think there was sort of anger over-
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --attention paid to the-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --assassination of Martin Luther King?
Speaker 2: No, no, they were angry over--I mean the fact that it happened on the same day as King's assassination probably just crystalized it for them but they didn't like the fact that a black girl had been elected Vice President of the Student Council.  Now that wasn't the majority of people, but there was enough backlash about me being elected to this, you know, Student Council office that it was--it made the year a little painful for me.
Speaker 1: Hum.
Speaker 2: And-
Speaker 1: Did people approach you with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I was--I was told that there was that--that there was that backlash and then that year, with some of my black and white friends, we created something called a "Human Relations Council" because we knew there was a lot of tension and we, you know, tried, in the various sort of naive way that high school kids would do, somebody of that age, we tried to create a dialogue so that people would talk to each other.  But it was, you know, there was a backlash.
Story_ID: 89176
Speaker 1: When you were in school, I mean, your high school career was contemporaneous with the black power movement?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The peak, you know, '65' [1965] was when they-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Stokely Carmichael [now Kwame Toure] started talking about "Black Power".
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] and people, you know, it was--and people would, you know, it was the first time black empowerment using the same sentence in a long time, you know, so-
Speaker 2: Well--that you're absolutely right and that--that moment, that coalesced for me, being elected Vice President of the Student Council in the Spring of '68' [1968] and having this feeling of a backlash against me really radicalized me and so for that next year I was reading everything from "Souls of Black Folk" to "Soul On Ice" and I was becoming more militant.  And then it was the Vietnam War [1962-1973] and I was really becoming aware of politics.  My father [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] and I traveled to New York [New York] in the Fall of '69' [1969] and to Boston [Massachusetts], when I was interviewing for colleges, and it was around the time of the big moratorium parade and I wore an arm band to--a black arm band to school, and I was going to be expelled.  But I was really feeling this sort of discovery of, not just about being black, 'cause I always knew I was black, but a discovery of a more militant strain of blackness.  And I would say "Souls of Black Folk" was a really pivotal book for me and I've re-read it this year in honor of the hundredth anniversary and I realized that at that time it must have been the first really analytical treatment that I had seen of the history of African Americans.  And [W.E.B] Du Bois was so eloquent.  I mean, he remains one of my intellectual heroes and he's, reading that book and becoming aware of him at that time gave me an intellectual foundation for being able to define why black people should be treated properly.  Why we were as smart as anybody else because there wasn't anything else certainly in the curriculum in my school that was breaking things down in that way and that was giving that kind of analysis.
Story_ID: 89177
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you were a senior in high school, what did you--you knew you wanted to be a journalist, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you were trying to choose a school-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --so what was your criteria for choosing a school?
Speaker 2: Well that, you know, that's a very good--that's a really good question.  I knew--when it was time for me to start thinking about colleges, I had taken the SAT and I was a National Merit Scholar so I had gotten a lot of letters that kids who have that get, you know, schools that were encouraging you to come.  I knew I wanted to leave Indiana, because that year as I had become more radical politically and it was clear to me that Indiana was much too conservative for me, there was a high school government teacher in my school, the person who wanted to get me expelled for wearing an arm band and I thought if this is any indication, I don't want to be here, and I also--because we had taken family vacations to California and Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York], I knew that there was a wider world out there.  And so I was interested in going to the East Coast.  New York was my first choice and I was interested in Barnard [College].  My father [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] was interested in me going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  My mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] was sort of interested in me going to Sarah Lawrence [College, Bronxville, New York] and when I finally narrowed things down to four schools, I had Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] as my safety school because I had gone to the summer journalism camp there and they had a journalism curriculum-
Speaker 1: Medill School of Journalism?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  And Barnard, Harvard--Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts, now merged with Harvard University] and Tufts [University] Jackson, which was the women's portion of Tufts, those were my final four choices.  And my father did a very interesting thing.  My father and I went on a trip to visit schools and we went to New York to visit Barnard and the night that we arrived, he took me to the Copa Cabana where we had been on a family vacation once before.  And Gladys Knight and the Pips were playing at the Copa Cabana so this was great.  I was in New York and I'm like, this is why I want to come to New York.  This is what I love about New York.  It's the Copa Cabana, it's Gladys Knight, it's the Village, it's Chinatown, it's, you know, seeing people walking through Times Square, this is so much more exciting than Indianapolis [Indiana], this is where I want to be.  So we had a great evening.  And then the next morning, we got up and he took me to breakfast at a place called "Horn and Hardarts".  It was an automat.  There are no automats any more, but an automat was a place where you put a quarter or fifty cents into a machine and the machine turned around and you would get a sandwich out of the machine or you get a drink-
Speaker 1: You can see your sandwiches through glass-
Speaker 2: Right, you could see the sandwiches through glass, so, and it was very, very basic.  And what my father--and my father said to me after, 'cause of course we could have afforded to go to someplace else, and he said, "you know, when you're in New York you're not on vacation and you don't have a lot of money as a student so you really ought to think about that" and I'm like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm going to New York, Daddy, I'm coming to New York."  So we went to the interview at Barnard and, you know, it was fine but the dorms were a little funky and, you know, I was thinking, well, I don't know about this but I'm still thinking, I want to be in New York.  And then the next day we went to Boston [Massachusetts] and I interviewed at BU [Boston University] because, you know, you needed a safety school and then we went to Cambridge [Massachusetts], to Harvard, where my father wanted me to go and it was an absolutely perfect day, it was October, who knew that Cambridge is usually cold in October 'cause the sun was shining, there were people on the grass, along the Charles River, there were sailboats going by, we walked through the square, it was just very wonderful, it was interesting.  I had a great interview.  My father said, Harvard, and I'm still thinking New York, New York, New York.  So the months passed by and I get the acceptances from every place and I'm really sitting on the fence.  But then somehow, whether subconsciously or consciously, my father's words kept coming back to me that, you know, maybe New York wasn't the right place for me to be at 18 years old.  And so I made the decision to go to Harvard.  And then ultimately I went to graduate school in New York so I had my cake and ate it too but it was really much better, I think, to be eighteen in Cambridge rather than in New York.  Cambridge was much more hospitable.  Boston is a great place 'cause there's so many college students.
Story_ID: 89178
Speaker 1: Okay. Well how did you find Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I mean, was it what you expected or-
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I-I-I think I had always, you know, there was--I had enough romantic--romanticized images of being a smart girl and, you know, being able to study and being in the garret and, you know, up in some Victorian house and reading and studying and making good grades.  I mean, there really was that part of me and the other side of the girl who really loved to dance and, you know, and go to parties.  So, I fancied myself as, you know, as being that sort of, maybe little avant-garde.  I mean, these are, you know I have to laugh at myself as I say this now.  And I, you know, what was really wonderful for me in that environment is that it was the first time that I had been around--that all the black people I was around were good students because I was usually, you know, one of a few kids who were in the accelerated classes and that sometimes created some jealousy among other kids which, you know, you tried to ignore but it was still there.  But at Harvard, all of us were good students and that way, so you weren't judged on that, you weren't separated as a result of that.  And I was there.  The Class of '74' [1974] was the largest class of women at Radcliffe [College, now merged with Harvard University], of black women at Radcliffe, ever in the history of the school.  In 1968, after [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s assassination, there was a big recruitment effort to increase the number of minority students.  And so the Class of--the people who entered in '69' [1969] were the Class of '73' [1973] so they were then the largest class but then my class was sort of the next class recruited and admitted.  And we really created a community.  We--I think many of us had gone to predominantly white schools and we were really glad to see each other.  In some ways we isolated ourselves, but I think we were being isolated by the larger community and we found a great deal of sustenance.  It was a hard adjustment for me.  My best girlfriends had gone to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and they were having a much better social life than I was.  Their parties sounded much better.  There were a lot more black folks around them.  The community was--seemed more hospitable.  And my freshman year was a little bit of an adjustment.  I think that probably, freshman year is probably hard for most kids who are away from home who are used to being on top and who have to readjust.  But once I went to work for the radio station--I went to work for the college radio station at Harvard, I found my niche and I became a DJ.  I had a jazz show and really enjoyed being a DJ.  It was an early morning show.  I think I--it was like six to eight in the morning or seven to nine in the morning but I relished getting up to do that and planning, doing my playlist every week.  And then during, what we had called, "reading period", the three weeks when you studied after Christmas and before you took exams, we had what was called an "orgy period" where the radio station was on 24 hours a day and I did a reggae show and I would do an R and B show and I did a special show, the King and the Queen, Nat King Cole and Dinah Washington and, you know, played my mother's [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] favorite music.  But that was really--once I found--once I went to work for the radio station and found my niche, I was much happier and I could, you know, go to the jazz clubs in Boston [Massachusetts], and get in for free, or you know meet the musicians and invite them to my radio show and interview them.  So, that was--that was a real--that was very, very important for me.  I learned how to operate the boards.  I mean, radio was so primitive at that point.  It wasn't like now when it's digital.  And as a result of that, that began a network for me where I met other people who were interested in broadcasting.  I didn't want to work for the newspaper.  I didn't want to work for "The Crimson" even though that would have been the logical thing for me but "The Crimson" was very competitive and not particularly welcoming to African Americans.  And there were a few people who worked for the paper but it just sounded to me like it was a full-time job, there were some shenanigans going on, I didn't really want my extracurricular activity to be a hassle. I wanted to do--I was studying hard enough.  I wanted to do something that was fun and the radio station was fun.  Well, my senior year I became director of the Jazz Department and there were a couple of guys I knew who were in law school.  Channing Johnson and Don Mizell, who are both attorneys now, obviously, they were in law school.  And they had worked on their radio stations in their perspective--respective colleges, and they wanted a show.  And so as the director of the station I was able to, like, give these two guys an occasional slot where they could, where they could play their music.  They, in turn, introduced me to Topper Carew who had a TV show at WGBH, the Public Broadcasting station in Boston, called "Say Brother".  And Topper had come from Washington, D.C., he had started a lot of drama workshops.  He subsequently became a Hollywood producer and did the movie, "Car Wash", and did a number of television shows.  But at that point, Topper let me be an intern, let me hang out at WGBH, at "Say Brother", and that gave me my first taste of television.  So that kind of, you know, started the spark.
Story_ID: 89179
Speaker 1: Okay.  WGBH was like a pioneer public television station?
Speaker 2: That's right, and you know, really high quality.
Speaker 1: Hum-hum, right, right.  So did you--well, how did you get involved in television--I mean, what did you do in television (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when I graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Radcliffe [College, now merged with Harvard University], I went back home to Indianapolis [Indiana] for the summer and I worked at WTLC, a radio station--FM station that was owned by a family friend, Dr. Frank Lloyd.  And Frank Lloyd had been a pioneer in a lot of things in Indianapolis, as the first black director of the Indianapolis 500, owner of a radio station, one of the founders of the black banks.  He ran the hospital--Methodist Hospital.  He was an OB-GYN who made a lot of money and invested that money in a lot of really important ways.  And I went to work as a--as a newscaster at the station, and I think I was making, I don't know, $100 a week--$150 a week, not much more than that, but I was just really happy to have a job doing radio and doing radio news.  And I--I mean it was the same summer that [President Richard M.] Nixon was impeached [1974] so I remember being on the radio while Nixon was going to the helicopter.  Now, mind you, I was just in the radio station.  I was reading the wire copy but it was, you know, just a real high for me to, at that point in my life, doing a radio show.  Now, I had gotten a job at--The DuPont Company in Wilmington [Delaware] so, after spending the summer in Indianapolis, I started work the day after Labor Day of 1970 [sic, 1974] in Wilmington at The DuPont Company as a staff assistant.  Very low level person in the public affairs department.  And that was a period of time when corporations were first starting to diversify.  They hired four new young people for the department.  Two young white people and two young black people and I think all of us left after about five years.  So some of it might have been, you know, Wilmington is not all that hospitable to black folks but some of it was just young people in Wilmington.  But I spent a year, exactly a year, at DuPont, and I did an in-house television program.  I helped create their in-house television program and I wrote news releases and, you know, those kinds of things that very, very junior people in public affairs do.  And then I went to Columbia [University, New York, New York], to "J" school, to journalism school.  And I had actually been accepted at Columbia the year before.  I initially had been waitlisted and then had taken this job at DuPont and I thought well that's fine, I'll work for a year, I'll save some money so I won't be entirely poor in New York.  And then I started graduate school at Columbia in September of '75 [1975], I guess.
Story_ID: 89180
Speaker 1: I want to back up a little bit-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --maybe go back to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a minute-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but, who were some of the faculty-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --people at Harvard that influenced you?  I know that they had a black studies department at the time where African American studies--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear) was in charge at that time.  Martin Kilson was there-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I don't know who all else but-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Derek Bell was at Harvard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Derek Bell was there.
Speaker 1: I don't know how many of these you ran into?
Speaker 2: All of them.  I mean, you did--you know you absolutely--
Speaker 1: Allen Counter.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: David Evans.
Speaker 2: David Evans, oh yeah, absolutely.  In fact I was just--I was in Cambridge last Thursday because my godson graduated from undergraduate school.
Speaker 1: Archie Epps.
Speaker 2: Archie Epps, yeah, you know all of those folks.  And Orlando Patterson and Pierre-Michel Fontaine, Eileen Southern was there.  The people--and Geneva Smitherman.
Speaker 1: I didn't know she was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a linguist.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly.  Who influenced me?  Well you know in some ways Derek Bell's wife, whose first name I'm not remembering and Doris, whose name I'm not remembering who was in the admissions office at Radcliffe [College, now merged with Harvard University], were probably more of a personal influence.  I mean, I think that Martin Kilson had a much bigger impact on the boys than on the young women.  And it was interesting.  I took his course and--the Political Science course, and he--he had all of us write about politics in our home town.  So I went--I went back home [Indianapolis, Indiana], I guess over Christmas break, and I interviewed a lot of the older black politicians and, you know, wrote my paper for him.  And that was a very smart thing for him because he was looking at black agency and power in cities all over the country.  But he really was much more of a mentor to the young men and I hear them even now talk about their conversations with him.  But, you know, he was a little--he was a little bit problematic for the girls.  And you know later he had this sexual harassment suit and there were some of my, you know, some of my friends who were a little bit traumatized by him.  I was kind of really confident and so I didn't experience that.  But I know he was a little hard for some of the girls.  But Martin Kilson is a brilliant man.  And when, a couple of years ago, when Skip Gates had this big wonderful anniversary for the Du Bois Institute, I went back for that and it was just a great celebration of, you know, all the black folks who had come through there and what Skip had been able to accomplish.  And we were at the dinner at a big hotel in downtown Boston [Massachusetts], and I see Martin Kilson across the lobby.  You know, Kilson is very much that sort of disheveled professor.  And he had on a coat that, you know, he probably--it looks like he had been wearing that coat when I was there thirty-seven years before, and the coat was kind of, you know, a little slick.  It was, I think, it was sort of half buttoned funny and his hair was a little wild and he was holding forth and he says, "A'Lelia Bundles, how are you?"  And I'm thinking, he--how does he remember me?  "You were smart. I remember you", you know, and I'm--and then he starts talking about something that happened at that point and I'm thinking, are there any brain cells left there?  He's really a brilliant, a really brilliant guy and a complicated person but clearly somebody who made a real difference for a lot of the guys who were in my class who were really quite influenced.  Now the people who were--who I dealt with more closely, Orlando Patterson was my thesis advisor.  I wrote a thesis for my--for senior year and Pierre-Michel Fontaine who was Haitian, were my advisors.  And Orlando was Jamaican and had worked for the [Michael] Manley Administration and I wrote my senior thesis on the Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation and I had--
Story_ID: 90037
Speaker 1: --[Orlando] Patterson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  He's important so-
Speaker 2: Right, well Orlando--I ended up asking Orlando to be my thesis advisor because I wrote my senior thesis [at Harvard University] on the Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation and he really opened up a lot of doors to have people in the government and with Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation talk to me about my topic.  And so I got a grant from the Kennedy Institute to spend several weeks of the summer in Jamaica.  And, you know, it was a great adventure.  I stayed with some friends there and I interviewed people and I really felt like I was, you know, doing something that was meaningful and I--and my thesis, which was a very naive thesis, but that's why you write these papers so you can challenge your naive theses, was that--it was called "Jamaica--The JBC: Broadcasting and National Development" because at that point people were very optimistic about Jamaica, the economy was relatively good and bauxite was still a very marketable product and that was bringing some income in.  [Michael] Manley was very progressive, politically, and Orlando was a part of that administration.  So I was looking at broadcasting as a way to disseminate national values and values that would help development and a way to educate people.  Well, what I discovered after doing my research on this communications theory and then collecting my data on the reality of Jamaica Broadcasting Corporation, was that the cost of production of programming was so expensive that there wasn't--there weren't the resources that JBC needed to create its own programing, so most of its programming ended up being American programming and British programming.  So it wasn't indigenous programming that would infuse the values of--that would help a developing country.  It was, in fact, this infusion of American and British culture that-
Speaker 1: Or probably British intellectual shows and American comedies.
Speaker 2: Yes, American comedies.  But you know what was the hottest show, was "Dark Shadows," because it sort of spoke to, you know, part of the tradition in Jamaica of obeah that was--that still was important to a number of people.  There were, you know, there were a couple of locally produced programs that were--that were really quite good with local culture and, you know, local literature, but, and then there was an evening broadcast but it was still--it was not, you know, it really challenged my--it challenged my young twenty-one year old mind but it was good for that.  And I go back and I read that and I think, you know, this wasn't bad.  Did I write that?  But I think what that sort of speaks to for me is that everybody has a gift.
Story_ID: 90038
Speaker 1: Some people can sing, I'm not one of those people.  And some people can write.  And I think that I really have a gift.  And I'm not saying that I'm the greatest writer on the planet, but I do have a gift to tell stories and to convey information in an interesting way.  And I discovered that love for writing, as a really young kid, I would write stories, you know, mostly school assignments.  Some people say they wrote a book when they were eight years old.  I didn't do that, but I wrote a short story in third grade and it was about someone going to the moon.  And one of my mother's [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] friends, who was a schoolteacher, was getting her Master's Degree and so she was doing IQ tests for all the kids in the neighborhood and she read my story and she submitted that story to a magazine called, "Up The Hill" that was published by Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.], the mother's and children's organization.  So when I was eight years old, I had a story published in "Up The Hill."  So I had a byline at eight years old.  Now it was a long time before I had another byline, but I went to--because I was excited about writing--in sixth grade I remember writing a couple of stories.  We were supposed to look at a picture and I had a sunset--a postcard of a sunset that my father had sent me from a trip, a business trip he made to Jamaica.  And then I had another image in my mind about basketball--a high school basketball tournament in Indiana, which are really, really a big deal and which we went to every year.  And I wrote these two stories.  One about walking on the beach and seeing the sunset and another about Hoosier hysteria and basketball.  And my-I just my adrenaline got going when I would write these stories and I knew that I could create emotions and I could get other people interested in them.  So that love and excitement of writing led to me working for the school newspaper in junior high school and then working for the paper in high school and then having a career in journalism.  But it was that, you know, that gift.  And when I look back at my senior paper, I'm like, you were a pretty good writer for a, you know, for a 21 year old kid.  But I know that it's not just that I was a good writer it's--that's the gift that I've been given.
Story_ID: 90039
Speaker 1: Okay, alright now what did you do next after you came back from Jamaica and-
Speaker 2: Well that was--that particular Summer, the Summer of '73' [1973], I spent part of the Summer in Jamaica doing research for my senior thesis and in the other half of the Summer, the first half of the Summer, I was an intern at "Newsweek Magazine" in Chicago [Illinois] and that was great fun.  I was, you know, I lived up on--near the Treasure Island in--off of, I don't know if it was Grant Street, but anyways sort of upper--the North Side--on the North Side.  And I had a little apartment.  It was the first time I lived away from home that I wasn't in the dorm and it had a waterbed and, you know, that was--that was great.  It was this little sublet that I had.  And I didn't really do major reporting.  I worked on a couple of stories but it was also the Summer of the Watergate Hearings and Katharine Graham, whose company owns "Newsweek", happened to be in Chicago and came through the office one day.  So I got to meet Katharine Graham and I remember her in the Bureau Chief's office and she was on the couch with her feet up on the couch watching the Watergate Hearings.  So that was exciting.  And I really did, you know, from that job and from writing the thesis, I really did see myself as a writer.  In my mind, at that young age, I was a journalist.  I was already a journalist.
Speaker 1: Did you--did you get a chance to meet any of the black journalists?
Speaker 2: Yes, and gosh this is horrible, I'm spacing his name, in Chicago, who was a columnist, who's just always so nice to me--Vernon Jarrett.  Vernon Jarrett was somebody who I remember from, you know, from a very early age and he says, "Oh, I remember you that summer that you were in Chicago."  And, you know, my parents knew the Johnsons.  It wasn't like I went over to visit John Johnson and his family, but I knew who they were.  Who else?   Who else would I have met?  You know at that point I was a little bit-
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago at that time, Lou Palmer was fairly known.
Speaker 2: Right, I didn't meet--I didn't meet Lou.  I didn't meet him but there were a few people at "Jet" [Magazine] and "Ebony" [Magazine] who were family friends.  And one particular person, Basil Phillips, who's a long-time librarian there, he and my uncle were very good friends and there was another lady who had done a cookbook and who worked at "Ebony" who was another family friend.
Speaker 1: "Black World" was out-
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and there was two with Hoyt Fuller-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Cheryl Parks, did you get a chance to talk to her?
Speaker 2: I didn't meet them.  I didn't meet them but you know I still have some copies of "Black World".  When I--because I loved reading so much and in this process in high school of really becoming fascinated with black history, I would go to, you know, whatever little, you know, newsstand that had popped up or black cultural center or whatever and whatever was for sale I would buy.  So, if it was "Black World", if it was "Encore Magazine", which Ida Lewis published for a while.  If it was a black teen magazine.  I mean, I have all of these--I've saved them, these books that might have only had--magazines that might have only had one or two issues.  But I was just hungry for these images and for these stories about us.  But, you know, definitely, "Black World" or "Negro Digest", as it was before it was "Black World" was something that fascinated me.
Speaker 1: Did you read "Black Scholar"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: "Black Bulletin"?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the "Bulletin" but I definitely have some old issues of "Black Scholar".
Speaker 1: Okay, I know when you mentioned "Newsweek", I thought about Sam Yeti who was at-
Speaker 2: Right, he was here, right?
Speaker 1: No, he actually was--he went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I mean, yeah, yeah, here is Howard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, right, that's all right.  You forget which city am I in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And there was a brother who worked in the bureau with me.  So there were a few, you know, there were a few young black reporters but it's really the older heads who we're talking about which ones but Vernon Jarrett I would say is really the one who I met when I was in Chicago.
Story_ID: 90040
Speaker 1: You know, and then later, and I'm jumping ahead so you can tell me if you want me to do this, when I was at Columbia [University, New York, New York], Phyllis Garland who had worked for "Ebony" and whose mother had been an editor of the "Pittsburgh Courier" was someone who was very pivotal in my life.  My--the year that I spent at Columbia [1974-1975], we all had to write a paper, a Master's paper, and Phyl was my advisor.  And I can't remember whether I choose Phyllis as my advisor or whether she just happened to be my advisor but we had our meeting to talk about the topic.  And I was offering her a number of topics and they were sort of very typical New York topics like the Fulton Fish Market or I don't know, something--but it was all very sort of cliched New York topics.  And Phyl listened to my pitch and then she said, "Your name is 'A'Lelia?'"  "Do you have any connection to Madam [C.J.] Walker or A'Lelia Walker?"  And I said, yes, it's my great-great-grandmother, 'cause I wasn't going around broadcasting to people that's who I was, but with the name like A'Lelia, somebody knew a little bit of black history, they can sort of put two and two together.  But I really--you know I really wanted to be my own person.  I didn't want to be Madam Walker's great-great-granddaughter and that was, you know, the only, you know thing that I could do or could be.  And so Phyl said, "Well, that's interesting."  She said, "Now, do you know much about them?"  And I said, "Well I know some things and my mother was Vice President of The Walker Company and I have some, you know, papers and some photographs and that kind of thing."  And she said, "Well, that's what you're going to write your paper about."  Well, that was perfect for me.  If I had anybody else on that faculty, they wouldn't have known who in the world A'Lelia Walker was.  They would have just thought this little colored girl has this weird name with an apostrophe in it, you know, they don't know how to spell.  So, Phyl really validated that for me at a time when there really weren't a whole lot of people validating stories about African Americans.  Now this was the mid '70's [1970s] and we had just come through almost a decade of black power and black conscientiousness and an increased interest in our stories but the publishing world wasn't embracing those stories at that point.  It was still another year before "Roots" would be published.  There weren't lots of black people who were getting published even after Alex Haley wrote "Roots" and Phyl really set me on a course of doing research about my great-great-grandmother and my great-grandmother.  So I will always be grateful to her.  Now it was a really difficult year for me.  My mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] had been diagnosed with lung cancer a few months before I started graduate school at Columbia.  And by the fall of '75' [1975], they knew that it was terminal.  And I went home for the Christmas break and she was in the hospital.  And, you know, she was really--chemotherapy was really making her very weak and--and it was--the process was very painful.  I mean she--the days when she would have the chemotherapy she was--she really couldn't function and she really didn't want to see anybody.  I mean it was that difficult.  But I went to visit her every day in the hospital and, you know, we'd sit in the bed and I'd paint her toenails and, you know, we would talk and I said, "Mommy, I'm writing this paper on Madam Walker" and, which you know I couldn't really interview her.  She really--she was happy to talk to me but, about whatever, but I couldn't really do the kind of interview that you would want to do with someone.  But I said, you know, "Mommy, I'm starting to find, you know, interesting stories that don't have the--that don't sort of hold the myth and that don't--that are different from the myth of Madam Walker," you know, about A'Lelia Walker's wild parties or Madam Walker's divorces or the husbands or some lawsuits and I said, "Mommy, what do I do about that?"  And she leaned up in the bed and she said, "Tell the truth, baby, it's all right to tell the truth".  And that was a great gift to me because it really freed me up not to have to make Madam Walker into a mythological figure and not to bury the truth and not to hide what some people might consider secrets or unpleasant things.  And it allowed me to tell the story of Madam Walker as a multidimensional woman and as a whole person.
Story_ID: 90041
Speaker 1: And I think for my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles], I think my mother had felt the pressure of upholding the myth.  She had grown up with everyone's expectations that she would go to work for The Walker Company.  Her mother [Mae Walker Perry] had become President of The Walker Company after A'Lelia Walker died.  My grandmother--when my mother was a freshman at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], her mother died and my mother became President of The Walker Company.  Now, clearly, she was too young to be President of The Walker Company but that was the politics and the succession and certainly she started college when she was 16 so she was really young and, you know, really grieving.  And then there were people who were, you know, fighting about who was going to control The Walker Company but she was the female heir.  And she had majored in Chemistry and Germany--German at Howard so that she would know how to do the formulas so that she would understand the chemistry of manufacturing the products and she had taken business courses.  So that was really the only alternative she had.  There was no other alternative.  That's what she was going to do.  And in her early forties, now she died in her late forties, but in her early forties, she really began to reconfigure her life and she went to work for the City of Indianapolis as a fiscal administrator and she worked for model cities and she still remained on the board but I think at that point she was, you know, really saying, you know, I'm old enough now to do what I am.  And it's not that my mother was a timid person by any means but that was just what the expectation was and she made the best of it and she did a great job of it but she didn't want her children to feel the burden of having to do something that was something other than their real dreams.  And so she encouraged my brothers [Lance Bundles and Mark Bundles] and me to follow our own dreams.  And it's ironic to me that I pursued my dreams, to be a writer, and to be a journalist but that I was pulled back into telling the story--into telling Madam Walker's story because it is such a powerful story and that needed to be told.  And in some ways I really think that it's one of the reasons that I was put on the planet.  One of my best friends, who's a journalist, Susan McHenry, who works for "Essence" [Magazine] and "Black Issues Book Review" [Magazine], her--our families are very good friends and when Susan was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], she's a couple of years ahead of me, she wanted--she was interested in doing a paper on Madam Walker.  I never knew about this until years later.  And her mother had called my mother to say "Susan would like to do a paper on Madam Walker" and mom--my mother said, "No, I'm saving all of that for Leli" (ph.).  Leli was my nickname.  And it's the--I, you know, all these little twists and turns when I wrote my--the first magazine article I ever published about Madam Walker, Susan McHenry was an editor at "Ms." [Magazine] and Susan was my first editor for a major publication and she edited my story on Madam Walker.  So it--there are lots of coincidences and moments of intersection that led me to the point of writing the book.
Story_ID: 90042
Speaker 1: Okay, now you had a career in the media prior to being able to write the book [On Her Own Ground: The Life and Times of Madam C.J. Walker]
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: The book was written in 19--came out in ninety [199-]-
Speaker 2: It came out in 2001.
Speaker 1: Two thousand one, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Oh, yeah, no I have had a full career as a producer in network television.  I started at NBC in 1976, when I finished Columbia [University, New York, New York] and I was, I started in a management program called "The Associates Program" where I moved around to ABC radio and local television and network television and it was right at the moment when women had just won lawsuits against ABC and NBC and the networks were pressured to equalize the salaries and to create more opportunities for women because women had come in as secretaries and men had come in as producers and, you know, it just was not equal.  And so I got an incredible break at the end--in the spring of 1977.  NBC was laying off seventy people and there were seventy people-seventy people who were in the writers' union, and NABET [National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians], which all the writers were in, and I had--I was the very bottom person on the union list because I was the newest employee and I was going to be laid off.  But because I had come in the door in this special management training program, they offered me the chance to go to Houston [Texas] to work as a producer.  Now, I did not want to leave New York [New York].  I'd finally gotten to New York and I was loving living in New York and the last thing in the world I wanted to do was go to Houston.  I had to look for Houston on the map and it didn't sound like a place I wanted to go.  But I was more afraid of being unemployed in New York and I knew, you know, the more logical side of me said, you know, you'd get great experience.  So I went to Houston and really kind of miserable but it turned out to be a very important step in my career development.  It was a very small bureau.  My bureau chief was a guy named Art Lord who was just a guy of great energy and integrity and a really wonderful journalist and George Lewis was the correspondent on the air and another producer named Don Critchfield and we had two great camera crews, older white guys who had shot a lot of stuff during the Civil Rights Movement in the South and they were great teachers.  And so the first two years I was there I just absorbed everything.  And I covered hurricanes and grain elevator explosions and tornadoes and murders and--but on the network level, trials and got really wonderful experience.  The last year of my three years in Houston, I was miserable.  My colleagues, who I cared about so much, all went off to do other things and a new bureau chief came in.  And he was a guy who was really pretty incompetent.  He had been the Chicago bureau chief and he'd been demoted to the Houston bureau, which was smaller and he had been replaced by the first black woman bureau chief.  So this was like a total blow to his ego and he resented the hell out of me and gave me a hard time.  And he was like a--he just really was incompetent.  And it was really, really a hard year for me.  And toward the end of that year, Bill Small came over from CBS as president of news and he made a tour of all the bureaus.  Now, most people hated Bill Small.  He was really mean to people.  He really screwed up a lot of people's careers but he did me a great favor.  There were some changes going on in the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau.  I told him how desperate I was to leave Houston.  I think he had gone to Columbia so maybe there was that connection.  Maybe he felt some, you know, connection or wanted to do a nice thing for me but I then moved from Houston to Atlanta and I spent five years in the Atlanta bureau.  And that was also wonderful.  I was really happy to be in Atlanta.  It was a much more, you know, there was a much larger black community.  It was a much friendlier community and I did the child murders, the Wayne Williams trial [1982].  During the time I was there, I covered Jesse Jackson's campaign in 1984.  So I really did learn a lot.  And after those five years in Atlanta, where I spent most of the time on the road, I moved to Washington and-
Story_ID: 90043
Speaker 1: I just want to stop for a little.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: Now, the Atlanta [Georgia] thing.  That--the Wayne Williams trial-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and all, I mean, so many people think he had no business being in jail.  He didn't do it.  What (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it's very--it's very interesting.  When you look back on that, they--Lewis Slaton who was the prosecutor who just died not that long ago, and Maynard [Jackson] who was the mayor, they had to find somebody so you do have to at this point, do you really believe it was Wayne?  And did Wayne really kill the people whose murders he was charged with?  He didn't acquit himself very well.  He had a very, sort of, suspicious demeanor and there were--and they really built this case on fiber evidence and it was sort of a new science.  And the way that they did this was the rug that was in his house had fibers on it that were very unusual--unusually structured fibers.  They went back to the original mill.  There had only been a very limited amount of this rug that had been produced.  They found these fibers on the rug that--the rug in the Williams' home and these same fibers were found on some of the bodies, so the evidence said.  And that was a real foundation of creating this case against Wayne.  And then they mixed in other things where he was sort of an independent music promoter and maybe he lured the kids.  But, you know, at this point I have as much doubt as anybody about whether Wayne--if Wayne did one of them, he didn't do all of them.  And the two people who he ultimately--whose murders he ultimately was charged with were both adults.  They were older--they were older guys.  So I don't know that we're ever going to really know.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering.  It's one of the cases that always pops back up on the news.  "Nightline" had a special on it ten years after.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You know, and there's a lot of doubt about that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if you--being there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot of doubt.  I mean, I won't go as far as the, you know, the James Baldwin, you know, theory or the Dick Gregory theory, where Dick Gregory said that they were murdering these kids to get interferon, I just thought that was a little hooey, you know, bless Dick Gregory's heart, but, you know, my thought on that is that we're so much a part of the public health system if somebody wants to extract anything from us, they can do it and you don't have to, you know, murder children in an obvious way in Atlanta to make that happen.  So I didn't believe that particular conspiracy theory.  It was a very difficult time in Atlanta.  You know, there was--and I was really involved in, in covering that story and in the details of that story.  And you would talk to--you know you try to make friends with police detectives or you go visit the places where the kids hung out and try to, you know, see what you could learn and then there seemed to be a period where every Friday at four p.m., a body would be found.  That was like maybe three or four weeks in a row or maybe it was only two weeks but it was just, you know, you just were--everybody was on pins and needles.  And at the time, I was dating a cameraman who worked for one of the local stations and there--a body was found in a gully near his house and then, you know, so then he became really stressed about this.  And by the time Wayne was arrested, I had developed these horrible stress headaches and I went to a doctor and got some medicine for the--and he said, you know, it's really amazing to me.  I've had six or seven other journalists in here who have the same problem.  We were just so caught up in it and Maynard was--Maynard Jackson, who was the mayor at the time, was really suffering.  And Lee Brown, I--this is so funny.  Lee Brown, who's now, I guess he's now the mayor of Houston, Lee Brown was the-- He was the Police Chief.
Speaker 1: He was the Police Chief.  And Lee Brown, you know, he was--he had a PhD and he had theories about how to make policing work and how you treat the press and he did this, he would have a press conference every week.  I can't remember which day of the week but it was like every week while this was going on.  And I guess this was in his way--he's like, I'm inviting you all here and I'm--and you can ask me questions and it was in some ways a way of controlling the flow of the message.  But he would say nothing.  You could ask him questions about the murders in fifty different ways and he would give you no information.  And so we started calling him "No Rap Brown", you know and years later he was--I ran into him I think during a black caucus weekend in Washington and at that point he may have been in New York, 'cause I think he became Police Chief in New York at some point-- Yes, he did.
Speaker 2: --and I laughed and I said, you know, I said "Lee, you were so frustrating.  You really frustrated us" and he just kind of chuckled.  But it was really a very, very difficult time for the city.
Story_ID: 90044
Speaker 1: Okay, and you mentioned the Jesse Jackson campaign before-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was great.
Speaker 1: --which was one of the high points, I guess, in black political life in this country.  So-
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  That was--that was just a great thrill and, you know, even now I think a lot of the black journalists who are in my age group, people in their late forties and, you know, through their late fifties, who were part of that campaign realized that it created a real turning point in their careers.  And part--there were many black journalists, I think, certainly more black journalists that had ever been on any political campaign just as later that year there were more women journalists than there had ever been on the Geraldine Ferraro campaign.  It was no longer the white boys on the bus 'cause that's what it had been.  All those political campaigns had been the white boys on the bus with the smattering of women or people of color.
Speaker 1: Now, the ironic thing though is the black journalist created the Hymietown furor.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no absolutely, absolutely, I knew him. That's true.
Speaker 1: I can't think of his name [Milton Coleman].
Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm spacing and I, you know, just saw him not that long ago but he's still an editor at the "Washington Post."  But you know, Jesse, you know, Jesse sort of made that--you know you could, people were there representing their news organizations and they were reporting the news.  But the irony is that a lot of news--mainstream news organizations assigned black reporters and correspondents and producers to the campaign thinking Jesse was going to give them the scoop, when Jesse did no such thing.  He wasn't giving--he was giving the scoop to "60 Minutes."  So it was--it was interesting that that was the theory but it created a great camaraderie among us.  Sylvester Monroe was there from "Newsweek," Jack White from "Time," George Curry was there from the "Chicago Tribune."  Gerald Boyd who just left "The New York Times" as managing editor was there and I think, I don't know if he was writing for "The Times" at that point or if he was writing for the "St. Louis Post-Dispatch".  Jackie Adams was there from CBS.  So, it was really--it was almost like being in college again where, you know, you were on the plane and everybody knew everybody and everybody was having a great time.
Story_ID: 89189
Speaker 1: --We're back to the '84 [1984] campaign?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know that guy (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, it was, you know, Jesse is amazing.  We would--he would go somewhere.  Jesse would over-schedule all the time.  All the other campaigns, there were phone banks set up.  There was the luggage call.  The Jackson campaign had none of that.  This was a campaign that I thought was operating on the biorhythms of Jesse.  But it was a great ride.  I remember we would arrive at a church two hours late and one of the things--this was before cellphones and as the producer, I had to find the phone.  I had to find the phone to check in with the office.  And I had become very adept at finding the phone in the church and getting to the office and make--being able to make the first phone call.  And people would have been waiting in the church for hours.  The churches would be hot.  People would be fanning.  They're in the aisles and you think, "Jesse, it's eleven o'clock, how are we going to do this?"  And Jesse would get up and Jesse would get that spirit and Jesse would get that activism and everybody would be on their feet.  And he, you know, especially when you went through the South, you would see a lot of elderly black people who you know hadn't been able to vote when they were younger and Jesse would say, "Hands that pick cotton can now pick a President".  And he energized people and, you know, he knew that there were--Jesse was cutting corners here and there, maybe the campaign wasn't highly organized and maybe the campaign wasn't on time but he really made a difference and he really energized American politics.  And recently I was talking with a friend who was also on the campaign, Bruce Talman, and Bruce said, "You know, we really ought to do some kind of conference or something and talk about what happened, what that--what that campaign meant" and I said, "You know, it's true, there are so many things."  Jesse really changed the face of American politics, of American presidential politics.  He--his campaign created or enhanced the careers of a large number of African American journalists and other journalists as well because Jesse's story was the most interesting story.  And his story wasn't really covered properly by the mainstream press.  He was dismissed by "The New York Times" and the Hymietown story in the "Washington Post" hurt him.  And Jesse would make jokes from time to time.  I remember when we went to Johnson Publishing on one trip to Chicago [Illinois] and we were--the journalists were getting a tour and I think he was--he was taking people who were part of the mainstream press on these tours or exposing them to different black institutions 'cause he knew they didn't really know anything about them.  Now you know some of us knew something but these white journalists didn't really know anything about Johnson Publishing and to be in that building and to see it.  But Jesse said, "That's all right, 'The New York Times' may not cover me but my people read 'Jet' [Magazine]," and it was true.  We knew--you know that you knew that "Jet" was going to cover everything that Jesse did, and you know, and still to this point, I would never be without my "Jet Magazine" every week.  But it was really--it was a great ride.  I mean, from early January, I-I joined the campaign on a stop in Memphis [Tennessee].  I think the first night I was on the campaign there was a fire alarm.  We got up in the middle of the night, and we were always having to leave really early and get back really late.  We went to--after the primaries were over, we went on a trip to Cuba and Nicaragua and Salvador and Jesse released the political prisoners from Cuba.  During the [Democratic National] convention, there was a lot of electricity because there was a lot of infighting and people were curious what Jesse was going to do.  But I'm really glad that I participated in that campaign.  Later that year, after covering the Democratic campaign, I then covered the [Geraldine] Ferraro campaign.  And that was, I think, as exciting for women as Jesse's campaign was for African Americans but it wasn't as exciting for me.  I wasn't, you know, I didn't feel like I connected with Ferraro.  And later in the year, in November, after the election, I finally was at home, I had basically been gone the entire year except for coming home for two or three days at a time to do my laundry and then I was back on the road.  And I remember, you know, November, or whatever the Friday after the election, waking up in my own bed and not having any idea where I was because I was so used to being in a hotel.  But I-I made some great friends on that campaign and it was really fabulous to be a part of history being made.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think I feel that way more than any other story that I've ever covered.  I was there in the midst of history.
Story_ID: 89190
Speaker 1: Okay, that takes us to about 1985.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, what were you doing in '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Well, after covering the, the [1984 Presidential] election--covering the campaign, I was really ready to do something else that I wanted to move to Washington [D.C.] and there was a new magazine program that NBC was starting.  So I applied for that job and I moved to Washington in May of 1985 and went to work for a program called, "American Almanac" that was hosted by Connie Chung and Roger Mudd.  And I produced some interesting pieces.  I did a piece on Daufuskie Island in South Carolina and the story about Daufuskie being developed and the people who had lived there for so many generations being pushed off the island and being pushed off their land.  And then I worked for--then NBC was at that point still struggling with--still didn't have a successful magazine show.  It would be several years before "Dateline" would be created.  So then that show ended and then another show called, "1984" or "1986"--"1986" I guess started.  I worked on that show for a year and then for the next three years or so I worked on "Primetime News Specials" for NBC.  And then my contract was up and ABC had been pursuing me, I'd been having conversations with them.  At that point, NBC cable was really just starting.  I mean, CNN was around but the networks didn't have cable operations and at that point ABC had more news programing, more successful news programing.  And so I made the decision to go to ABC in 1989 as a producer with "World News Tonight with Peter Jennings".
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, were you--at that point--yeah, at that point, Max Robinson was gone?
Speaker 2: Max was gone.  Max was gone by then.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 89191
Speaker 1: So, well, what were the highlights of that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was Carol Simpson's producer and Carol and I did a number of stories for "World News Tonight" and a series called "American Agenda" and our beat was family and social issues.  And we did cutting edge stories on these issues on rape, on foster care, on crack addicted mothers and the impact on their babies, stories on anorexia, stories on children who, you know, were abandoned.  I mean, we really--we really did a lot of social issues and those kinds of stories really get very little play now on network television news but it was--our executive producer really believed in it and Carol felt deeply about it and we just had a great time.  I mean, Carol cared so much about the stories and the people in the stories.  I mean, I remember one story we did in Chicago [Illinois].  In fact, it was the first story we produced together and it was on children and violence and we did it in Chicago at Cabrini Green.  And there was an after-school program in one of the community centers on the property where the children were--they were examined by a psychologist and sort of to try to help them with, you know, some of the violence that they were seeing because there was, you know, a fair amount of violence in the neighborhood and the kids were so--had become so accustomed to the violence and to the funerals that they--one of their games was playing funeral.  And that was very, very troublesome.  And I remember Carol was interviewing one of the little boys, whose name was David, he was as cute as he could be, and the kids had been doing art therapy.  So he was drawing a picture and Carol sat down next to him and he had drawn a picture and the picture was a house and there were flames coming out of the house.  And she said, "David, what's that?"  And he said, "A house on fire".  And she said, "Whose house is it, David?"  "Your house" (laughter).  We laughed about that in the editing room every time as we were editing it, every time that went by we laughed about it and just last year, Carol went back to the same place and interviewed a couple of the kids who were in the story, who are now grownups.  And she interviewed David and David is in college.  And there was another little boy who she interviewed who was just traumatized by all the violence, he is now a minister.  So, there is some follow-up.  But Carol and I had a great time and we--we worked really hard and we did really difficult subjects but then we had great laughs.  Carol, you know, people see Carol Simpson on the air on Sunday and she enunciates those words so perfectly and she's so dignified and, but boy you ought to see Carol off camera, you know, she's still dignified--we won't say Carol's not dignified but she has a great laugh and she's a lot of fun.  So we worked hard but we also had a great time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she has a severe character on camera.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I have to say that.
Speaker 2: Right, she's very, very--but you know I think some of that--some of that persona that Carol adopted on camera was because she was a pioneer and to be the first black woman anchor and to be on WBBM in Chicago on radio and then to go to NBC network, people were judging her and they were looking for the least flaw and so she probably had to push the pendulum a little bit farther on the other side just to say, you know, I'm just as good and I'm better.  So she--she really had to, you know, she had to really push her way through things and she's had, you know, a really distinguished career.
Story_ID: 89192
Speaker 1: Okay, so, how long were you at "World News Tonight"?
Speaker 2: I was at "World News Tonight"--I was a producer at "World News Tonight" from September of 1989 until the spring of 1996 and I became deputy bureau chief.  Now, this is a story, I mean I don't know if you want this story, but this was one of those, you know, making lemonade from lemons.  I had--we had had a succession of executive producers at "World News" and I had gotten along really great with the first one, Paul Friedman, and I'd known Paul Friedman since my days at NBC.  He's the producer--the executive producer who hired me at "World News Tonight" and was one of the people who interviewed me when I first went to NBC.  So we had a really great relationship.  I had a great deal of respect for him.  And then we had a succession of two more executive producers and the last one before I left was someone who I didn't get along with at all.  It was a woman, Kathy Christensen.  She was really a newspaper person and she was one of these people who really played up well and she played up well to the executives and she had her favorites, who were mostly white guys, and she really sort of had no use for me.  And I had, you know, it was like everything that I did was wrong.  And I knew I wasn't stupid and I knew that I, all of a sudden hadn't developed the inability to be a good producer but it was really tough.  I mean, I would pitch stories and none of my stories would be accepted and, you know, so I was trying to figure out--I was ready to leave.  Well, around the same time, I'd gotten a contract to write my book [On Her Own Ground: The Life and Times of Madam C.J. Walker].  And so Kathy Christensen was in New York [New York] at "World News" but my Washington [D.C.] boss, who I really didn't interact that much with, was a bureau chief and her name was Robin Sproul.  And I went to talk to Robin and I said, "You know, I'm having trouble and, you know, I'm just--I'm not sure--this is not working at "World News", maybe I can wait this executive producer out, but in the meantime I have a contract for a book and I'd like to take a leave of absence."  And Robin said, "Oh, well, that's interesting."  And she said, "Well let me think about it" and she called me a couple of days later and she said, "Let's have lunch."  And we went to lunch and she said, "You know, I really need a deputy and there's some things that I need done.  There's no deputy bureau chief.  Would you be interested in the job?"  Well, I had gone from the outhouse to the in-house (laughter), you know, in a matter of hours.  But I--what I now know about Robin, who's my age, we're exactly the same age, is that she really has a knack for recognizing people's talents and knowing where to place people and how to best utilize their talents and their skills.  And what I did for her for the next year or so was to create a lot of systems that she needed creating--to create some career development opportunities to really hone in on the career development of producers in the bureau.
Story_ID: 89193
Speaker 1: And our agreement was this, because she [Robin Sproul] knew I wanted to go write the book, that I would work for a year and a half [as Washington D.C. Deputy Bureau Chief for ABC], set up these systems and then I would take a six-month leave of absence.  And I did take that six-month leave of absence and I was going to finish the research for my book and I--in September of '98' [1998], I think, I--yeah, that's right, in September of '98' [1998], I started the leave of absence and I was coming back to work in early '99' [1999] and the week before I came back to work, the Monica Lewinsky story broke.  And I had really imagined myself as being able to compartmentalize my life.  That I was going to come back to work, I would write before I went to work in the morning, I would go do my job as deputy bureau chief, I would work--write the book on the weekends and--there were people I had read about who did that.  But with the, with this Monica Lewinsky story, it was such a crisis that as deputy bureau chief I couldn't absent myself from it even though I was not all that interested in the story but it was a huge story for any Washington [D.C.] news organization and as deputy bureau chief I had to be supportive of the people who were working on it and engaged and involved in the coverage that we were doing.  And so I struggled through that year, through '99' [1999] saying, this is not working, I've got to write my book, this is my lifelong dream, this is my passion and if I'm doing this in a haphazard way, the book is not going to be very good and I won't be very happy with myself.  So, then later in the year, our engineers went on strike, our cameramen, our editors went on strike, and I had to do--I had to do chyron, the names that go across the bottom of the screen for "Nightline", that was my job as the management person, being a scab, and that meant I was at work many nights until after midnight and so I totally was not working on my book.  And I just came to the realization at the end of the year, I said, I'm going to quit my job because this book is so important to me that I'm just going to take my chances and see what happens.  And so I resigned from NBC at the end of '99' [1999] and-or, I resigned from ABC at the end of '99' [1999], and just, you know, my mid-life leap of faith, I guess.  I remember calling my father [Samuel Henry Bundles, Jr.] and I said--I said, "Daddy, so you know, my last day was at ABC, was yesterday," and there was like this horrible silence on the other end of the phone.  And I said, "Well I told you I was going to do this."  Well, he was just, you know, I could see him, he's a child of the Depression [1930s] and his daughter gone to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and she'd been an executive at ABC News, "What do you mean you're quitting your good job?"  I could just hear all of this stuff going through his head.  But I said, "This is really important to me.  I mean, I have to do this."  And so for the next 15 months I spent seven days a week working on the book, you know.  And after the book came out, my father was very proud of me and, you know, can't say enough good things but he was--he was frightened at that moment.
Story_ID: 89194
Speaker 1: Now, was it--people would probably think, oh, it's relatively easy for her to write a book like this 'cause after all she's related, so all the materials are going to be around the house-
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).  Yeah, right.  I mean it was a real labor of love but it was not easy and it was, I mean, it was a pleasure to do it but it was definitely not easy.  You know, basically, my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] was Vice President of The Walker Company so I had memories of going to the Walker building and seeing my mother in her office and playing on the typewriter and on the adding machine in the days before calculators and the typewriter in the days before computers, and having--growing up in a household where the silverware that we used every day had Madam [C.J.] Walker's monogram and our china for special occasions had been her china.  The baby grand piano in the living room, in our home, had belonged to A'Lelia Walker and was in one of her apartments in New York [New York] and there were vases and pieces of furniture around the house that had belonged to the Walker women, so I knew, you know, some things.  And one of my earliest memories is being in my grandfather's [Marion Rowland Perry, Jr.] apartment and being in the room that had been my grandmother's [Mae Walker Perry] room before she died, but there were--all of her things were still there.  Her clothes were still there.  And I remember going through a dresser that had ostrich feather fan and opera glasses and photographs of these women.  And it was before I could read so I--Mahjong Tiles--I was touching these things that had belonged to the Walker women so I think that I had begun to, you know, feel their story at a very, very early age.  But the details of their lives were not really readily available.  Later, we had a big treasure-trove of letters between Madam Walker and her attorney and between A'Lelia Walker and the attorney and a lot of business records.  And I was fortunate that I studied those and they are now at the Indiana Historical Society [Indianapolis, Indiana] and that helped lay a foundation.  But for the first 38 years of her life, she was an illiterate washerwoman so there were no real records and the only thing that I had to go on was that the story that she told in the corporate biography was, "I was born on December 23rd, 1867 to Owen and Minerva Breedlove," they died by the time she was seven, she married at 14, she was a widow at 20, she started her company in 1905.
Speaker 1: She had a baby.
Speaker 2: She had a baby, right, and she started this company.  But I had to go back and visit all those places and look in obscure records and be very creative and inventive about finding out the facts of her early life.  It really wasn't that easy.  And then I had to do a lot of history from pre-Civil War [1861-1865] through the Civil War through reconstruction with Jim Crow era through World War One [1914-1918], finding all the places that she'd been, who she'd--whose lives she intersected, then doing research on the people she'd known, like Ida B. Wells-Barnett and [W.E.B.] Du Bois and Mary McLeod Bethune and Booker T. Washington and Monroe Trotter.  So it was--it was great fun for me to do that but it really, you know, did take--it took a lot of effort to uncover these things and not, you know, not always in the most obvious places.  And then the writing of the book is--I was trying to write a book that would be respected by my friends who were scholars and historians but also accessible to people who didn't want to read dry academic work and so I was using my journalistic skills but writing is very hard.  I mean, as much as I love writing, it is time-consuming and it is--it drains you and for me I was so totally immersed in it that even I almost became manic in a way with each chapter and I think each chapter in my book I probably did 12 to 15 drafts.  I would write a chapter on the computer and I had--I have notebooks with all of my notes and every scrap of material I had typed into the computer for each chapter and each era and I sat down and wrote these drafts.  I would print the drafts out and then I would make it a little bit whimsical because I had a fountain pen that had purple ink and so I would do my edits in purple ink and then I would type the edits in and I had arrows in places and stars and this moves from this page to that page and insert this here and move that around.  And then when the draft was about as clean as I could make it, I would send it to my editor, Lisa Drew.  Now, Lisa's great.  I met Lisa through Alex Haley.
Story_ID: 89195
Speaker 1: There was a point when Alex Haley was going to write a biography of Madam [C.J.] Walker, actually a fictionalized version.  And we had--I had met Alex in '82' [1982].  He approached The Walker Company and he said he wanted to do a book.  And at that point I had written my Master's paper on Madam Walker and in 1982 there were not a lot of black people whose books were being published.  I mean, you probably remember.  There would be a Toni Morrison book and then six months later there might be a Alice Walker book and then three months later there might be David Levering Lewis but there weren't--it wasn't like now where you can't keep up.  And so it seemed to make sense that I knew the material.  I had access to the research.  Alex was a big name.  He was still riding the wave of "Roots" and "Malcolm X".  I would provide the research and Alex would write the book and it would be his name but it would be--I would be involved in the promotion of the book.  So I did that.  I did all of this research.  I took--that was in '82' [1982].  I took a nine month leave of absence from my job at NBC and traveled around the country and I was able to interview all the people I could find who had known Madam Walker, or A'Lelia Walker, and there were a handful who had known Madam and a larger number of certain Harlem Renaissance survivors who had known A'Lelia and I did oral histories with them.  I mean, they were great.  It was just great talking to these octogenarians and nonagenarians and listening to their stories and that was great fun for me.  So I had all that--I had all that material and that, I think, being a family member gave me an advantage in that way that people would talk to me.  When I would call Alberta Hunter and she would find out that I was A'Lelia Walker's great-granddaughter, she was really happy, you know, she was really willing to talk to me and I don't know that any other--that other people could have gotten in the door quite as easily.  But I--in writing the book and getting back to Lisa, I met Lisa through Alex.  Alex, in his interest in trying to tell Madam Walker's story, had a group of people come down to his farm in Tennessee one beautiful spring weekend.  He invited Stan Margulies who had been one of the key people involved in the production of "Roots" and Reuben Cannon who had been the casting director for "Roots" and their wives. I invited Arnold Rampersad who's--who was Langston Hughes' biographer and Jackie Robinson's biographer.  He and his wife and kids came and I also invited Bruce Kellner who was Carl Van Vechten's biographer, he and his wife came.  And then there were a few other people who were there.  And we spent all weekend.  And Lisa was there.  And we spent all weekend talking about Madam and, I mean, this was his pitch.  This was like the totally non--you know, outside of Hollywood, how do you "woo" people who you want to back your project, and he invites them to his farm instead of going to somebody's office in Culver City [California] and taking a meeting.  And it was just a magical weekend and I--we showed a film that Stanley Nelson, who recently won a MacArthur [Foundation award], it was his first film, it was about Madam Walker.  His grandfather had been Madam Walker's attorney.  And I thought, "Oh, we're finally on track."  We know the book is, you know, the book is going to be written.  Well, Alex died without writing the book.
Story_ID: 89196
Speaker 1: In the meantime I wrote a young adult book and after Alex died, we had--I realized that I was in a really bad situation because the agreement that had been signed with him was very unfavorable to the Walker estate and it was essentially--we didn't have an intellectual property attorney.  And this agreement basically gave the rights to him in perpetuity and to--whomever it was assigned.  And so his family and his estate tried to prevent me from writing my book.  So people may think it was easy for me to write my book and that it's my family and that it would have been a piece of cake but I went through a really difficult couple of years, fighting the Haley family.  I mean, I loved Alex.  Alex was a good friend and a great mentor but they were so interested in money and there were so much infighting amongst them that they were trying to figure out any place where they can make money and so they really came after me.  When I was trying to auction my book, they called the publishers and said, "You know, she doesn't have the right to do this book."  It was ugly.  It was very, very ugly and it was very, very painful.  I mean, I had some really traumatic, you know, moments.  But by this time I'd written a book, I'd won an Emmy, I knew how to tell a story, I didn't need anybody else to tell the story.  And Alex, I think, Alex had appeared in my life for a reason.  He had--he had helped make the Walker story legitimate in the eyes of Hollywood and in the eyes of the publishing world.  But he wasn't supposed to write the story.  If he was supposed to have written the story, he would have written the story.  And actually, just a little--a little bit before he died, he had gotten a contract to do three books with Valentine One World with Cheryl Woodruff who was an African American editor.  But Alex was in a lot of debt at that point.  There were some people who had ripped him off.  He owed people a lot of money and he was getting this advance and he was going to pay off some of those debts.  And I talked to him on the phone and he said, "Baby, I got this advance and we're going to--it's three books and the first two are going to be the two books I've been telling you about on my family and the third book is going to be 'Madam.'"  And I mean, I'm thinking, this book is never going to get written.  You work at the pace you've been working at for the last decade, my story's never going to get written and I want my story told.  And I said, I said "Alex, you know, Alex, this book is not going to get written unless I write it."  He said, "Well, baby, that's probably right."  And I said, "You know, let's--here I'm going to--let me make a suggestion.  If you can give me from your advance, because I knew it was a big advance, if you can give me enough to pay my mortgage for a year," which probably was about a thousand dollars a month, it wasn't huge at that point 'cause I was living in a condo on Connecticut Avenue, "if you can give me enough just to pay my mortgage, I have money saved, I can survive for a year.  I'll write a draft of the book and then you can, you know, do whatever you want, change it, we'll work together on that but I just really want this written."  And he said, "Yeah, baby, that's probably what we ought to do."  Well, I was talking to him on the phone.  I distinctly remember this.  I was standing in the hallway near the edit rooms at ABC, and I was the next week leaving for Paris [France], I went to a conference that Skip Gates was hosting on blacks and, you know, expatriates, and it was a really great conference.  Everybody was there, from Ishmael Reed to, I don't know, it was just, it was just a great, great wonderful conference, and the brother who's, he's an actor, Delroy-
Speaker 2: Lindo.
Speaker 1: --Lindo, he and his wife.  I mean, it was just great, great, great conference.  Anyway, so I get back from this conference and I promised to do a speech in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I flew to L.A.  I had laryngitis, I had gotten a cold in Paris, and I do this speech, I struggle through the speech and the next morning I wake up in my hotel room and I have CNN on and I hear that Alex is dead and I'm like, "Oh, no", you know, and I was--my first thought was, I mean the book and all those issues came up later, and I was just so sad because Alex had been a good friend and I knew he had been sick and I knew that there was all this--he was in the midst of a divorce and he owed people a lot of money and I just thought, you know, the pressure was just probably really was just too great.  And then I, you know, when he died, I just thought, okay, well now I'm going to write the book and then I proceeded to try to do the things to write the book and that's when I ran up against these people, these very litigious, you know, relatives of his who tried to prevent me from writing the book.  Well, at this point, when things finally sorted themselves out, I had a great lawyer at that point.
Story_ID: 91318
Speaker 1: So, you know, by this point, I was, you know, smart enough and savvy enough and I hired a lawyer and I had an agent who--who hooked me up with a really excellent intellectual property lawyer.  And--but the, but the Haley's I knew we were going to have to do some negotiating and I knew I was at a great disadvantage because I had been one of the people who had signed this contract.  And while Alex [Haley] was living, it was fine, 'cause he and I had a great relationship.  I didn't realize that these people who were his relatives were going to be so uncooperative and so unkind.  But my lawyer began to have conversations with their attorney and they, in the meantime, it was kind of--it was--as this situation was extremely messy, Alex was in the process of getting a divorce from his wife, Myra [Lewis Haley], and one of the things that she was jacking him up on was the right to finish his unfinished projects as part of the settlement for the divorce and, of course, he was resisting this.  And Madam [C.J.] Walker was one of those projects and it was the one that she coveted the most.  So, she's in a fight with the estate and they're trying to push her aside but she has at least temporarily managed to win the right to complete these unfinished projects.  So, through her attorney in Tennessee, she--they bring on a writer, a woman named Beverly Lowry to write their book.  And they somehow believe Beverly Lowry is going to, you know, take the research that I've given Alex and be able to write this book and, you know, in a year.  I knew that I had done another several years of research.  I had taken that leave from ABC, I had done, you know, I had lots--a lot more material.  I knew that there was a lot in my head that was not part of the ten boxes of research that, you know, that Alex had and that they had found.  And they said, "Well, you know, this is the person who's going to write our book" and I was sort of in such a bad unfavorable situation that I had to meet with them, with my agent, and their agent and this other author.  And we met in my, in my agent's--Gayle Ross is my agent, we met in her office in Washington [D.C.] and this woman walks in and she's a white woman from Greenville, Mississippi who is very presumptuous in her approach to black people.  She thinks she knows black people.  Now, I say this with, you know, with some care because I don't believe this is true about all white people.  I have a lot of good friends who are white people, as people would say some of my best friends are black.  But this was a person who I got a really bad vibe from, that she, you know, is somebody who probably, you know, grew up, you know, with a black "Mammy" or somebody who thought, you know, therefore I have the right to know black people.  I don't know.  I mean, I don't know the details of her life.  But I just had a bad vibe.  And we're sitting at the table and talking and she--they say, "Well, you know, you could help us on our book."  And I'm like, "Well, why exactly would I want to do that?  I can tell the story without you.  I'm going to write a book.  I don't really want to help you.  What about the book I want to write?  I don't, you know, I don't really want to help you on this."  But again, I was in an unfavorable stance and so I took her out to dinner that night and I had a vibe, you know, have one dinner, get one dinner free at the restaurant at the Four Seasons, they--really lovely, one of the best restaurants in Washington.  And I took her to dinner and as we talked I got increasingly sick thinking about this woman writing this book 'cause I listened to what she thought about Madam Walker and what she thought she'd do about Madam Walker and I just I was like, "Oh, no, this is, this is never going to work.  I don't know what I'm going to do but I cannot do this."  And I called my agent the next morning and I said, "Gayle, I can't do this.  I don't know what's going to happen but I'm not working on this."
Story_ID: 91319
Speaker 1: And then my lawyer came up with a very creative solution.  Because what they were essentially doing was trying to prevent me from writing my book [On Her Own Ground: The Life and Times of Madam C.J. Walker] but you can't really--there are some things in the law where you can't prevent a person from pursuing commerce.  So, he worked out a deal where we had a settlement agreement that specified a five-year holdback period because they thought they were so smart and that they were going to do this thing really quickly.  They thought they'd finish in a year.  Well, you know, if you know anything about publishing, which she did, but I don't know why they didn't understand this, if you finish the book today, it's still a year from today before your book will get published, will be on the bookshelves so you've got a lag time.  But the settlement agreement was that if they finished their book a year from the date we sign this agreement, I had to wait a year for my book to come out.  If they finish theirs in two years, I had to wait nine months.  If they finished their book in three years, I had to wait six months down to the end of this five-year holdback period.  And at the end of that period they could do a book and a movie, I could do a book and a movie.  All holds were gone.  Well, I knew that they weren't going to be able to do this as quickly as they thought and subsequently they ended up falling out with Beverly Lowry.  She went her way, they went their way.  They then tried to-Myra [Lewis Haley] tried to write the book.  She's not really a writer and they tried to hire other people to write the book, they couldn't get any traction on writing this book.  They couldn't get it done and meanwhile I'm finishing my book, you know, I'm moving along, you know, my contract is signed, I've now left ABC.  And then sort of six months into my writing, I hear that--and they've been very dishonest with us about the terms of, you know, what they're supposed to do along the line in terms of this settlement agreement, but I sort of hear through the grapevine that they have an author whose a young novelist named Tananarive Due, whose written science fiction as sort of horror stories.  And they've hired her and they've connected to her through an agent who represented Alex [Haley] and, you know, that's how those things go in publishing.  And I hear from her in an e-mail saying, "I'm writing this book on Madam [C.J.] Walker and I really would like to be in touch with you."  I'm like, "Why would I want to be in touch with you?  Do you have any sense of what these people have you doing and what the implications of this are and are you that naive that you don't really see that you've taken material that was mine and you don't really know anything about Madam Walker and now you're trying to write this book, essentially, to thwart my book" because the objective was that their book would come out before mine.  So they gave this material to Tananarive Due.  They gave her eight months to write a book.  Well, that's no time to write a book.  It's certainly no time to do any original research.  So she wrote a fictionalized version which is very much not Madam Walker's life.  I mean, it's got some facts but many of the characters are made up.  Most of the scenes are made up.  Some of them are really totally inconsistent with--if you were doing historical fiction, they're very inconsistent with Madam Walker.  So this book comes out in June of 2000 and they think "We'll put Alex Haley's name on it, we'll sell a lot of books and who will care about A'Lelia Bundles' book."  But now they sort of messed up the Alex franchise because they had David Stevens finish the other two books.  People realized it wasn't really actually--certainly knew this wasn't Alex's book.  And then my book came out in--in January, 2001 and that was a great ride--
Story_ID: 91320
Speaker 1: I'll just tell you the Beverly Lowry stuff, finish it up before we get back.  Beverly Lowry's book [Her Dream of Dreams: The Rise and Triumph of Madam C.J. Walker] finally came out in April of this year [2003] and I made myself read it.  I had the manuscript for a couple of months because somebody had told me that I was mentioned in the acknowledgements.  I read the acknowledgements and it says, you know, "and I thank A'Lelia Bundles for her generous," or "my appreciation to A'Lelia Bundles for her generous end notes and family letters," or something.  And, of course, I gave this woman nothing.  I closed the Walker collection while I was finishing my book because I knew that she was like wanting to get her hands on it and I wasn't going to help her.  And then in another place in the book she calls me the "adoptive great-great-granddaughter of Madam Walker who has, you know, who says this particular thing, you know who claims this but there are other family members who, you know, have said other things."  Well, you know, there are no other family members.  And so I don't know who she was trying to, you know, sort of smoosh things up so people really didn't understand.  And that--and that was a putdown of me.  I mean, my grandmother is adopted and, yes, and what?  But I'm not adopted and I certainly, you know, have paid whatever dues one pays to be a part of this family.  I'm not, you know, somebody who's distant from or disconnected.  But it was clearly a way to try to diminish my creditability and to distance me from this.  So it's very, you know, very insulting but I couldn't make myself read the book.  It took me a really long time.  And then I, there was a review.  Nicholas von Hoffman did a review in "The Wall Street Journal" and it was like this wet kiss, totally glowing review.  He knew nothing about Madam Walker, clearly.  I mean why Nicholas von Hoffman? What an odd choice.  But, you know, I was so bothered by that.  I wrote a letter to the editor to "The Wall Street Journal", they published a paragraph and not my most critical information, mentioning in fact that she had just had a review in "The New York Times" about Susan McDougal's book which had so many inaccuracies that "The New York Times" had to do retractions and apologies.  So, she's a sloppy writer.  But anyway, I finally read the book and I was stunned because there are many parts of this book which are very close to copyright infringement which I'm pursuing.  It's just amazing to me that she would be that bold to do that and then there-- You think some of them appear to be plagiarized?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there's--there's sections that are very close to plagiarism.  The tricky thing is that in publishing, the bar is much higher than it is for newspapers and in academia so it has to be, you know, the whole paragraph exactly.  But there's--there's several places that are really very close, that the language is very close that it's paraphrased, that it's you--taking two disparate thoughts and juxtaposing them which I did in my book and they're exactly the same and the paragraph in her book, which I know are things that, you know, because the way my mind works, I put them together.  It's not a logical thing for somebody who hasn't just read the paragraph in my book to then do that.  I mean, if you--even if you'd done all the same research that I'd done, you wouldn't necessarily bring those two things together.  And then there are like things that are really stupid.  Like, she calls [James] Madison the third President of the United States.  That's like, you know, have you ever heard of [Thomas] Jefferson?  She's gotten--because she is presumptuous in her look at African Americans, she has--she's created this scene with Madam Walker when she's still a poor washerwoman and she's made this scene up.  And this is non-fiction but she's made the scene up where's she in a Sunday school class and she's talking about something and she's encouraging people to give money to a poor family, which in that story, that's a story that actually happened.  She did encourage people to give money but it wasn't--there's no evidence that it was in a Sunday school class.  But in that paragraph, she says, and there-"but there would be other black women who would become elocutionist and activist.  Women like Mary McLeod Bethune, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, Mary Church Terrell and Anna Julia Cooper but all of these women were women whose skin was the color of tea with a little milk in it and who had aquiline noses."  Now, you and I know that was not what Mary McLeod Bethune and Ida B. Wells-Barnett looked like but she's-
Speaker 1: Mary McLeod Bethune certainly didn't look like-
Speaker 2: No, Mary McLeod Bethune certainly did not look like that.  But it's that kind of thing that she trips herself up on.  So-
Speaker 1: It represents a profound ignorance of black history and culture-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that someone who knows it-
Speaker 2: If you studied it for five minutes, you'd know that.  You know what Mary McLeod Bethune looks like.  But I guess she just thought I can, you know, gloss over this stuff and, you know, who's going to question me.  So, anyway, that's, you know, like now I have episode two--episode three, I guess, 'cause it's the fighting with the Haley's and the Tananarive Due book and then--and now Beverly Lowry.  And I don't know what the conclusion of that will be.  But the good parts of the book (laughter) after the, you know there's the ugly parts, it was--it was absolutely--it really is why I'm on the planet, I mean telling Madam Walker's story.
Story_ID: 91321
Speaker 1: What did you discover about Madam [C.J.] Walker that you had not known that was the most exciting things for you?
Speaker 2: You know what was really thrilling for me was to find what a political activist she was, you know.  What everybody knows is Madam Walker had something to do with hair.  They think she invented the straightening comb.  She didn't invent the straightening comb.  So there's more myth about her then there is, you know, reality and fact.  And I think that's true of a lot of famous people, that the myths around them kind of overtake the details because people like, you know, really sort of, you know, simple, easy, you know catchwords that they can--that they can hook onto.  But she's so much more interesting and so much more multi-dimensional than that.  And in doing the research, I was thrilled to find that she had been really involved in the anti-lynching movement and she had helped finance the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] anti-lynching initiatives.  She had spoken out for the rights of black soldiers during World War One [1914-1918].  She was an early feminist: a person who advocated economic independence for women.  She--in 1917, the year before Mary Kay was born, she had her first convention of national sales agents and more than 200 women came from all over the country and she gave prizes, just like Mary Kay, but she gave prizes not just to the women who sold the most products, or who brought in the most new agents, she gave prizes to the women who contributed the most to charity and to political causes.  At the end of the convention, the women sent a telegram to President Woodrow Wilson protesting the recent riots in East St. Louis [Missouri].  And then a couple of weeks later, she traveled with a number of Harlem leaders to--from New York [New York] to Washington [D.C.] to the White House to try to meet with President Woodrow Wilson to urge him to make lynching a federal crime.  And then later, during World War One, when a lot of people were being investigated, she was investigated by a black spy, a black war spy named Walter Loving.  She and Ida B. Wells [Barnett] were at a rally and I read some of the War Department classified documents and she was called a "Negro Subversive" and I just loved this because it was like being on a [Richard] Nixon enemies list in 1968 and I thought, "Go Madam."  You know, you're speaking out enough that you're upsetting people but you're doing the right thing.  So I loved finding that out about her.  I also found out about a husband she never mentioned and, you know, a marriage and the fact that she didn't divorce this second husband but married a third husband, you know.  So there were other things and those were the kinds of things that I felt, because my mother had given me permission to tell the truth, I could tell them.  But to me it made her a more believable character and when I tell the story, one of my motivations is to inspire other women and I speak at, you know, across the country at a variety of places.  I speak at Ivy League schools, I speak at elementary schools and last fall I spoke at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women [Bedford Hills, New York].  I had learned that they were reading my book in the college course there and I called the professor and asked if I could, could come to the prison and talk to the women.  And she invited me and there were about 80 women who came to this evening assembly and they had written papers and they had, they read from their papers and they had great questions and it was just thrilling to me to know that these women in prison were inspired by Madam Walker's story because in her story there is, you know, early loss of family.  There's abandonment, there's abuse, there are family members who commit crimes, you know, there is poverty.  So there are lots of things that women who are having difficult times can, can relate to and after the visit to the prison, I wanted to do something for these women 'cause they were, you know, they were trying so hard in that environment to improve themselves intellectually and, you know, just make their lives better and make their children's lives better.  And so I e-mailed a bunch of friends who are authors and I asked if they would donate a book, an autographed book, to the women to inspire them.  And now we've collected more than a thousand books and a few weeks ago I spoke at the commencement for the prison, the college graduation at the prison.  So that to me is the greatest reward in writing this book that there are people who are inspired and that there are kids who can do their reports on Madam Walker and tell her story, you know, 'cause you don't get rich writing a book and I didn't write the book to get rich.  It would have been nice if I had gotten rich writing the book but that wasn't--that wasn't the motivation and it's born out, you know, almost every week I get a call from somebody who is inviting me to come do a speech or who wants to hear the story.  And it's, you know, it's what I love to do.
Story_ID: 91322
Speaker 1: It seems--well, did you--I've read in some of the research on Marcus Garvey for instance-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that Madam Walker's home was a gathering place for a lot of intellectuals and activists and she, you know, she was the, I guess, she gave financial support to many independent efforts like those of Marcus Garvey-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: People start businesses and, you know, to uplift their race and-
Speaker 2: She, you know, you're absolutely right.  And she was, you know, much to the consternation of her attorney, F. B. Ransom, she was cavorting with some of those--those radicals.  He was nervous about that.  And in fact he was right.  That was--he had warned her about going to rallies with A. Philip Randolph and Marcus Garvey and that's when she was looked at as a Negro subversive.  But she did know Marcus Garvey and she invited him to a meeting at her house.  She and a number of other people were putting together a kind of umbrella group called, "The International League of Darker Peoples", and this was a group of different organizations, all of whom wanted to send delegates to Paris [France] to participate, or observe, the peace talks after World War One [1919].  And the U.S. Government, President Woodrow Wilson and his Secretary of State, the last thing they wanted was a bunch of black people coming to Paris, raising not just international issues about Germany and their African colonies, but domestic issues about African Americans and lynching and the treatment of black soldiers.  So, they were totally against that but Madam Walker met with Marcus Garvey and A. Philip Randolph and some others to discuss creating this group to send delegates.  Their passports were all denied.  Madam Walker's passport, along with most of the other African American leadership who applied for passports, they were prevented from going.
Speaker 1: This is where we get real history.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So we have Wilson-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --parading himself on the world stage as the author on the "Four Freedoms".  World peace, you know, a new United Nations, I mean the precursor to the United Nations, a League of Nations, and yet while he's president, lynching is reaching its highest level in the United States.  The [Klu Klux] Klan grows to its largest membership, you know.  I mean, this is--this is really something-
Speaker 2: It is--it is a tremendous irony, you know.  Unfortunately the Wilson historians don't, you know, try to deny that he was a racist.  I mean, he really was.  He could have cared less and when he was pushed, he would make kind of a, you know, tepid statements that would say, "Well you know, you all shouldn't really be lynching anybody" but it was clear that his heart wasn't in it.  It was sort of akin to [Ronald] Reagan, you know, I sort of see them as similar kinds of people.  He, you know, he's the one who re-segregated public facilities in Washington [D.C.] and, you know, government facilities.  So, yeah, he was-
Speaker 1: He endorsed "Birth of a Nation" [1915]-
Speaker 2: Right, he endorsed birth of a--yeah, he was really bad news for African Americans.
Speaker 1: So your great-great-grandmother was really--she was doing what the Civil Rights Movement later did to the American government, exposing them before the world-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to try to end these injustices here.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  And you know she was interesting in the sense that, you know, most--at that period of time, I mean, by then, by World War One [1914-1918], Booker T. Washington had died but when he was living, she had a relationship both with Washington and with [W.E.B.] Du Bois but many people had to choose between the two.  They had to either be a Du Bois person or a Washington person and many people owed their jobs to Washington, political patronage, that he controlled and, you know, more--many people who were Southern and Du Bois was appealing more to people in the North.  But Madam Walker was interesting because she did not have to choose because she had her own resources and she was the wealthiest black woman in America.  I mean, between Madam Walker and her competitor, Annie Malone, they were the two wealthiest black women-
Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri], the one in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: St. Louis, right.
Speaker 1: What was her-
Speaker 2: Poro. Yeah, Poro Institute-
Speaker 1: Exactly-
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So she could mix it up with whomever and she basically--she was friendly with Monroe Trotter, with A. Philip Randolph, with Washington, with Du Bois, with Mary McLeod Bethune, with Ida B. Wells-Barnett, she wanted to do whatever she thought would be good for the race, that was her objective.
Story_ID: 91323
Speaker 1: Well how was the book received first of all and what is the reality?  You said, you didn't make a whole lot of-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --money off of this but it is--it's the kind of book-
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it's been successful, you know, as books go.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) libraries, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it's the kind of book that any library would have to have-
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in its collection?
Speaker 2: You know, the book was really well-received.  I mean, I cannot complain in any way.  It was positively reviewed by, you know, all the major publications, "The New York Times", the "Chicago Tribune, the "Wall Street"--not the "Wall Street Journal", "The New York Times", "Chicago Tribune", "Washington Post", "People Magazine".  I was on "Fresh Air" on NPR, I was on "CBS Sunday Morning", I mean, people were really intrigued by Madam [C.J.] Walker's story and they were intrigued by my connection to it and my, you know, sort of perseverance in telling the story and, you know, and my love of it, my absolutely sincere enthusiasm in telling the story.  So, you know, as a person who's worked in news all of her adult life I, you know, I know a good story and I know how to pitch a good story but I had great support from the publisher and from the publicist at Scribner and Simon and Schuster.  So we really had, you know, wonderful, wonderful support and it made the "New York Times" extended best seller list which is just below the 15 and the "Washington Post" best seller list and the "L.A. Times" best seller list.  It was a "New York Times" notable book.  It received a number of awards.  One from the Black Caucus of the American Library Association.  It was a finalist in the ANEW [Annual National Entrepreneurship Week] competition that Borders and the Hurston Wright Foundation sponsors.  It was the "Book of the Year" on Black Women's History from the Association of Black Women Historian.  So, I had, you know, all of the strokes that I could possibly want from this book.  And on my website I get letters from people.  It's gotten very positive reviews when people send the reviews in on Amazon.com.  So I'm--I'm very, very happy about the book.  And book sales are a very interesting thing and we, you know, we know about Stephen King, who sells a million books.  And we know about "Roots," that sold a million books but most books sell fewer than five thousand copies and my book sold a whole lot more than five thousand copies and I made my advance back and I've gotten a royalty check.  A lot of books never get a royalty check.  But again, it's not, you know, I'm not going to get rich and I'm not going to, you know, be able to pay all my living expenses on the sales of the book but one, one thing that the book has done is to get Madam Walker's story out there and it also legitimizes me as the teller of the story and the keeper of the flame and so I do get invitations to do a lot of speeches, which I, which I, you know, do at least a couple a months, sometimes more than that and travel all around the country telling the story.  And I'm now at work on a biography on A'Lelia Walker, Madam Walker's daughter, and her parties during the '20's [1920s].  So it'll be a really different book.
Speaker 1: Harlem Renaissance-
Speaker 2: Harlem Renaissance, right.  It'll be--it will be--you know Madam's story is up from slavery, even though she wasn't a slave but from that era and she is so much a representative of what African Americans experienced between the Civil War [1861-1865] and World War One [1914-1918], the evolution of African American politics and business and commerce.  And her daughter's story is a totally different story.  It's the story of an heiress and there's glamour and there's tragedy and there's the conflict between mother and daughter and living up to a mother's expectations.  So, it's a different story but I think it'll be a fun story to tell.
Story_ID: 91324
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Have you considered writing about anyone other than the Walkers?
Speaker 2: You know, that's an interesting question.  I have so much to do just telling their stories but the other people that I would be interested in writing about are some of my other relatives.  Not, the ones who are not famous but telling their stories and I don't know if I would tell--there might be historical fiction to talk about the great-great-great-grandfather who was--who traveled from Ohio to Memphis, Tennessee, and who worked with Robert Church and then ended up in Arkansas and was elected to state office and who then took his children to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] to go to college.  That's a fascinating story and there's so many stories about African Americans that haven't been told.  I mean, they've been told among us but people--unless you have a great oral tradition in your family, those stories are lost and the publishing industry had not really been interested in those stories and, but though there were always black people who wrote their own stories have published their own stories.  You know, you find these obscure books.  There might have been five hundred copies of them but I want to tell our story and I have a unique vantage point and some really interesting ancestors whose story I can tell.  And through their personal stories, I want to tell the story of African Americans and I want, in many ways, I want to write history in the way I wish it had been written for me when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a self-serving question on my part--
Speaker 2: Um-hum. --representing this organization but what potential do you see in the value of this project and where you're engaged at?
Speaker 1: This is fabulous.  I mean, this is doing--you're doing exactly what I was doing.  You don't know where it's going to go.  You don't know if you're going to make any money.  You don't know if, you know, somebody is going to air it, you know, in the sort of a huge commercial way but that's not the point.  The point is that these stories have to be preserved and if we don't preserve our stories, nobody else is.  I mean this, I can just see this being something that is, you know, 50 years from now people are going to be so glad it happened.
Story_ID: 88205
Speaker 1: Now we went back on everything you have done in the media, including writing this book.  What do you see as your legacy?  You're still young, I know-
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right (laughter).  I think--I think my legacy--there are two things.  I really feel very proud of the career that I've had in television and I, at this point in my life as Director of Talent Development, and making a difference quietly behind the scenes in terms of correspondents that we hire and producers that we hire, and I hope that there will be some legacy that I leave at ABC that I will have made a difference with some of the younger employees who I'm helping to mentor and who I'm creating career mentoring and development initiatives for and that I will have had some impact on the outward face of ABC News, in terms of our correspondents.  The other part of the legacy that I hope I'm leaving is two really great books and maybe a third book if I am able to finish that book.  But two--a young adult book about Madam [C.J.] Walker [Madam C.J. Walker: Entrepreneur] and really the first comprehensive nonfiction biography of Madam Walker [On Her Own Ground: The Life and Times of Madam C.J. Walker] and that through those books, through that story, I've been able to help contribute to the canon that tells the stories of African Americans--of great African Americans of every day African Americans of our history and the contributions that we've made.  So those--those are the things that are very important to me.  I don't have any children so I'm not leaving behind any offspring but through the telling of Madam Walker's story and through my work as a producer, and now an executive with ABC, I do think that I am having some impact on the next generation and generations to come.  My books will always be on the bookshelf and a hundred years from now, if somebody wants to know about Madam Walker or if they want to read about the history of African Americans between the Civil War [1861-1865] and World War One [1914-1918], as told through the story of this great woman, that they'll be able to find it in my book.
Speaker 1: Okay, and one last question.
Speaker 2: Actually, you know, with them, there's one other thing I didn't think of that I'm thinking about.  I'm really blessed to have the artifacts of the Walker women and my significant other, Fred Cook, is the neat one of the duo and I'm the packrat, and I've inherited this packrat gene from my family and thank goodness, my grandfather [Marion Rowland Perry, Jr.] saved everything which is why I have so many photographs and so many papers and artifacts that have belonged to Madam Walker.  But I have these tangible pieces of their lives and I have things that are on exhibit in a couple of museums in New York [New York] right now, at the Museum of the City of New York and at the New York Historical Society.  I lend things to a lot of museums and when I'm gone, those things will be donated and so in some way that these women's lives will carry on and other people will be able to see the things that have belonged to them.
Story_ID: 88206
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Um, I'd like to be remembered as a person who was--who told a story accurately, who told a story with passion, as a person who made a contribution to her community.  I'm involved in a lot of boards and a lot of volunteer activities and I do that because I get a lot of satisfaction but I also do that because I think that I've been blessed and that part of the rent that I have to pay to be on the planet is to make a contribution to my community.  And so I, I do want to be remembered as somebody who gave--who did her best and who tried to help other people along the way and who really cared about quality and who cared about trying to make the world a better place.
Story_ID: 88207
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Alex Haley and me, we're at the Smithsonian [Institute, Washington, D.C.].  This is sometime in the mid to late '80s [1980s] and we had just made a presentation about Madam [C.J.] Walker in conjunction with the "Field to Factory" exhibit.
Speaker 2: Now, what date is that?
Speaker 1: It's sometime in the mid '80s.  It might be '88 [1988] or so. All right.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see you're doing this--oh I see the magic of it is that you can flip it--the electronic avid and all of that stuff.  This is me with Alex Haley.  We are in a banana grove in Ecuador and I've--Alex, of course, was known for writing his books on freighters and in the summer of 1990 I traveled with Alex and two other people on a freighter between Long Beach and Ecuador and I finished the manuscript for my young adult book on that trip.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm here with Alex Haley and Maya Angelou at Alex's farm in Tennessee and this is probably late 1980s, I would say maybe 1989, 1990, something like that.  And Alex had invited a lot of people for a week and Glynn Turman was also one of the people who was there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, (unclear).
Speaker 2: This--I'm on--I'm in the midst of my book tour and I'm speaking to a group of women at a Goodwill Center in Atlanta [Georgia], women who are former welfare recipients who now have started their own businesses.
Speaker 1: I'm in Charlotte, North Carolina with--after having done--just done a book signing with the group of women who came and who were really enthusiastic about Madam Walker's story.  They all bought books.  That was great (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: I'm in the basement of the AME--one of the AME corporate offices in Washington, D.C. and I'm speaking to a group of young women in a mentoring group that's sponsored by one of The Links Chapters in Washington, D.C.  This is a Saturday morning.  This is in 2001--2002.
Speaker 2: I'm at the 21 Club in New York [New York] and I've just given a speech to a group of women in publishing about Madam Walker and on the left is my editor, Lisa Ross--Lisa Ross--on the left is my editor Lisa Drew, who also was Alex Haley's editor on "Roots" and on the right is my boss in New York, Amy Entelis, who's senior vice president of business affairs at ABC News in New York.
Speaker 1: You got it?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  And that was 2002 or so.
Speaker 1: I am in a--I think I'm in a book store in Harlem [New York, New York] and I'm not really sure but I believe that's in Harlem and I think it's 2001 and I'm with two kind people who've come to my book party--my book signing.
Speaker 2: Me in 1984, the summer of 1984, with Jesse Jackson in Cuba.  He had just negotiated the release of some political prisoners and we are in the VIP lounge in the airport in Havana [Cuba].  Oh, and it's 1984, summer of 1984.
Speaker 1: I'm there in the light green dress taking notes while [Fidel] Castro and Jesse talk in the VIP lounge in the Havana airport in the summer of 1984.  It was in the midst of the Jackson campaign between the primaries and the Democratic convention.  And I'm the pool reporter for--I'm taking notes for all the other reporters on the plane.
Speaker 2: And this is a really ugly picture of me.  I'm shaking Hilary Clinton's hands.  This is at George Washington University in Washington, D.C. and Hilary Clinton was speaking to a group of students.  It's--an ABC radio was producing this event and at the time I was deputy bureau chief so I went as a representative of ABC News.
Speaker 1: I'm sitting at my desk in Washington, D.C.  At this point I was deputy bureau chief so this is probably 1998 or 1999.  I'm actually back in the same office now, in 2003, as director of talent development.
Speaker 2: Is that up too much or should I-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: This is my favorite picture with my mother [A'Lelia Mae Perry Bundles] and me.  This is probably about 1956 or seven [1957] and we are in our house that we lived in in Indianapolis [Indiana], 3841 Brookwood.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother.  This picture--this is one of the last pictures that were taken of my mother and she's standing next to her garden in the backyard and she's holding some--I think--is she holding vegetables in there?  Oops.  I'm sorry, I'm trying to see.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Look at the monitor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm you know-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, it looks like a strawberry or something-
Speaker 1: Yeah, something, but she's standing next to her garden.  She was really proud of her garden.  This is early one morning before work.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, this is my mother as a "Hot Momma" and this is when we lived in Atlantic City so this has to be around 1954 or so.  And she's on the beach in Atlantic City.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All righty.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in 1998 when the--on the first day of Issue Ceremony for the Madam Walker postage stamp and I'm standing with LeGree Daniels, is the lady with the gray suit on the left, and Carol Simpson, who's a correspondent and anchor for "ABC News" is in the center and I don't know who the gentleman is on the left.  He's a postal executive.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: This is the unveiling of the Madam Walker's stamp in 1998 at the first day of Issue Ceremony at the Madam Walker Theatre Center in Indianapolis.  There are various postal officials and Walker Theatre Center Board members who are included in this picture.  The person in the red suit, on the left, is Carol Simpson, of "ABC News", next to her is LeGree Daniels who is on the Board of Governors of the Postal Service and then I am just to the right of the stamp.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in high school and it must--I'm standing in front of the administrative office so it must have to do with my role as vice president of student council and this is 1969--no, yeah, 1969 or '70' [1970].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm here with my cousins.  I'm sitting on the floor and my two older girl cousins, Vanessa and Cheryl, are holding their doll babies.  This is Christmas at my father's parent's [Samuel Henry Bundles, Sr. and Ellis Davis Bundles] house in Indianapolis and this is probably 1954 or so 19--no, probably 1956 or seven [1957].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Start on top.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My brother, Lance [Bundles], and I are at the Indianapolis airport with my father, [Samuel] Henry Bundles [Jr.], and my father traveled a lot so we were always going to the airport to pick him up or take him to go away and, when you're ready?
Speaker 1: This picture is probably kindergarten or first grade, maybe first or second grade.  It's somewhere in the late '50's [1950s].  Can you hand me the phone?
Speaker 2: That's me, just a few months old and my daddy used to take lots of pictures of me so-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm standing here with my mother.  I think this is the last picture I took with my mother.  This is probably the summer of '70' [1970].  Well, does the place card say what year it is?  Let me see, I'm sorry.  Sorry, 1970s, and I'm standing with my mother in front of our house in Indianapolis with one of the Indianapolis 500 Pace Cars.  My father was a festival director for many years so we got a Pace Car every year.
Speaker 1: I'm here on the back of my parent's car in Chicago with my little pants rolled up and this is sometime in the mid '50's [1950s], probably '53' [1953] or four [1954].  In fact, the license will probably tell you what year it is.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Um, I see something.
Speaker 1: Um yeah, maybe it looks like four-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty-five [1955], actually, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, great, great.
Speaker 2: I think--I think in this picture I am at the Bronner Brothers, either the Bronner Brothers Convention or the Proud Lady American Health and Beauty Aid Institute Convention and I have a booth where I'm selling copies of my young adult book, "Madam C. J. Walker: Entrepreneur".  The last time I had long hair.
Speaker 1: Well, I really don't want you to use this unless you take my moustache off here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  We didn't even notice that. Oh boy, oh boy.
Speaker 1: This was before I had my moustache wax.  This is taken in--wait a minute--let me just see what--this is a photograph that was taken in Los Angeles [California] probably mid to late '80's [1980s] and one of my college friends, Gordon Lewis, who was the photographer who chronicled the black students at Harvard [University] during my era and I was visiting him and his wife at that point and I had dinner at their house.
Speaker 2: I think this may be the same--this may be the same, my hair's a little different.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Same occasion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have on the same outfit, I have on the same earrings.  It may be the same time in L.A., at my friend Gordon Lewis' house, sometime in the mid to late '80's [1980s].
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, I was--this was when I was in Jamaica doing, I think, I don't know if at this point I was doing the research for my Master's paper but I was in Ocho Rios, somewhere not doing research on the balcony of a hotel and this would have been sometime between 1972 and 1974.
Speaker 2: This is my great-great-grandmother, A'Lelia Walker, in one of her famous turbans.  She was known for her turbans.  She was a very flamboyant woman.
Speaker 1: This is another picture of A'Lelia Walker.  This is signed in 1926 so I'm guessing it's around that time and she's in another one of her flamboyant outfits.  I always call this the "Cossack" outfit.  She was known--a lot of artists and writers liked to paint and sculpt her.
Speaker 2: This is Madam C. J. Walker in 1913, at the dedication of the Indianapolis YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  Madam Walker is the only woman in the picture.  To the left of Madam Walker is George Knox, the publisher of the "Indianapolis Freeman."  Directly behind Madam Walker, with the straw hat, is F. B. Ransom, her attorney, and general manager.  To the right of Madam Walker is Booker T. Washington, the man holding the white hat.  To the right of Booker T. Washington there are two men who were businessmen in Indianapolis.  I don't know their names.  Immediately behind them is Dr. Joseph Ward, who was Madam Walker's physician and one of the prominent black physicians in Indianapolis.  And the man on the very end, on the right, was Thomas Taylor, who was the secretary of the black YMCA in Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Madam C. J. Walker at the first convention of Walker Agents.  She is in the middle, between Mr. Ransom, who's the only man you see on the front row in the suit and the woman who has on the white dress.  Madam Walker is there surrounded by delegates of Walker Agents and beauty culturists, as she called them, who had come from all over the United States to tell their stories about being Walker Agents and the money they made and how they'd been able to help their families and their communities.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Midwest?  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the--this is Villa Lewaro, Madam Walker's home in Irvington, New York and this is the back view of the house and with--arrayed with Walker's sales agents and beauty culturists who had attended the 1924 convention.
Speaker 1: And this is close to where the Rockefellers lived?
Speaker 2: Right, it's not far from Rockefellers.  Its--its-- Kykuit is a few miles away.  Jay Gould's estate is about three-quarters of a mile.
Speaker 1: That's the famous Jay Gould of the smuggle scandal (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was involved--he was many--involved in many scandals.  Banking I think was-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --controlled that.
Speaker 1: This is Villa Lewaro, a front view with Walker Agents at the 1924 Walker Sales Convention.  They had made--they had met in the city, in New York, and then they made this pilgrimage to Villa Lewaro.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us who they are from left to right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mae [Walker Perry] (laughter).
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: --yes, just to the right of the arrow, and then next is F. B. Ransom.  So if you see the one man who's on the front row, to his left, that's F. B. Ransom, and to his left is my grandmother, Mae.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is--I love this picture.  This is Madam Walker at the wheel of her Model T, in front of her house, in Indianapolis.  This picture is taken probably 1911 or so and seated in the front seat next to her is her niece, Anjetta Breedlove, the daughter of one of her brothers.  Directly behind Madam Walker is Alice Kelly, who was the forelady of the factory and a former teacher at a school in Kentucky called, "Axtell Norton".  And the person next to Alice Kelly, I'm not sure, I think that was Madam Walker's bookkeeper but there's--there's two different--people have told me two different things, so, I'll never know.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Madam C. J. Walker's vegetable shampoo.  This picture of her was taken around 1905 or 1906 and this was the image that she used on most of her products.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Softer, silkier vegetable.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is Madam Walker in her fur coat, a seal coat.  I think they called it "Hudson Seal".  I'm not sure what year this is.  My guess is that it's circa 1915 or '16' [1916].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is probably--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hum, ready.
Speaker 1: This is probably the most famous picture of Madam Walker.  It was taken around 1912 and it's taken by Addison Scurlock who was a very famous black photographer in Washington, D.C.  He was to Washington what [James] Van Der Zee was to Harlem.
Speaker 2: This is a graduation of Walker beauty culturists in 1939 in St. Louis.  Madam Walker is long dead by this time but this is an example of one of the lovely beauty schools that The Walker Company sponsored and in the--on the front row, the fourth person from the left is Jesse Robinson who, at that point, was the owner and the principal of the school but who also had been a mentor to Madam Walker.  She was a former schoolteacher in the St. Louis Public Schools and when Madam Walker first arrived in St. Louis [Missouri], she was one of the women at St. Paul AME Church who helped encourage Madam Walker to improve her life.
Speaker 1: And this is a Walker beautician in her home beauty salon and I think this is the 1930s.  There's a calendar on the wall that will verify the date but it's interesting to have these two pictures back-to-back because the Walker--being able to be a Walker agent allowed a wide variety of women to make their own money and to be economically independent.  And some of them had beauty shops at home and some of them had fancy beauty shops often on the main drag in the black community in cities all over the United States.
Speaker 2: This was from the very first ad that Madam Walker created and she used a very effective, before and after, images.  Kind of like the Jenny Craig commercials today but in the center, which Madam Walker was--she really developed something she called a "wonderful hair grower" because she was going bald because she had scalp disease and the--between the use of the vegetable shampoo, which cleansed the scalp and then the application of this ointment which included sulfur, she was able to grow her hair.  And you can see the effects of her wonderful hair grower in the pictures on either side.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, one last one, and this is it.
Speaker 1: This is me with my family.  My youngest brother, Mark [Bundles], had not been born yet so he's not in this picture but this picture was taken probably around 1960--maybe 1960, 1961.  We were living in our house in--on Grandview Drive in Indianapolis and so I'm on the left, my brother, Lance, is the little cute, little boy in the suit and my mother and my father.
