Story_ID: 20561
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers archives.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Jeannette Elizabeth Brown, Jeannette, J-E-A-N-N-E-T-T-E, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Brown, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 13, 1934.  I was born in Bronx Hospital, in Bronx, New York at 5:00 p.m., roughly.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired Research Chemist at the moment and author.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the title of your, a book you just published--
Speaker 2: I just published a book called "African American Women Chemists".  And it's Oxford University Press.  The publication date was December 14th, 2011.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 16th, 2012.  It's MLK's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday, celebration.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Minneapolis, Minnesota at the Minnesota University Hotel.
Story_ID: 20562
Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, before we go into depth, there are six, lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm up.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Winter, snow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's hard (laughter).  Hawaii, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A hundred and one years ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you just say that as a general, I mean as a general reference to the past?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I say, a hundred and one years ago, I did this.
Story_ID: 20563
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family as well as your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother was Ada May Fox Brown, of course.  Her name, Ada, A-D-A, May, M-A-Y, Fox, F-O-X, and then Brown, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think it was August 26, 2005--no, I'm sorry, 1905.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: I think she was born in Connecticut, but I'm not quite sure where or what town.  I know her sister was born in Bridgeport [Connecticut], but I don't think she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, tell us, what do you know about your mother's [Ada May Fox] side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I, as far, I've been doing a little family history on my mother's side of the family.  My great grandfather was Henry Dillard.  And he was a United--he was an American missionary minister, licensed minister.  The American Missionary Association was part of United Church of Christ now.  And they were sent down to do education programs for the slaves right after the Civil War.  He had a church down in Sedalia [North Carolina], no, I'm sorry--no, Sedalia is my cousin, McLeansville, North Carolina.  He had a small church in McLeansville, North Carolina.  And my grand--his daughter, my grandmother was Maxie Dillard, Dillard-Fox.  She was the oldest of the family, oldest girl in the family.  There were four or five--oh, it must have been five people.  There were three, three boys and two girls in that family, but my grandmother [Maxie Dillard] was the oldest.  And my grandmother lived in, grew up in McLeansville, North Carolina.  She had taken education so she could be a school teacher.  But then when the whole family moved north, at that time, my father, my grandfather moved north to become a carpenter, a minister who was a carpenter.  And they moved to New England.  And I don't think he had a church in New England.  And then they moved up to Pittsfield, Massachusetts where my--everybody moved up there, including my mother and my grand, and my, and my grandmother had married John Fox.  And my mother moved, they moved up to Pittsfield because that was the GE--GE [General Electric] had just started up their, opened up a plant in Pittsfield [Massachusetts].  And so there were a lot of people up there.  It was a diverse community, my mother always said.  There were Italians, there were Polish, there were Germans.  There were whatever (unclear).  I think they were the only African Americans on the street where she lived in Pittsfield, but everybody taught, helped everybody's kids, and they all ate at everybody's houses and everything like that.  That's what she was told.  She showed me the street.  I know where it is.  I've been there in Pittsfield.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was that a home base for the General Electric Company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they still have a place there in general, in Pittsfield, I think, or outside of Pittsfield.  They were just beginning, you know.  This is the beginning of electricity in that (laughter) in that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What did your mother say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, as I said, she was, grew up in Pittsfield, and in this diverse community where everybody took care of everybody else's family.  The house they lived in, I think they only had heat downstairs.  So when she wanted to go upstairs to go to bed, you know, they took a warm brick and took it upstairs and put it in the bed to keep the bed warm.  There was a sister, my mother had a sister, Elizabeth.  That's where I get my middle name from.  Elizabeth is sort of a family name.  So they, just the two girls.  There had been a third child who was born in Bridgeport, Ma- Connecticut, but that child died at age three.  And it could have been that flu epidemic that was around.  Nobody knows.  My Aunt Elizabeth said somebody probably stole her.  I don't think so (laughter).  We have different--in our family, we have differences of color.  My grandmother and her father are very light.  And so I think that sister, that child was also very light.  So maybe somebody just thought that she was a white child and took her.  My mother was dark 'cause her father was dark.  My mother's sister, Elizabeth, is lighter than my mother was.  And so we have a gradation in my whole family of color.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said that Pittsfield was a diverse--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my, it seems like the whole Dillard family moved up there because when I was doing my roots, two of my, my grandmother's brothers lived in Pittsfield.  And they were all in the nursing home in the, Pitts--assisted living home in Pittsfield back then.  I haven't--and I think they're all dead now.  And one of her grand, her nieces and nephews--nieces lived there.  I went to see her house, at their house.  And so, yeah, Pittsfield was, that was where my mother, it was the base, base of activities for my mother, Pittsfield, Massachusetts in the Berkshires.  That's why I like snow.  See, I'm used to, I'm, I'm--got these New England roots from my mother (laughter).
Story_ID: 20564
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Ada May Fox] went up to two years of high school.  She, as I said, my grandmother had had enough education to teach down in the South, but, you know, they weren't gonna let a black woman teach up in the North.  So she went into service.  And she took her daughters, and sometimes there was a sleep away.  So they took the two daughters to work in the service, and my Aunt Elizabeth hated it.  My mother sort of tolerated it.  And my mother worked, I think she worked in service with a woman down in, oh, God, what's the name of the town in New England?  Ah, (laughter), oh, it's down in the Berkshires.  I'll think, it's where John--Rockwell has his house now.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew you were gonna ask that question.  Anyway, my mother worked down there, and she worked--in the summer, she worked for this woman.  And the woman wanted her to stay down there with her.  And she would take her to high--put her in high school and stay year around.  And my grandmother [Maxie Dillard] said, no.  She didn't want her to, to stay down there.  So my grandmother--she went back north, back up to Pittsfield [Massachusetts].  Oh, God, Tanglewood.  I'm trying to think of the town.  It's outside of Tanglewood, and it's--I'm looking at the town, but I'm not looking at a name.
Speaker 1: Okay, but this is the town that Norman Rockwell lived in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Norman Rockwell Library is there now [Stockbridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll think of it.  It'll come.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so in those days, were the--so women were still, there were a lot women that lived with the families they worked for in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like 'The Help' [2011 film] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like it would, that would present a problem for, you know, raising your family--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, in that situation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the family that they worked for, yeah, they--I have a picture of my mother going to, in the summer, they would go to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And I have a picture of my mother on the boat going to Martha's Vineyard.  And so their winter house was in Massachusetts, Stockbridge--that's the name of the town, Stockbridge, Massachusetts.  And their summerhouse was on the Vineyard, on the, Martha's Vineyard.  And so they just moved back and forth.  And they would stay and stay with, my mother would stay with them when she was a teenager, I think.  She might have commuted.  There was a trolley car that ran from Pittsburgh--Pittsfield, down to Stockbridge [Massachusetts], down to Lennox [Massachusetts], that area.  And she might have commuted.  Maybe after school, she commuted down to work with, work for the woman because their--the old trolley line is still there.  There's a bus that runs now, but the trolley doesn't run.  And so my mother used to talk about taking that trolley.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it--did she ever meet Norman Rockwell?  I'm thinking I may as well ask.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, she was, they were long gone by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Or who was gone, your parents were gone by, I mean your mother moved before--
Speaker 2: I think they were gone from that area, from the Berkshires, by the time [Norman] Rockwell got there.  I haven't figured out--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --the two sets of dates.
Story_ID: 20565
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Okay, all right, so, okay, now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Freddie Brown.  I don't think he has a middle name, and sometimes they called him Frederick, but his name was Freddie, F-R-E-D-D-I-E, Brown.  And he was from Wilmington, North Carolina.  He, again, he's the oldest of his family.  He had one brother, Charles Brown.  And I think four or five sisters.
Speaker 1: About approximately when was he born(unclear)?
Speaker 2: He was born, oh, I know that date.  It's September 3rd, 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that date.  We always celebrated it right after Labor Day or around Labor Day.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, well, what about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I didn't go very far on his side of the family.  I haven't really worked on that very much.  He said that his mother was full-blooded Cherokee [Indian] named Warpole or something like that.  And his, his sisters are in the, the children of his sisters, my cousins, they know nothing about that.  And since my father was the oldest, he knew all about the family history.  And I really haven't dug into it.  I haven't been to Wilmington, North Carolina at all.  My father used to write about his stories, and I guess, I can look it up about his, a little bit about his family in Wilmington [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: So he would write about his--
Speaker 2: Oh, later on, yeah.  He would write a lot (laughter).  He was a writer.  But he only had a third-grade education.  He left Wilmington, North Carolina about the time when he was 16.  He, his age was so that he was between World War I and World War II.  I think he was too young for World War I and too old for World War II or he had a disability before that.  But he didn't like the racism in North Carolina.  So he, when he was 16, he just--that's it.  He shook the dust of North Carolina off, went north and--
Story_ID: 20566
Speaker 1: Did he have--excuse me for interrupting, but did he have any stories about the racism in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  And one of the stories--I gave a sermon at my church, when he was a child he talked about the Wilmington [North Carolina] Massacre [1898].  The Wilmington Massacre is history.  You can look it up in the, on, you can Google it, which I did.  It turns out, I think it was after the Civil War.  Wilmington was all--what was it?  Democratic or Republican, I can't remember.  One of the, they were all--most of the people who worked in the legislature or in the town, township were black.  And one of the other party said, no, there can't be blacks running this town of Wilmington.  And so they started killing people or, you know, the (unclear) [boosters?], the barbershop and the stores and everything.  So there was that, and people were running away because of the fact that they were being massacred.  And so that story is available on Google, and he wrote it, talked about it.  And he was three years old at that time when that happened [sic, 1892].
Speaker 1: Right, now, this is something I just found out about last year.  As a matter of fact, there's a story I'll tell you after we finish about this.  But, yes, when the Reconstruction government was black, and ran the City of Wilmington, and the whites actually organized a militia and destroyed city hall--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and killed people--
Speaker 2: And he wrote about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was like a war.
Speaker 2: It was like a war, I know.
Speaker 1: They took the government over, and the federal government did nothing about it, nor did the State of North Carolina.  In--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  So that's why he, you know, when he--
Speaker 1: Public insurrection in American history.
Speaker 2: --when he was old enough, he said, I'm leaving.  I mean any place that's like that.  And it's funny because it must have been--
Speaker 1: Or Coup d'etat (unclear) (simultaneous), right--
Speaker 2: --the Democrats.  It was the Democrats at the time because my father was a lifetime Republican--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Party of Lincoln Republicans.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, so it must have been the Democrats that were destroying everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the blacks were Republicans and the white Democrats.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Party of Lincoln Republicans.
Speaker 1: This is the way it is.  They say it's the first and only Coup d'etat in American history--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --for a city.
Speaker 2: The Wilmington Massacre.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And he told me about that.  And then he would write about other things political.  I think we have an FBI file on us (laughter) because he swore he was gonna get to the president if the president didn't do what he wanted him to do.
Speaker 1: Gee, okay.  What president did he particularly dislike or was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, anyone that wasn't Republican, I guess (laughter) at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a lifelong Republican?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a lifetime Republican.  He died a Republican.
Story_ID: 20567
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, did your father have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't bother.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, you said third grade.
Speaker 2: Third grade, yeah.  But he always talked about common sense.  He says, yeah, you know, I only have a third grade education, but I have common sense, which most people--and he said then, did not have common sense.  And I almost can say the same thing now.  They can't think outside--well, my, I just say they don't think outside of the box.  If it's not written down on the paper, I don't--we don't know anything about that.  They don't know about history.  And so that's--my father tried very hard to get me into Black History.  And I was a young, rebellious girl, and I said, "No, they don't teach it in school."  You know, but he has all these books about Black History that I have still in my library that he bought and read.  Yeah, he taught himself to read very well, and he taught himself to write and taught himself to type.  And he had a little typewriter, and he typed all of his, everything that he wrote.  And, oh, he, and he's a--he was sort of an inventor too because he liked things electronic.  When radio first started, he built himself a crystal radio.  When television started, he built the first color TV, he put together from a kit.  I was screaming and yelling at him because we lived in an apartment, and there was stuff all over the living room floor, but he was putting together this TV.  So, it worked too.
Speaker 1: Um, so, was he the first person you were exposed to that had like a scientific kind of, even though he wasn't trained, he had a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so because of his exploratory, he explored everything.  And he wanted to find out how it worked, picked it apart.  So I pick things apart.  I told him, I took my dolls apart (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he have friends that engaged in the same kind of activities or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know that.  He worked in the Post Office.  I don't know whether he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, I was gonna ask you what he did for a living.  So he got a job in the Post Office.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is--
Speaker 2: Well, he, he--okay, when he left Wilmington, North Carolina, he got several jobs.  I think he worked in service too.  He worked for a man, he was a man's right-hand man.  And then he taught himself to cook.  He was a cook I guess for a while.  And then somehow or other he wound up as a Pullman Porter.  So he was a Pullman Porter for a while.  That's, my love of railroads comes from him.  He told me about the Twentieth Century Limited, and how he worked on the Twentieth Century Limited and all the movie stars that he saw on that because that was the train that went from New York [New York] to Chicago [Illinois].  And it was just the Twentieth Century Limited and in the Pullman cars and how he took care of all these movie stars and actors and actresses and stuff like that.  So I always wanted to get on the Twentieth Century Limited.  And I did go on way later, you know.  I mean it wasn't the famous train that it was when he was working.  So, yeah, he loved, he loved the railroads, and so that's why I like 'em too.
Story_ID: 20568
Speaker 1: Okay, well, he seemed like he was, he was very active, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I mean he met--my mother and father met when they were both working in service.  They met in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  They were both working in the hotels in Atlantic City, the Traymore Hotel, which has been torn down by Trump [Donald Trump], I think or one of the big hotels.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that, Traymore?
Speaker 2: Tremore, T-, I think it's T-R-E-M-O-R-E, and I was gonna look it too because I wanna see where it was.  [Traymore Hotel in Atlantic City].  There's a story about Atlantic City and about blacks in Atlantic City, and I was gonna look that up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I took them later on, when I as a chemist, I took them to Atlantic City, and they were so excited because oh, we could swim on the beach in front of the hotel.  I think the hotel was still there, which they couldn't do when they were working in service.  There was another beach further north called the "Chicken Beach" where they could go.  And that was where all the service, service people could go, all the African Americans.
Speaker 1: So Chicken Beach, huh?
Speaker 2: New Jersey, the Mason Dixon Line goes through New Jersey, and Atlantic City is still sort of, you know, separate--well, it's kind of like an urban area, segregation--not so much segregation, but it's--at the time when I took them down there, I was driving down there, and I was trying to get gas in the gas station.  I sat there 'cause we don't pump gas in New Jersey.  And they looked at me like they weren't gonna serve me.  And I went, oh, my God.  I'm in New Jersey, and I had to go to another gas station to find, so they could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had quite an experience.  They lived a number of different places along the East Coast before getting to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother--I don't know.  Let's see now.  That connection, I don't know, from Massachusetts down to Atlantic City where my mother was working because I know when they met.  And then they got married.  Then they moved to New York [New York], and that's where we lived in New York.  And my father was working, I think my father was still working in service.  And my mother was a housewife or, no, but then it was, no, they had me.  So my mother wasn't doing anything.  And then my father got a job working as a superintendent in a house, you know, shoveling coal into furnace at that time and maintaining things in the house.  And so we lived in Washington Heights which is one of the sections of Upper New York other than Harlem and then there's Washington Heights.  And that, Washington Heights was just becoming, was turning into becoming a black neighborhood.  But my father was the super.  And so we lived there for a while.  But we moved around in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--do you know why your parents moved to New York?
Speaker 2: Probably there was more opportunities for jobs.
Speaker 1: Were there other relatives there already?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we had some relatives.  Yeah, my cousin Vina--not my cousin, Vina, yeah.  I've done the family history, but I, there's some fuzzy things about it, about the branches of--the cousins that we would stay with.  And I have to figure out where they come from and how they link into the family.  But there were some relatives there in New York, and his sisters, his sisters, two of 'em were in New Jersey.  And one of 'em lived in Connecticut.  And, yeah, he was, he was the only--oh, Onion, his brother lived in New York.  His brother was married and had five kids.  And he lived in New York too.
Story_ID: 20569
Speaker 1: Well, how would you describe your parents' personalities?
Speaker 2: My parents' personalities? Oh, wow. My father, he really loved me.  I was an only child because--and I was destined to become an only child because my mother had gotten Cancer and was told never to have another child.  But my father--so I was the boy that my father never had.  And so I would pal around with him and like, as I said, shoveling coal.  You know, when we went down to, to bank, to bank the furnace or shovel coal in the furnace or clean out the coal room in the summertime, he and I, I'd be there helping him, helping (laughter).  I remember one time we found some arsenic or something like that.  And my father took a look at it, and he looked over at me and says, "Did you touch this?"  "No, daddy", you know, 'cause he knew that was poison, you know.  And, no, he was--and for one Christmas, I got an electric train set.  Oh, great, 'cause he wanted an electric train set.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I wanted it too, so.  Yeah, my father always was my champion.  My mother too.  My mother wanted to be a school teacher, and she had hoped that she'd gone on to college and become a school teacher.  So she was involved with me.  We went everywhere.  I had a girlfriend who said, mothers and daughters are supposed to hate each other.  I said, "That doesn't happen to me."  And she couldn't believe it until she actually saw the way my mother and I worked together.  My mother was my sister at all times--if I was going somewhere, mom was going too.  Even, as an adult, you know, we just went, we just went everywhere together.  When I first went, discovered I loved the Opera, I said, mom, we gotta go to the Opera.  And so mom went, you know, everywhere, you know.  We just went together.  She was my sister, and she really liked it, you know.  I was looking through some things in my mother's suitcase in my desk.  I suddenly realized that we wrote letters all the time.  When I was in grad school, and when I was in summer camp, I think I wrote a letter to her every day, and so did she.  I have these piles--my mother was a pack rat.  So all the letters are still there.  "Dear Mom", you know, dah, dah, dah, you know.  And we would just write because there was no Internet.  So we would write about our daily activities and send off letters to each other, back and forth.  I think my mother cried when I was away.  I went--well, we're getting way ahead of myself in college, but anyway.  You know, when I was away at summer camp--I was a counselor, you know, she just missed me.  And when I went to grad school, it was worse.  Oh, she's not, she's not even in the same state (laughter).  So, no.  They were my pals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As an only child, that was it.  There wasn't any brothers or sisters.  I had to rely on them, to rely on them.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here--
Story_ID: 20570
Speaker 1: Okay, you wanna backtrack.  There's some other information about your family that you didn't share during the first reel.  So if you wanna tell us now is a good time.
Speaker 2: Well, I was 16 or so when I learned that I was not my father's [Freddie Brown] child.  It turns out that my mother [Ada May Fox] had met this guy who was a dentist in New England.  And I guess I was the result of that meeting.  But my father--my mother had also met my father about the same time.  And I guess she told him, and he said, okay, he didn't care.  And, you know, he married her.  Actually, they didn't get married until I was about 16 (laughter).  But anyway, they lived together.  And I was his daughter.  I was always his daughter.  And the reason why I found out when I was 16 because my father had something stupid, misdemeanor, and he was in court.  And they asked me to come and testify about my father and how I loved him and all that kind of stuff.  And that came out as part of the testimony.  And you should have seen my mother and father's face, because they were just shocked.  And I remember on that on the steps of the courtroom, my father--me saying to my father, "I don't care.  I love you.  You're my father, you'll always be my father," because he was so shocked that I had found that out that way.  And, and, but he was--he is always my father.  I think about that time, my mother and father got married.  I have the ring, my mother's because they came back from some meeting or other, and they were real happy and stuff.  And I'm going, huh, you know.  And they didn't tell me anything about it, but I have the ring that he had given her.  It's in the safe deposit box.  And because my father had been married to somebody else, and it took a while before he could get divorced from that one or separated from that one.  I found that out later.  And, but, you know, but my mother--and my father was always my father, you know, and he's, he was my pal.  And he was, he always defended me.  When I went to school and the people in the Post Office were saying, "Oh, why are you educating that girl?  She's gonna get married."  My father said "There's no way--there's no reason why she should not be educated because who knows whether she's ever gonna get married.  And women need to have as much education as men do."  And so he defended me everywhere I went.
Speaker 1: It sounds like he had a progressive attitude and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, I had to--boyfriends had to be checked out by him (laughter).  They, when I came--whenever I would meet a boy, you know, they would come home to the house, 'cause my mother was cooking Southern, to dinner, you know.  And then my father and my mother would check this guy out.  And then later on when the guy came, my father said, do you really like this guy?  Well, maybe not.  I don't think so (laughter).  And there was one guy, it was funny 'cause I loved him, and he loved me.  And it was like, you know, they started to talk about--my father was a camera buff.  And they talked about cameras and stuff like that, and my father said, "Hey, he's a keeper, okay" (laughter).  And this guy liked him too.  He said, oh, ghee, I had so much fun with your father, but he decided he wanted to marry somebody else (laughter).  So that was it, yeah.
Story_ID: 20571
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question.  So I'll ask it, and, 'cause you've answered some of it already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Cooking.  Usually, when--my father was a cook, my mother was a cook, and my grandmother, who lived with us, she also cooked.  And so Sunday dinner, you know, chicken or whatever it was, cooking.  We have a combination of cuisines, remember with my mother is from New England and my father from the South and my grandmother from the South.  So we would have New England boiled dinner, which my mother would make.  And we would have grits or whatever that my--and biscuits that my grandmother would make.  And all the food that my father would make.  So we'd have a different, you know, we'd have this blending of cuisines in the family.  Sounds, when growing up.  Well, there was no television.  It was the radio.  It was on all the time, 'cause I liked the radio.  And so, well, listening to the radio programs, especially on Saturday.  There were a lot of different, 'cause there was no television.  So there were radio stories, like one of them, one of the programs being "Grand Central Station", which was the station in New York [New York, New York].  And they had the stories of all the different things that happened on the railroad or in Grand Central Station.  So I can still recite the commercial for, when the radio station came on, and then "Grand Central Station, Crossroads of A Thousand", you know, "A thousand lives, gigantic stage on which are played a thousand dramas daily", dah, dah, dah.  You should get that.  You can still get those.  If you go on line, you can listen to the announcer talking about Grand Central Station, 'cause the train would come--see there's my railroad connection with my father.  The train would come under Park Avenue.  And so that they would "dive with a roar, onto the two and one half mile tunnel which burrows beneath the glitter and swank of Park Avenue, and then Grand Central Station".  So those are the sounds.  And the commercials, here I, here we are in Minnesota.  We're at the home of mills and stuff like that.  Well, there was a commercial for Cream of Wheat, "Dah, dah, dah, dah dee, dah, dah, dah, dah (laughter) things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you grew up during the '30's [1930s] and the '40's [1940s], I guess in, right, before TV became popular, so.  Now, did the family get a lot of newspapers and magazines or did you--did a lot of that come into the house?
Speaker 2: We may have gotten newspapers.  Oh, but I know we read the Sun--oh, yes, we read the Funnies [comics].  Yeah, we got newspapers 'cause I remember when there was a newspaper strike and LaGuardia read the Funnies to us, Fiorello LaGuardia picked up the paper and read the Funnies so that we could on the radio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've seen that in news reels where he did that, he read to the children.
Speaker 2: And I think we got, oh, we got 'Life', 'Life Magazine', and, yeah, we got some magazines.  I don't we, I don't think I got 'Ebony' or anything like that.  We had 'Life.'  And we'd get a lot of the news--we went to the movies a lot.  And at that time, the news, there were news reels.  Before the feature movie, there was the news reel, and it was the news reel would talk about things that were happening in World War II, in the War.  And so that's how we got our visual of the War.
Story_ID: 20572
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me if I'm moving ahead too fast, but I know at a certain juncture, you got sick, right?  And --
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, when I was a little--okay, we, as I might have said, we lived in Washington Heights, New York [New York], and we lived at 436 West 160th Street.  And that's where my father [Freddie Brown] was super.  At age four or five, I got very ill, and they put me in the hospital.  Columbia University Medical School [New York, New York] had a place called Vanderbilt Clinic which is up in Washington Heights, where we used to go all the time.  One of the doctors there, and I think, as I look back on it, Arthur Logan, he was an intern there at that time.  But he lived in the house that we lived in.  And so he was my doctor.  They put me in Babies Hospital [Babies and Children's Hospital of New York, New York, New York].  I remember being in a crib.  I thought I was in jail (laughter).  I think I saw all the bars around me.  And so when I got better, I think what I had was living in New York, I had Infantile TB [Tuberculosis].  I think that's what I had.  But anyway, so living in New York, when I saw Dr. Logan later on, 'cause he lived in my building, I said, "Well, how do you become a scientist?"  And, oh, no, "How do you become a doctor?"  He said, "Oh, you study science," you know.  And I have a picture, in fact, when I saw the five year olds at the Science Museum the other day, I said, Ah, they were that small and so was I.  You know, I looked up at him, and I said, "Okay."  And I decided that, yeah, Science was something that I'm gonna learn because I wanted to be a doctor like Dr. Logan.
Speaker 1: Now, was Dr. Logan a black doctor?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Arthur Logan.  There is a wing of Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] named for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I now talk to his--Adele Logan was his daughter, and they lived in the house.  And she was about two or three years younger than I am.  And we've met as adults.  And I've got a, I've got to tell her that my book is out.  I have, you know, because I've met, I've talked to her since.  And she's a writer too.
Speaker 1: Okay, Adele--
Speaker 2: Adele Logan, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Adele, I'm wanna think of what her married name is, oh, Adele Logan Alexander.  That's her married name.
Speaker 1: What kind of books does she write?
Speaker 2: She wrote history.  She's a historian.  And she wrote her family history in, on her mother's side, not on her father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Okay, so then were you consciously thinking of concentrating on Science when you were in school then, as a result of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somehow or other, it's--I don't know.  He [Dr. Arthur Logan] must have made an impression on me, and I decided, oh, yes, Science sounds like fun.  The, where we lived in forty--in the Washington Heights, the library was right across the street.  So I would go there for story hour.  And my mother would take me across the street.  It was, it wasn't a very big, you know, big street with a lot of traffic.  And we'd go for story hour.  And later on in years, I would go to the library, I started looking up books about what they called space at the time because there was no space travel.  And as we moved from house to house 'cause my father, as I said, would get the job as a superintendent.  And that included an apartment.  So when he would lose that job, he would get to another job.  We went to the Bronx [New York], and when I was in third grade.  And I remember this, in third-grade class that I lived in--that I had there, was the Science room.  So I sat right next to the fish, the goldfish bowl.  I had goldfish too that I worked on as a Scientist.  I think I killed 'em.  And so we moved to the Bronx, and then the next job was in Brooklyn [New York].  So we moved to Brooklyn, and I was still interested in Science and things like that.  So we had two jobs in Brooklyn that my father, you know, my father was the superintendent, the super's kid.  And, but I was still, you know, I wanted to learn, and I wanted to be a scientist because I wanted to be a doctor.  So I was always interested in, you know, learning everything there was to learn.  One of the reasons why we moved out of Manhattan to the Bronx was the first grade--well, I, we skipped kindergarten.
Story_ID: 20573
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back a minute.  Like, what school did you start at?  Did you--where did you start?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's what I'm getting--that's where I'm going.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: In, I went to nursery school when I was three or four because this was during, oh, no, this was during the Depression.  And WPA, Works Progress Association, [sic, Works Progress Administration, later renamed Work Progress Administration] had schools for teachers who were out of jobs.  And so my mother went to the school to learn Spanish, and she put me in the nursery school that was right there.  So when I was three or four or five.  So, and I learned a lot of things in nursery school.  Now, they call it pre-school.  And so and then we moved to Manhattan [New York], and my mother--they decided that--oh, you know, since my mother had had cancer--she had breast cancer, it was no sense sending me to kindergarten 'cause my mother would have to take me back and forth.  And she wasn't that well.  So I skipped kindergarten.  I didn't, you didn't--kindergarten was not mandatory in New York [New York, New York] at that time.  So then I went to first grade in PS-2, 130, 246, 135.  Schools had numbers in New York.  And it was 135 in New York.
Speaker 1: It was 135?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.  It was 155th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue.  It's not there anymore.  There is a school there, but the one that I went to burned down.  Anyway, so I was there in the first grade and the second grade.  In the second grade, somehow or other, the kids decided that they didn't like me because I was a goody two-shoes.  I wanted to learn.  I was teacher's pet, and so they decided they would beat me up in the girl's room.  So my mother would have to walk down--cause we all went home for lunch, and pick me up to keep, to protect me from the kids.  And my, and then we also switched from the teacher that I was in the second grade, back to the one I had for the first grade, but she was now teaching second grade, to get away from those kids.  And my father said, "Forget this."  I'm gonna leave--" 'cause this was an African American, predominantly African American school.  And my father said, "Forget this.  Let's get another, get out of this area, get out of Harlem [New York]."  So he, we moved to the Bronx [New York] so that I could go to a school that was mostly white and there the kids were not gonna play with, you know, they're not gonna bother me.  And they didn't.  And the teachers were gonna teach me too because, you know, they're not gonna discriminate against one kid.
Speaker 1: What was the name of this school?  Was it PS--
Speaker 2: They all had numbers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was PS what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, PS something or other.  I can find out.  And they all have numbers.
Speaker 1: So did you have any problems at all there?  Now, they didn't dislike you because you were smart, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, I had no problems in--
Speaker 1: Did they have any problem with you being black?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, the kids, no.
Speaker 1: Were there other black students?
Speaker 2: In Bronx school, don't remember any.  Brooklyn, I don't remember any either.  I may have had problems with gym because my mother wanted me to wear knee socks, and I kept saying, "My mother said I have to wear knee socks."  Well, you have to wear white socks when you go to gym.  It's what the teachers want.  I always do what my mother said (laughter).  No, I had friends in the school.  I had little girlfriends, yeah.  And there was PS, was it 244 in Brooklyn, and there was 135 in Brooklyn.  So I'm trying to figure out what the number was in Manhattan.  They all had numbers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Except, I went to Winthrop Junior High School in Brooklyn.  It had a number, but it also had a name.
Story_ID: 20574
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Winthrop Junior High School.  At that time, now they have middle school, but at that time junior high school was seventh, eighth and ninth grades.  So your first year of high school was junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I went to Winthrop Junior High.  Winthrop Junior High, because I was a smart kid, I went there, and they wanted to put me in rapid advance.  Now rapid advance class meant I would have skipped a term and graduated six months sooner.  My mother, being--and then I always hope that women do that now, right on top of my education said to them, "Okay, she's good in Science, but she's terrible in English.  And if you put her in rapid advance, she's not gonna do well in English."  And so my mother took me out of that, and I was in the first class--classes were graded R-1, R-2, R-3, and I was in the first class of the regular school.  And I'm happier for that because that way I could graduate in June rather than January.  And closer to whatever the colleges, you know, would start in high school.  So, yeah, I would--'cause I was good in, I was good in Science.  I was good in Math, but I was terrible in English.  And my mother knew that 'cause she was an English major or she wanted to be an English major.  She was good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, these, is Winthrop like a mostly white school too, all white school?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I have a picture of my class.  My, my graduating class, I'm the only black girl in that class.  Yes, it was all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a particular ethnic group that dominated there or--
Speaker 2: Oh, this was Flatbush, so it was, at that time Flatbush was Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was funny because when I grew up and I didn't understand why Hitler [Adolf Hitler]didn't like the Jews.  Everybody I knew was Jewish (laughter), you know.  What is this with Hitler and the Jews?  In Brooklyn, when we lived in Brooklyn, we went to church.  We finally figured out a church since my--which was a congregational church.  It was in the neighborhood, and it was like an island in the neighborhood.  Like I said, there was a small congregation of non-Jews and surrounded by this Jewish neighborhood.  And so, it was--I went to Sunday school there, and I was confirmed there, and I have a picture of me on my confirmation dress-robes.  And again, I'm the only black kid in the confirmation class.  But that's okay.  The, one of the teachers at the Sunday school, and he took the high school kids, and he would pile us all into the station wagon.  And then we'd go out for ice cream after, after the high school program for kids.  And we'd all pile up, and pile up in the station wagon and go down for ice cream.  And it was homemade ice cream.  It was in a store that made homemade ice cream.  It was really great.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  I didn't--this is like right after World War II.  Were they discussing the Holocaust then?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And did anybody, you know, so you didn't hear about--did you know about it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at that point?
Speaker 2: No, didn't know about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They weren't discussing the Holocaust.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't know about it until later--well, maybe I saw a little bit about persecution of the Jews, and I'm going, "Why," you know.  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered 'cause, all right.
Speaker 2: The women, the people in my, the house that we lived in, and where he's [her father, Freddie Brown] super, they were Ortho, some of them were Orthodox.  Now, with, you have to know about Orthodox Jews.  On the Sabbath, which is Friday night and Saturday, they're not allowed to touch anything mechanical, like lights and things like that.  So I became what they call a Shaba [Shabbat] girl.  One of the, they would invite me in to turn off the lights in their house or turn them on or, you know, do things that they couldn't, they're not allowed to do.
Speaker 1: So according to their religion, they couldn't turn the light on, but they could use the light if somebody else turned it on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if somebody turned it on, and which I did.  You know, they had me come in and do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I saw some of the inventions on television designed to turn these things on without having to physically do it or something.  Isn't there a Shaba [Shabbat] telephones and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I have a stove that has that capability, that you can cook something, and it'll keep it for the Sabbath.  Yeah, it's built into this new stove.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who are some of your teachers at Prospect High School--
Speaker 2: In Prospect Heights in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I don't remember any there.
Speaker 1: Were you there very long?
Speaker 2: No.  Okay.
Story_ID: 20575
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you graduated from New Dorp, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: In Staten Island.
Speaker 2: Okay, let me just back up.  I graduated from Winthrop Junior High School, and I decided I was going to--I wanted to go to a girls' high school.  And instead of going to Erasmus [Erasmus Hall High School, Brooklyn, New York] which was the local high school that I was supposed to have gone to.  So I went to Prospect Heights High School.  Now, Prospect Heights High School used to be, had been Girls Commercial and it had just converted from Girls Commercial [The Girls' Commercial High School, Brooklyn, New York] to Prospect Heights which meant it was, had an academic program, as well as the commercial program.  So I got on the subway and went down to Prospect Heights.  And I was only there for a year.  Now, I was--again, I like to do activities.  And so what I did in the high school, I was a leader.  I was gym leader.  I think I was a gym leader in junior high as well.  So as a gym leader, I would referee the, or umpire the softball games and things like that.  The kids used to get mad at me 'cause I'd, maybe I made the calls wrongs.  Um, I'm the umpire (laughter).  And so I was gym leader in the girls' high school.  And I also, since it was still a commercial school, I remember going to the sewing class 'cause my mother taught me to sew when I was age six.  So by the time I got to high school, I could sew very well.  And so I went to tailoring class or design class where you design your own patterns and make your own coats and stuff.  So I took that as part of my courses that I wanted.  Actually, it was an extra course because I went to the high school with two of my girlfriends from--that I had known in the neighborhood.  And they were on a different schedule than I was.  And so in order to go home with them on the subway, I took an extra course so that I could get out of the school at the same time they did.  And then we'd all go home on the subway together.  And then we moved to Staten Island [New York].  And I could have stayed at Prospect Heights, but that would have involved taking a Ferry boat and a subway and whatever to get to Prospect Heights.  And no way.  So I went to the local high school which was New Dorp High School [Staten Island, New York].  Now, we had, this was--when we moved to Staten Island, we were in the projects.  We finally had gotten into the projects.  Oh, yeah, my father had two jobs.  I forgot.  One of them being working in the Post Office and the other being a superintendent at a building.  Well, now, he didn't wanna work the two jobs, and we finally were able to get into the projects.  We weren't eligible for public housing for a while because we were middle class.  And, you know, we weren't lower class, so we couldn't live in the lower class housing.  We had to go into the middle class housing.  Well, the newest middle class housing that they were building was on Staten Island.  My mother said, "Staten Island?" 'Cause at the time, there was no bridge.  And the only way to get to Staten Island were two ferries, one from Brooklyn and one from Manhattan.  So, but my father said, "If this is where they're sending us, we're going (laughter)."  So we did.  So since it was the proj-, the housing project--actually, it was still being built when we were there.  We were in one of the first houses.  And there were very few high school students.  So there were only two blacks who went to New Dorp High School when I was there.  There was this one guy and me.  And when I got to New Dorp High School, I was in my third year in high school.  My home room teacher happened to be the only African American teacher in the school.  I think they did that by design.  She taught, she taught classics, Greek and Latin.  And she was strict.  And I just thought she hated me, except when I got, when I got--when I graduated, she gave me a hug, and later on I went back as an alum, and she talked, oh, yeah--I can't think of her name, Mrs., oh, I can't think of her name.  But anyway, I still remember what she looked like because she'd sit, you know, she was straight, and she was strict.  And she was always well dressed because, you know, as "the" African American teacher in the school, she had to hold up the reputation of African American teachers and "Jeannette Brown, Ms. Brown, you will also--" She didn't say it that way, but that's what was her intent.  And I, you know, I'd be the best I can be.
Speaker 1: And so did you make good grades--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- at New Dorp?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I, in fact, I--I don't know if I brought it or not.  I was searching through my mother's records, and I got a letter that had been sent from the principal.  This was after the first year I was there, from Principal Mary C. McGinnis, that "Your daughter has made the Honor Roll," the permanent honor roll.  And it was, and she should keep--no, "...is on the honor roll and if she keeps up this good, she will be on the permanent honor roll."  And, oh, wow.  And so when I graduated, I was--well, I was going to be on the permanent honor roll, except, there was something wrong with my French grade.  I had taken French for all four years of high school 'cause I had started it in junior high.  And the French grade was not as good as it should have been.  So I cried because I said, oh, my God, that means I can't be on the permanent honor roll.  The French teacher found out about it, it's--this is junior high, this is high school.  And she changed the grade.  And, you see, at Winthrop--at Prospect, New Dorp High School, there was only a hundred students who were in the graduating class.  Ninety nine of us graduated.  It was very small.  It wasn't like the big things that are graduating now.  In fact, when we graduated instead of wearing robes and stuff like that, it was almost like a private school.  The boys wore suits, dark suits, and the girls wore white dresses, long white dresses.  And I have a picture of me in my long, white dress.  And since I went to the senior prom, we couldn't afford two dresses.  So the graduating dress was a strapless dress with a jacket.  So when I graduated I wore the jacket.  But when I went to the prom, I wore it strapless, you know, just without the jacket.  You know, it was really interesting, you know, it was almost like a private school in a public school.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here for another little break.
Story_ID: 20576
Speaker 1: All right, now tell us about your high school Chemistry teacher, Mr. Gravonyae (ph.).
Speaker 2: Grabonyae (ph.).
Speaker 1: Grabonyae, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Grabonyae, yes, he was very good.  Since I still was interested in Science--I had taken Biology, I guess I took Biology at Prospect Heights High School [Brooklyn, New York], and didn't particularly care for Biology.  Yeah, that's where I took it, at Prospects Heights [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York].  I'm trying to think.  I started Prospect Heights--it's weird.  If I took the ninth grade, it was--anyway, Biology at that time was not like it is now where there's a lot of Chemistry in it because they hadn't advanced to that degree.  And so Biology was just (unclear) memorization and four o'clock's and all that kind of stuff.  And so then I got to Chemistry, and at the beginning of the Chemistry class, very first in September, Mr. Grabonyae said, okay, this is Chemistry.  And at the end of this year, there will be a Regents exam.  In New York State, at the time, when you finished a course, you took an exam.  And this is a state-wide exam called the Regents, which talked about everything you had learned in that course.  And he said, no one in my class has ever gotten a hundred on the Regents.  And I looked at him, and I went, "Um, okay" (laughter).  So then I decided that I was going to get a hundred on the Regents.  And so, you know, little Jeannette popped up her head, and she learned everything that she could.  She was also interested in photography.  And so was Mr. Grabonyae.  He run the, he ran the photo--photography club.  And so there I was with the boys, and we had a dark room in the school.  And so I learned how to develop film and develop prints and how to do that.  And it was really fun.  And it was just me and the boys.  In fact, I got so excited about that, I would use it--I got a little kit and I did it at home.  And I would go into our bathroom, 'cause there was no windows in our bathroom anyway, and put a sign on the outside door "Developing film" (laughter).  And I'd be developing film.  I still have pictures--I have some of the film that I developed.  It's not that good, but anyway.  It was fun, but and Mr. Grabonyae was good.  And he took our classes on a field trip.  Ivory soap was made in Staten Island [New York].  So we went to see Ivory soap made, and we found out why it--at the time the big commercial, it was 99/100ths percent pure.  So what's the rest of it?  Perfume.  But anyway.  So--
Speaker 1: It's pure what?
Speaker 2: Pure soap, and then perfume.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, and when it was time to study for the Regents, a girlfriend and I sat down--now, the easy thing about Regents exams, it's--and unfortunately, that's not happening now, is there were Regents books.  There were books in which every Regents that had ever been given were in there.  So we just sat down with the Regents book, and we tested each other, you know, back and forth and back and forth and back and forth, for the whole Memorial Day weekend, 'cause the Regents was in June right after that.  And so, I didn't make it.  I got 99.  I missed a question that had not been on the Regents before.  Now, this is crazy because, you know, I learned Chemistry, and to study, you know, just to take a test is crazy.  And I tell that to kids now.  But it was fun though because I actually did go on--and Chemistry got--I was enthusiastic about Chemistry because it was taught differently than it's taught now.  As I said, we went to see soap being made.  We found out why we're studying chemistry, what chemistry does.  We didn't start out with molecular models, which is what they do now and the, and the mathematics of chemistry.  We started out with "Why?"  What, you know, "What does chemistry do?"  And there is, there are courses now that somebody has written, "Well, Chemistry as a life science or chemistry in context, in which they try to teach high school kids that method.  But some of the teachers pooh, pooh that because, oh, we've got all this (unclear) stuff.  Why don't we learn about the molecular models?  Well, some kids wanna know why first before they wanna learn it.  And I was one of the kids, I wanna know why?  Why do I have to learn all the hard stuff, you know.  And I--we'll lose some kids that way if you don't teach them why before you teach them how.  So, I had fun.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting concept, chemistry in context.  I know when I thought of chemistry when I was growing up, I thought about, you know, test tubes and someone mixing the liquids together.  But when we get to class, there are formulas to, you know, I mean there are mathematical formulas to memorize and so I think in a whole different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's why I didn't like Physics.  And the next class was Physics, so I went "Oh, God."  I liked, oh, in high school, I think we still had labs.  And when we did things, and mixed up together, and I liked doing that.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular thing that you liked to mix up--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I don't remember all of the stuff we did in--
Speaker 1: --or was fascinated by them?
Speaker 2: --in the chemistry labs.  But it was fun being in the lab.  And so, as I said, all through my career, I've been, you know, focusing on Science.  And so when I got to Chemistry, I said, "Okay, that's it."  That's the one that I want to major in.  All the next class was Physics, which you have to take, and Physics is part of Chemistry.  So I took the Physics course.  And then I decided, well, when I went to college, I knew what I wanted to major in.  And it was Chemistry, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you went to Ivory soap, were you surprised at how soap was made?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Yeah, maybe--it may have been in our textbooks, as to how it was made.  I think we went, yeah, I was a little bit surprised.  I think we also went into the laboratories and saw the scientists there working, a whole bunch of high school kids wandering around.
Story_ID: 20577
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you--did Mr. Grabonyae help you decide what college to attend or how did you reach a decision?
Speaker 2: No, I had a guidance counselor.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1952, right, you graduated from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we have guidance counselors.  And so my mother and I, we went to the guidance counselor.  And I had told my guidance counselor that I wanted--I was still focused on being a doctor and going into Science.  And I thought I'd work in the lab.  Well, my guidance counselor said, "Oh, no, you'll probably teach."  Well, I think she knew--this was 1952, it would be hard for me to get a job in the laboratories in 1952.  But they still wanted teachers.  And my mother wanted me to be a teacher.  So as we picked colleges, well, growing up in New York City [New York] at the time, New York City had--it's now called the City University of New York [New York, New York].  It wasn't called the City University then.  It was the University System, that there were colleges that the univers--that New York City funded.  And if you had good enough grades, you were automatically in those colleges.  It was City College, Hunter College.  Queens College was just being born.  And I think it was City and Hunter and Queens [colleges].  So these were the colleges that the city funded.  They were free, free for those people who managed to make the grade.  And so I applied to Hunter College, but I also thought about going away to school.  I wanted, or going to another college.  So I applied to--and I always wanted to go to women's college, which is the reason why I applied to Hunter.  Hunter was a women's college at the time.  I applied to Barnard College [New York, New York] and Columbia University [New York, New York], and I applied to Wheaton College [Wheaton, Illinois], I think.  And I got into Barnard [Barnard College] and I got into Wheaton [Wheaton College], but there was no scholarship money for me.
Speaker 1: Is the Wheaton in Illinois? I think so.  Yeah.  And I had--there was no scholarship money.  And, you know, my parents didn't have any money.  I didn't have any money.  And so I went to Hunter College, but going to Hunter College is not a negative.  Hunter College is, was, and still is, one of the best women's colleges in the United States, and it's the only one where two female, Nobel Laureates, come from, Hunter College.  Even the Seven Sisters cannot say that.  Even now, in 2012, they have not gotten any female Nobel Laureate.  But Hunter College has.  Hunter College was the college that immigrants went to, and these mostly were Jewish immigrants went to.  Anybody that didn't have the money to go to college went to Hunter, any women though.  It didn't go--it's now coed, which we think is unfortunate, but those of us who are alumni say, okay, we tolerate the men (laughter).  So, that was the choice, and the three choices for college, and I got into Hunter, although they still made me take an entrance exam.  Any my best girlfriend, whom I met at Hunter, said--and her sister had been a teacher, she said, you were already in with your grades because her teacher--her sister knew that.  And I didn't know that.  I sweated through that entrance exam.  I still remember it.
Story_ID: 20578
Speaker 1: Now, did you decide to become a Chemistry major?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, right away, I decided to become a Chemistry major, and it turns out as I--in the admissions to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York], they were just starting a new Chemistry major called "Chemistry Field".  Now, this would be a major which is now the American Chemical Society's intensive major in Chemistry.  The chemistry field would start in your freshmen year.  You started your major course.  They, they had--those of us who had chosen an interest in that degree to come early, before the term started, to take a test.  And this test was just a spacial recognition test.  It wasn't an aptitude test.  It was whether or not, you know, they--well, it's sort of an aptitude test.  So, when we went to the test, my girlfriend and I, we were sitting there watching the head of the chemistry department was talking to us about this test and the test that we're gonna have and the chemistry, chemistry programs.  And he was chain smoking.  And so ever since then, we have called him Old Smokey (laughter) cause he would be chain smoking while he was talking to us.  And my girlfriend and I, we went through college together, and we met right at that test.  And we became fast friends.  She became a doctor, and I went on to, to get a Master degree in Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Dr. Carol Burnette, and it's not the movie star.  She is a doctor, and her name is Carol Burnette.  They get, she gets that on the telephone too when people call her, are you the real Carol Burnette?  She says, yeah, I'm real.  I'm a doctor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did you have any particular teacher at Hunter that was a mentor to you or guide?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, I started, as I said, I started my major in Chemistry right at my freshman year.  So I didn't have to take general chemistry.  I took another course in chemistry.  And then the second year, I took organic chemistry.  The professor there was Professor Arthur Sweeney.  He was the teacher of organic chemistry.  Now, there were two chemistry professors there.  One was Dr. Sweeney, and there was another organic chemistry.  And everybody was, you know, one of the teachers--not Dr. Sweeney, didn't like women.  And here he was in a women's college.  So people tried to avoid his class.  I lucked out and got Professor Sweeney as mine because Professor Sweeney was such a great guy.  He took my girlfriend, Carol and I, under his wing.  At the time, organic chemistry was a long class.  It was one of our longest classes of the day.  It was four hours in the afternoon.  And because I had to get all my courses in, in rapid succession, many times, I did not have a lunch period.  So we would come in, we would start our reactions, get our things going in the lab.  And then we would go into his office where he had a big burner of water boiling.  So we would have tea, and we would have our lunch there in his office.  And then we would talk to him about, you know, our futures or whatever we wanted to do.  And he was just really nice about that, and he invited us in.  Later on, when I took senior research, of course, I chose him for, as my research mentor.  So I was there again in his lab doing research with him and talking to him.  And, but he was also the pre-med advisor for people who were going on to become medical students.  There was no set pre-med course.  You just had to take enough Science so that you could get into medical school.  But he was the advisor there, and so Carol went on to medical school, and I went on to grad school.
Speaker 1: Now, were you tempted to go into medicine?
Speaker 2: I was going to go into medicine, and one of the women in my book--and now I understand, the same thing.  She was also focused on going into medicine.  We, I was graduating from college in '56' [1956].  Veterans from World War II were still around.  Medical schools did not have many openings for African Americans.  There was still prejudice about, in medical schools.  So they had two slots available, one for a veteran of World War II and the other one for Phi Beta Kappa.  Well, I was neither.  My girlfriend, Carol, got into medical school, but she got into Einstein College of Medicine [Bronx, New York].  Einstein College of Medicine was started because the Jewish people were having the same problems.  And so Yeshiva University [New York, New York] said, let's start our medical school.  And they did, and so Carol is in the second graduating class of the medical school, which I would have been in had I gone with her.  But I didn't make it into that class either.  I decided, but then 'cause then I decided, you know, I didn't have the money to go to medical school or pay the tuition or anything like that.  Carol, sort of scratched up the tuition for medical school, and then worked a lot.  And, but I decided, well, why don't I--since I love Chemistry, why don't I go for a Masters Degree in Chemistry and then go work in the pharmaceutical industry and then maybe later on go to medical school, you know, after I get enough money.  So that's what I decided to do.
Story_ID: 20579
Speaker 1: Okay, so, it says here that you had offers from the University of Minnesota and Penn State, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, applying for graduate school was fun.  I, I don't know if Professor Sweeney would have advised me for graduate school or not.  I don't know whether I bothered to ask him or not.  At the time--this was before the Internet, remember. There were--colleges had catalogs of all of their offers.  So I went to the library, and I pulled out the college catalogs.  And I saw the University of Minnesota catalog, and I guess I saw Penn State catalog.  I don't know why I applied to--well, I applied to the University of Minnesota because I looked at the chemistry building and I looked at the dorms, and I looked at a map, and I said, "Oh, wow.  That would work."  If I go to Minnesota, the chemistry building which is now Smith Hall, here.  It's called Smith Hall, and it was the only chemistry building.  It's right across the street, Washington Avenue, from a dorm that I would probably stay in.  And it's cold in Minnesota.  So I wouldn't have to be out in the, out in the elements too often.  So I would just go from the dorm to the chemistry building and back.  And so that's why I applied to Minnesota, for an assistantship.  And I applied to Penn State because it was closer, for an assistantship.  The assistantship came from Minnesota first.  They gave me an offer, and I took the job, and then Penn State probably, I was probably second their list, gave me the offer later.  But I already had this job in Minnesota, and I was all excited about going out to what I called "the West" because it was West of New York City.  And I found out later on, it was the Midwest (laughter).  So that's why I chose Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19--
Speaker 2: It turns out Minnesota was a good school, "is" a good school.
Speaker 1: So this is 1956, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 20580
Speaker 1: And, now, tell us about your thesis advisor, Dr. Fred Kelsh (ph.), is it Kelsh?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Okay, when I came to Minnesota, I was a teaching assistantship, which meant I would study and also work for a, work as an assistant.  And I would do, I would be working on teaching kids, helping--because the general chemistry courses were big.  They were taught in the auditorium.  And so there were a lot of teaching assistantships because they, that would be the only time these kids would see somebody to ask questions.  They didn't get to ask questions of the professor very often.  So I did that.  My second, my--I had to choose a thesis advisor.  And I was taking a course in qualitative organic analysis which is no longer taught because everything is done by instruments nowadays.  The professor for that was Dr. Fred Kelsh.  And he seemed to be a nice guy.  He, at the end of the course, he gave us a mixture of different compounds that we had to separate and decide what they were.  Well, my mixture was blue, and I'm going, what--there were very few organic chemicals that are blue.  And I was scratching my head to find a blue compound.  And finally I found, I identified all the organic chemicals in there except the blue one.  So I went over to him, and I said, "What's this blue compound?"  "Oh," he says, "I just threw in some blue dye 'cause I thought you would like it" (laughter).  So, but anyway, I decided I would use him as my thesis advisor for a thesis that I needed to write.  And he was a very good guy, you know.  He gave me a research project which is one that he was very much interested in.  You know, like he could have given me anything 'cause he knew I was only going for a Master's degree.  But he gave me a challenging research project.  And so I worked in the lab.  One of the things I liked about him is he didn't bug you.  If you needed any question, if you had any questions on anything you had to do, you went to his office and you asked him.  He very--he wasn't hovering over your shoulder finding out what you were doing, what you were doing.  So you would go to his office, and you would talk to him, if you could get past the dog.  The dog was always there too.  And he, he helped me a lot.  When I finally finished my thesis--I didn't come up with the project.  I worked very hard on his project, but I also discovered something new.  And when he saw that, and I saw that, he says, "Oh, okay, that'll work.  That'll be enough for your Master's degree."  And it was, we've discovered, we had a compound or something that I had made that the crystals were white at room temperature.  But when you heated them up, they would turn pink.  And this was sort of the discovery of liquid crystals, where you go from one temperature at one color to the next temperature, it'd be a different color.  And so we wrote that up, and that's what I have.  I wrote out, you know, what I did for his project.  But his other project, I noticed later on when I saw some of his papers, he went on.  And he got what I was planning to do.  I came into his office, in his career, late in his career, and he was almost ready to retire.  So I was one of his last graduates students.  And I was happy to be there.  I would come and see him later on when I was a graduate.  And we would have lunch together, and (laughter) he was funny 'cause he'd be sitting in the cafeteria, the faculty cafeteria.  And Professor Coltoff (p.) was there, who had already retired and was living in the--they had a place for older faculty members to live up in the building.  And he came down for lunch.  And Professor Kelsh says, "See that guy over there?"  "Uh-huh."  "He's old" (laughter).  Wow, well, what about you--no, I didn't say that (laughter).  No, we had a good, we had a good arrange--he's dead now, unfortunately.  But we had a good arrangement.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you focused on organic chemistry, right, or do we have it wrong?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, so, it centered around the study of dye and line formation in salts, right?
Speaker 2: Organic chemistry is a chemistry of compounds of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and whatever.  You would almost say living things 'cause everything, and everything in the body is living.  That's the big definition of organic chemistry.  The compounds that I was trying to make from my thesis was I was trying to make a compound which was both positive and negative poles within the same compounds.  But they do that now.  I've seen this in papers like that.  But I was on the cutting edge trying to do this.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's called, Y-L-I-D-E.  What is that?
Speaker 2: Oh, what I was trying to make an Ylide, L-L, Ylide, Y-L-I-D-E.  I think people have made them now, lately.  I think Dr. Kelsh did it later on in his work.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But it, 'cause--okay.  People, the way people have done it now, I wasn't--okay, at the time when I was doing this, I was not doing it the way modern chemistry is doing it.  They're doing things in micro scales, and they're doing it at lowered temperatures.  And they're doing low temperature where okay, the ways of analysis were not as good as they are now.  You could, I could probably find the compound by doing an analysis of it in an instrument that--so it was a fast phase thing.  But you can't do--I couldn't do that then because the instrumentation hadn't been invented yet.  You know now, every, you can see things that are maybe the reaction took place in micro--in nano section, nano minutes, and it took place when you could see it by the instrumentation, but we couldn't do it then.  This was way earlier than we could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, for the average person listening to what your thesis was about, I mean, did your thesis have a practical application?  I mean what is the practical application of the things that you were working on in grad school?
Speaker 2: As I said, now, I don't know that it had a practical application.  Now, I think we use, they use reactions like that, you know, to speed up reactions, to do things quickly and microscopically to, so that you don't have to be exposed to as much chemicals as I was when I was going on.  We had to use lots and lots of chemicals.  Now, kids who are in the lab, they can work on small amounts and still get a reaction done.  So I, I think we would, I think when I was doing it, it was just pure research to see whether it can be done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't have any practical applications.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Liquid crystals did and do.  You've seen them in different things.  Liquid crystals still have practical applications.  You've seen that.  There are microscopes, temperature--thermometers, you can do liquid crystals.  You press on them, and then, you get temperature of your body, you know.  That has practical applications.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna pause here again.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 20581
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, you finish up graduate school at the University of Minnesota, and so you began--now, how long was it before you got a job in chemistry after finishing graduate school?
Speaker 2: Let's go back to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, let's go back.
Speaker 2: Because remember, I'm an only child.  We went, when I graduated, okay, when I graduated from graduate school, most--a lot of people don't bother to go to their ceremonies.  But since I'm an only child, and my mother had, and father had, you know, sacrificed so much so that I could go on to graduate school, they said, okay.  They're gonna come out--oh, two things.  When I came to Minnesota, I had had surgery I guess just before.  And so my mother and father came to Minnesota with me.  And we all got on the train together, train--remember my father was a (unclear).  We didn't fly, and we call came together on the train and they got to make sure that their daughter was well installed in the dorm and everything like that.  So then when we graduated from graduate school, same thing.  They had to come out and watch me, and I have pictures of the graduation ceremony which was out here on the field.  It was on the old football field which is now covered over by the recreation building.  And at that time, Minnesota graduated everybody.  All, all the classes were graduated at the same time.  And now they stagger them all in different areas, different times, different days and whatever.  So we were all out there.  My mother was there, and my father was there.  And they were all excited to be there.  Now, this is '58' [1958].  It was before Civil Rights Act.  In order for them to come to Minnesota, they still had to go look at that Red Book to find out which hotels would accept a black family coming in.  So we--
Speaker 1: Now, the book, so people don't miss this.  There was actually a book published--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that black families used to travel--
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: --in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they did.
Speaker 1: And white people didn't need this book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they went and we, they stayed at the Hotel Alexander, I guess.  I have a photo of it.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the exact name of the book that you--
Speaker 2: I thought it was the Red Book.
Speaker 1: It's called the Red Book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought it was.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Someone said, you can, I can, we can Google it and find out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I've seen it on line.  That's something that I didn't know until about five years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I don't know if we have a copy of it in my house or we threw it out, hope not.  I don't know.  Anyway, so we looked to find a hotel.  Yeah, they got a room in the hotel and looked over the (unclear), it didn't--it wasn't a very great view (laughter).
Speaker 1: Excuse me again, but even in Minnesota.  Now, this is about as far--
Speaker 2: Even in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: --North as you can get.
Speaker 2: And as far as you can get, which means, that's why I'm so excited about, you know, today with the Martin Luther King ceremony and all these African Americans up here, you know, they're really celebrating the people that live here now are going--this was '56' [1956], '58' [1958], even in Minnesota, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So while, the Montgomery Bus Boycott had just taken place in Alabama in '56' [1956]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --even in Minnesota in '58' [1958], there were places where you couldn't stay.
Speaker 2: I think, what was it?  I think someone talked last night at the concert about a lynching here in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Duluth, there's a famous--
Speaker 2: Duluth, that's right.
Speaker 1: --photo of the people, of the men hanging.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God, oh, my God.  Well, anyway, so they came, and, you know, they were all excited to see me graduate and the whole bit.  So that's what I did.  Okay, about getting a job, now, okay, while--since I knew I was going to graduate, during school break, everybody in graduate school decides they're gonna go and get a, see if they can get job offers.  So I wrote letters--the American Chemical Society used to have--they still do, they have a magazine.  But they used to list all the employers, different employers and what they did and their addresses and stuff and employee--employee, employer in the issue.  So I took that book, and this was before the Internet and everything and computer weren't that, you--I made like a spreadsheet.  You know, now it would be an Excel spreadsheet, and I listed the company that I was gonna apply for, when I wrote the letter, when I got the application to come, and whether or not I got an idea, visita--an interview.  And so I got three--I wrote to every pharmaceutical company in the nation because I'm, since I was going to be a doctor, I was interested in medicinal chemistry.  I got an offer of an interview from Ciba Pharmaceuticals from Schering-Plough and from Hoffman Larouche.  So during school break, I came, and it was, I guess, Easter break, I came.  And I had interviews at Ciba, Schering and Hoffman Larouche.  The interviews with Ciba and Schering, and I think I also went to--oh, I think I also went to Johnson and Johnson as well.  The interviews at Ciba and Schering went well.  When I went to Hoffman Larouche, I walked in and the secretary took a look at me, and she walked in and talked to her manager and came back and said, there are--the job is no longer available, I'm sorry, dah, dah, dah.  They didn't even interview me.  So I was crying, you know, I was all upset.  But I got home and there had been a phone call from Ciba saying, offering me a job for $5,000 a year, which was big money in those days.  And then a letter from Schering came the next day offering me $5,500.  Well, I accepted the first one.  My father said, "You got a job, take it."  So I got the offer at Schering--at Ciba.  Now, the reason why I applied to Ciba and besides, in high school, in college, in college, undergraduate, we had a Chemistry Club.  And the Chemistry Club would go on tours.  And Ciba was one of the places where we visited.  So I knew what the labs looked like.  And so I said, and then I had been for the interview.  So I accepted the job at Ciba in Summit, New Jersey.  And I was one of two blacks they hired--actually, they hired three, two women, and I was one of the two women.  And we all had Master's degrees which is the reason why I had gone to get a Master's degree, is I could get a job with my Master's degree that I couldn't have gotten had I just had a Bachelor's degree in Chemistry.  And also the reason why I didn't go for a PhD was at the time, nobody would hire me, in the industry unless I passed the brown bag test.  And I didn't--
Speaker 1: So if you got--so if you were too highly educated then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hum.
Speaker 2: Well, it's because you, as a senior position, you were in charge of--, you assistants working for you.  And they couldn't see a black person, you know, working with white people as their underlings.
Story_ID: 20582
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this.  I didn't ask about it when you were at the University of Minnesota.  But when you were at the University of Minnesota, did you stay on campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was at Comstock Hall, yeah, I was in the dorm.
Speaker 1: So, you were in the dorm, and there's no problem?
Speaker 2: No, no problem in the dorm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No, no, I got in the dorm--the thing about the dorm, it was an undergraduate dorm.  And it was an all-female dorm.  Now, it's coed.  They had, a few of us graduate students who were there, it was some graduate students and there were some nurses who were, had come from, you know, this is, after World War II, they had been in the Army or Navy, I forget.  And they were taking graduate work.  So they were there in the dorm.  And the only problem was, you know, as being graduate students, they tried to, they'd make us follow the rules of undergraduates.  We had to be in at a certain time of the day.  So then we rebelled because we said, "We're graduate students.  We're not undergraduates," you know, we 20 and above or 23 and above in age, and above.  And so finally they remitted and then they let us get a key because as a chemist I would be in and out of that building all hours of the day and night.  I'd be over in the chemistry lab, and I had a key to the chemistry building.  Why can't I have a key to my dorm, because, so that I can get back and forth because in Chemistry, it's 24/7.  If you have to go and look at a reaction or if you have to go do something, you need to get back there and do it.  And even in industry, you're there 24/7.  It's sometimes, you know, sometimes, especially if you have a project you have to get done.  Then you have to get it done because the biologists are waiting for it.
Speaker 1: Just another question about school, one more, and then we'll go back to Ciba.  But did you find that as a science student there was less discrimination than if you were in some other field in a sense 'cause I've heard people say that, but I don't know.  How did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: In the chemistry department of University of Minnesota, let's see, there were two guys or three guys, black guys, getting their PhD.  There was one other woman getting a Master's degree.  There was another woman getting a PhD.  Nobody cared.  You know, they didn't care that I was black.  No, I didn't have any problems in the chemistry department.
Speaker 1: And what about because you're a woman, did that make more difference or any difference at all?
Speaker 2: I didn't think so.  Later on it seemed like there was a problem in Minnesota where women thought that they were discriminated against.  I didn't, you know, I was so used to working with the boys and acting like one of the boys, it didn't bother me, you know.  Later on, after I had left the University, some of the women faculty members had a big problem, and there was a big bruha about that, just as there was--I heard about African Americans of being a big bruha, and then they have this big African American Studies group that sort of grew out of that.  With women in Science, they had a big problem too and there was a Consent Decree in which the chemistry department had to consent to hire women faculty members over the next five years or so.  But that came after I had gone.  I saw that in Chemical Engineering News, but I had no problem.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense here that if you wanted to, I mean if you wanted to pursue a career as a teacher at a university it would be, it would be open to you and be, you know, something that you can do?
Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause I didn't try.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know, although I hear that, you know, maybe because there was this study about Women in Science at that time, but--
Speaker 1: There was a study about Women in Science that--
Speaker 2: Triple AS [AAAS], American Association of the Advancement of Science had, convened a meeting of Women in Science who were in different fields, to talk about being both a woman and a minority in Science.  And out of that came a report called the "Double Bind Report".  And this was 35 years ago.  What was that, 19--what was 35 years ago?  I don't know.  So--
Speaker 1: Like seventy, I don't know '72' [1972] or '73' [1973]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was this.  And so their, they was trying to figure out, you know, hiring faculty members, getting, faculty members getting tenured it said.  That's what that was all about.  I have a feeling at that time when I was there, I mean minorities getting in faculty positions, both men and women were having problems, unless they were going to be a historically black college.  You know, to go to a major land grant university or any university, it was hard for them to get positions.
Story_ID: 20583
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I thought I'd ask about some of that before we moved on.  But now, at Ciba--so you were hired at Ciba.  And you tried to duck discrimination on a higher level and so you fit right in the middle wrung there with a Master's degree where you knew you could get hired.  And--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I had no problems at Ciba.  I had a boss named Dr. Bennett Mizzoni (ph.).  There were two of us in his lab.  One was Jerry Boxer, and I, and he was like a father (laughter).  He was really nice, you know.  The two of us worked together in the lab, and we did our work and worked well.  And he, you know, he gave us projects, and he kept us going as well as can be.  It was a Swiss-oriented company.  And so it was done by the Swiss method, which we found out was, in Switzerland it was the senior person which was Dr. Mizzoni, who was PhD, and then two laboratory assistants.  And in Switzerland, they didn't, their degree was equivalent to, I guess, a Master's degree in Switzerland.  But they were considered underlings, and so when Swiss professors, people from Switzerland would come to visit the lab, they would talk to (unclear) Hir Dr., Dr. Mizzoni, and they would sort of totally ignore us.  And, but that was just the culture of the company.  Later on a young PhD came in.  And even though I was still working for Dr. Mizzoni, I did, he didn't have any assistants, and so he sort of got me to do some work for him as well.  And I was doing some original research for him.  And it worked out fine.  You know, I think Dr. Mizzoni didn't mind.  I was doing some, oh, your, research which was not part what our regular duties were.  And so we had, we were--I enjoyed that.  But then he decided, this young professor, this young person working for Ciba decided he was going to leave.  And I decided maybe I'd better leave too because the fact that I was doing original research was not, it was sort of like frowned on, not by my doctor--my boss, but by the powers that be, the, you know, the big bosses.  And I wanted to do--I was happy doing original research.  And so I went off to Merck to, 'cause there I could do a little, be a little more independent.
Speaker 1: Now, had you started, now, you worked on from what I, the notes I have, you worked on Coccidiosis, a chicken disease, disease of chickens.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, when I first started at Ciba, there was, we were working on Tuberculosis, and I was real excited about that because I thought, oh, wow, that's a good--that's a disease that many minorities get, especially, if you grow up in New York City, you wind up having some kind of TB.
Speaker 1: Now, at that time, was there--explain, at the time that you were working there, they hadn't developed any vaccine for Tuberculosis yet, is that true?  Or had they?
Speaker 2: No, they hadn't yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they were looking--well, yes, they--I think they were just starting to begin then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but we were working on Tuberculosis drugs.  And then my boss said, okay, drop everything.  We're stopping this drug because we, Ciba--that's when I found out that pharmaceutical companies are in it to make money.  We cannot make money on this because we have the vaccine or whatever it is in the United States, and it would only be in the third-world countries that we would be marketing this drug.  And we can't make money that way.  So we're going to do, work on Coccidiosis.  And I went, Oewh, you know.  Well, okay, it's a business, pharmaceuticals are business.  So then we worked on coccidia stats.  Now, now, chicken is cheap.  And the reason why chicken is cheap is because of the big factory farms, chickens, you're right.  From the egg to the chicken is, I don't know, 12, 13 weeks or something like that, not very long.  But in order to do this, chickens are all in one big hen house, and they're all together.  And they eat each other's feces.  Well, in these feces are little worms called coccidia and which will abort the growth of a chicken.  And so in order to prevent this happening, there is a drug called coccidia stat which is a drug which will stop the growth of this worm within the chicken, let the chicken grow big enough and long enough so that you can be slaughtered and become meat.  So, all chicken feed is, has a little bit of this drug in it.  And it's all medicated.  Now, farmers will only pay a certain amount of money for chicken feed.  So the drug has got to be very potent and very strong and enough, you know, and so that you could only put a microscopic amount of it in the chicken feed because you also don't want to have it in the chicken 'cause the FDA is saying, you know, people have to eat this, have to eat the chicken meat.  So it's got to be potent enough for the worms, but not enough so that it's gonna bother the humans or anything like that.  So that's a tough project.  Also the coccidia get to be used to this.  And then the coccidia stat doesn't work anymore.  So it's a good project for a company 'cause you're always having to make a new drug.  And so we were making these drugs for that purpose.  And it was fun.  It's not a talk that I try to give before or even after people have eaten a lunch and have had chicken.  I say, well, if you've had chicken, I work on a drug (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --for that.  And they go, Ah (laughter), because I can show you pictures of the worms (laughter), but I try not to.  But I do have slides with those pictures of the worms and stuff.
Speaker 1: So the worms actually, you know, siphon off nutrition and make the chicken smaller?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they in the chicken's gut and they siphon off the chicken's nutrition and that's what, instead you get a skinny chicken instead of a big fat oven-stuffer roaster.  I don't know what Frank Purdue does now.  I, you know, 'cause I've been out of the business so long, I don't know.  Maybe they don't need those anymore.
Speaker 1: The chickens seem huge now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, and he may have something else going on.  But when we were doing it--I know that Ciba farmed out--this is Ag Health business, they farmed out that business.  Merck had that business, and they farmed out that business to two different companies.  So maybe, I don't know.  Maybe it's no longer needed anymore.  But this was when I was working.
Speaker 1: Now, these two companies now.  I don't know.  Can we make any generalization from the fact that Ciba is Swiss and Merck is--is Merck German?
Speaker 2: It used to be.
Story_ID: 20584
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Can we generalize that a lot of the chemical industry in the United States is, or a good portion, is not native U.S. companies or what?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's go to the history of the chemical industry in the United States.  The Chemical Heritage Foundation has that.  After World War I, and definitely after World War II, the chemical industry started in Germany and Switzerland.  It started as a dye industry in Germany and many companies started in Germany or in Switzerland, but then during World War I and during World War II, we were cut off from that supply.  So all of a sudden they realized we had to start chemical industry here in the United States.  When I first started to study chemistry in high--in college, many of the literature that I had to read, we had to learn--I had to learn Scientific German 'cause everything was written in German.  All the books were in German.  Everything was written in German.  So that was one the things, it was mandated that I take some German in order to read the literature.  But after World War II, like as Merck.  Merck started in Merck Dohmestat (ph.).  That got split off.  There is still a Merck Dohmstat in Merck, but it's not the same as the Merck here in the United States.  The Merck here in the United States was an American company which had come from Germany but now is an American company.  And Ciba, Ciba is still connected to Switzerland.  It's now Novartis, but they're still connected to Switzerland because--well, they weren't in the War.  I mean they were in the War, but they weren't enemies, (laughter) you know.  So they're still, there's still a connection between the two there.  But the chemical industry, growing up in the United States, started in the United--started in Germany or Europe, and then after the War, after the World War II that really was the growth of the company--of the industry here in the States.  And also, the employment too.  During World War I and World War II, many of the men went off to war.  And women scientists, they needed--the companies here needed scientists.  So they employed women chemists or African American or anybody, anybody that knew chemistry, they employed.  When the men came back from the War, these women got fired, you know, because it was a man's job.  But they could do it during the War, you know, but that's part of the history.
Speaker 1: They're expected to not be able to do it after the War.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, oh, you go home and have babies and get married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the women in my book, I mean she was working in science during World War I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, now, we're at the point where you got to Merck.  This is 19--so you were at Ciba for about 10, almost 10 years.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, and you go to Merck in 1969.  Now, you're 35 years old.  Now, you're in Rahway, New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 20585
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about Merck?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the reasons why I got to Merck was one of the women who worked with me in Ciba, her husband was a manager at Merck.  And he was--this was, the Civil Rights Act had come.  He was mandated to go out and look for African Americans in Science.  Well, I said, well, I wanted to change jobs.  So I was talking to my girlfriend, and she says, "Oh, I'll ask my husband."  And so she did.  And he brought me in for an interview.  And they really wanted me.  They wanted me, I guess, also because of my--I had, by that time I had some publications, I guess, from Ciba or pretty close and my expertise.  But when I looked, later on when I looked at my personnel file, which I could, the very first page, which they forgot to take off, said, "to be filled by an African American", and I went "Umm".  And the woman who was showing it to me happened to be, the personnel, head of personnel, an African American woman chemist.  And she, she nearly died that they had forgotten to take that page out, the first page.  But anyway, so I was hired at Merck.  And all the guys said, oh, well, you came in as a legacy because of the Civil Rights.  And, no, I came because of my, you know, my credentials, you know.  I could do independent research, and while I was there I did.  I mean what I liked about Merck was they would give me a project, and, you know, we all work in teams.  So I would be, I would have a piece of the project that the team was going to work on.  And you're gonna work, mostly I liked to do cyclopropyl compounds 'cause I had done that at Ciba.  And so, okay, you'll do the cyclopropyl derivative.  And so I would go off and study how to make this compound and come up with a plan and try to implement the plan.  We would get together in group meetings and I'd get some advice from my bosses or the other members of the group.  But most of the time in the lab, we were just doing our own thing.  When we got together with a group, then they would say, okay, do this, do that, do other things.  Once we got a target and a compound, then we'd just go do it and come up with it--and later on in our career, we started to have deadlines because it was management by objectives.  And so we had to have objectives and by the year--by the third quarter, we will have, and by the fourth quarter, we will have.  And we needed to have compounds ready for the biologists to test by Friday.  Okay, if my compound is not ready, you know, totally analyzed and ready to go by Friday--well, if I didn't think it was gonna be there by Friday, I, you know, just worked, you know.  You'd go in the labs, you know, 24 hours or whatever, Saturday, Sunday or whatever, to get the job done 'cause I had to have it there for the biologist who was gonna do the tests.  And he was ready with--and he or she were ready with their animals or whatever they want to test it on.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kinds of things did you work on--well, let me pause here for a second.  And then we'll pick up after--.
Story_ID: 20586
Speaker 1: All right, Merck.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, when I first started at Merck, 'cause I had, I was an expert in Coccidiosis 'cause I had worked at it at Ciba.  The problem with that is, you know, I had come from another company.  And when you come from another company, you theoretically have to forget everything that you have learned in that other company for five years.  And so, because that's the way--so that the other company can't say, company secrets are going into the other company.  So I couldn't work on Coccidiosis for the first five years of the company.  But, so I worked on other projects.  I worked for Ed Rogers and I worked on little projects that he would give to me to work on, and I can't remember.  There was some project where I have a patent on.  I used patent on a compound that I found, that he had given to me, and I found another use for it.  I did some other projects.  I didn't work on antibiotics.  Merck was very big on antibiotics at the time, but I didn't work on antibiotics at that time.  And then five years later, we were back on Coccidiosis and Merck still had, was still working on drugs for Coccidiosis.  So I did some research on new Coccidia stats for the company for Merck.  And then I still remember the day when the biologist came to our team and said, we have a drug which is a antibacterial drug called Imipenem.  It was a antibiotic, a very potent antibiotic.  But it's being destroyed by an enzyme in the kidney called Dehydropeptidase.  He, the biologist, had been doing some research on his own.  He found some compounds that would inhibit this enzyme.  Would our team try to potentiate this because the reason why we needed to do that is because the antibiotic was very potent, and it was a broad spectrum antibiotic through the entire system.  But it would be better if it weren't inhibited, if it weren't knocked out by the kidneys because this way, we can work on bacteria or bacterial disease within the kidney.  So we needed to find an inhibitor for this Dehydropeptidase, which is an enzyme that really isn't that important, especially, if you have, or if you're taking this bacterial drug, you're already very sick anyway.  So inhibiting that enzyme in the kidneys for a short period of time is not going--it's gonna, not gonna hurt you.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, so you would actually, people would eat chicken that has this--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  This is human.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We're back, we're out of Coccidiosis.  We're out of Coccidiosis.  This is human.  This is a human antibiotic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're not in--I've left Coccidiosis.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm now on a human antibiotic.
Speaker 1: Okay, right we've got them kind of running together, so, okay.  I'm with you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so, he brought us, you know, I remember the scientist bringing this compound to us.  And he gave, here's the structure (unclear).  And I said, okay, or my team.  Everything in the industry is done in teams.  So my boss decided he would, you know, give us each a little piece of this structure that we had to work on.  When you work on, in Science, you may have a structure, and there are a lot of different places where you can make different variations on that structure.  You vary the structure.  You do only one at a time.  You test it and then you go on.  You see whether it does it better or it's worse or whatever, and you keep going.  So they gave us the structure, and I worked on my little piece of the structure, and we came up--finally, our team finally came up with a perfect structure that will inhibit the enzyme and help the, the antibiotic to potentiate the antibiotic.  Okay, we now have two different things.  We have the antibiotic and we have the inhibitor.  These are two separate compounds which when combined become one drug which is now called Primaxin.  What happens is the FDA [Federal Food and Drug Administration] has to approve the antibiotic without the inhibitor, the inhibitor without the antibiotic and the two of them together.  This is really rough (laughter).  It's really hard because all the laboratory, all the things that are done in the laboratory by the researchers, by the--everybody that works on it.  Anybody that works on that drug, their laboratory work has to be tested, has to be given to the FDA.  And they get these big books of information.  And so finally, they got all of this information and this drug is now on the market as Primaxin which is the Imipenem and the inhibitor, the Dehydropeptidase.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Primaxin?
Speaker 2: Primaxin, P-R-I-M-A-X-I-N, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's still on the market because it's a very potent antibiotic, especially if somebody has problems with their lungs, if they have pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia.  I just recently saw in the paper that it was being compared with another drug from another company--and I won't mention the name.  And it turns out that Primaxin was better than that other drug.  So it's still on the market, and we made that.  I haven't been in the lab in years, and we made that a long time ago.  I have publications about this, and the structure of the final compound does have a cyclopropyl compound on it, my idea.  And it's buried with lots of other compounds, things hanging off of it, but I'm real happy about that.  And so--
Speaker 1: Now, did you receive a patent for this one?
Speaker 2: I, I think I have a patent.  Any patents that a company, you get from a company, belongs to the company.  They give you a dollar.  And it belongs to the company.  So I don't have--I don't get any royalties or anything for that.  They give you, and here's your dollar, and it belongs to the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have publications.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--you developed this, you said like later on.  And so this is about 1974 or so that this happens with the Primaxin?
Speaker 2: Probably, likely '80' [1980] or so.
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) 'cause then I was working on, later on, the last thing I was doing was growth, growth inhibitors--not growth inhibitors.  It was compounds that would increase longevity, increase the longevity.  One of the things a pharmaceutical company will do is they work on drugs for--well, where they make money is something that a person will have to take for the rest of their lives.  So that's why they like anti-hypertensives, 'cause once you get high and you get high blood pressure, okay, they can sell hypertensions, drugs, like Lipitor or anti-cholesterol drugs.  They sell them for a long time.  It's a drug you're gonna have to take forever.  They're now making, doing drugs for diabetes, drugs like that.  So, because, you know, once they get the drug, it's on the market, they can sell it for a long time.  Then they do the second generation to make it better, a second generation theoretically is supposed to make it better.  Now, though, companies are now starting to work on cancer drugs, which I'm happy about.  But that's, I--you learn a little bit about marketing while you're working as a chemist.  It started--'cause originally when we first started working, it was like pure, sort of pure research.  Now, it's sort of applied research.
Story_ID: 20587
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a, I guess, do you have a philosophical take on this?  I mean did it cause you to reflect on like what your, you know--I don't know if there're any--now, when you work for a big pharmaceutical company if you have like cause to pause and think like, is this, are they--are we really doing what is the most effective thing or we're just doing the thing that's gonna sell or what?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I like to, where many of us who retired early liked it when we, as we--as the company sort of went through phases, and I guess every company has gone through phases.  When we first started it was pure research, and we just would make the compounds and however long it took.  And it may take a while.  People will work in an industry for a while and may never have anything that's on the market.  And you still have to pay them.  And then later on it was, marketing came in.  And we would, a marketing person would be at our meetings.  And we're going, "Why?"  And it was management by objectives, and we had to get things done and accelerate things quickly, do it faster.  And in order to get the project, the thing that the company wanted quickly, they threw another team on it.  And we'd go through two or three team.  We're all different--they're all competing against each other for the same target and which one was gonna get there faster.  And I talked--we had a conversation with one of the biologists and she said, I don't know that we're gonna get the best compound out on the market by doing it that quickly.  And, you know, I always wonder, you know, because now, you know, we get a compound out on the market, and it gets tested, it has to do the human tests and all the other tests.  But is that exactly the best compound that could be on the market?  They still work on the second generation and third generations, but you've still had patients taking that first generation compound that may side--well, there isn't a drug on the market that doesn't have side effects, including aspirin.  Everything has side effects.  And so you're always making something that will, you know, make the side effects go away or try, you know, so they're always, you're always making another drug.  But that's philosophy, you know.  But if you really wanna do pure research or long research, then you have to be in academia, and even there, because you have grants, when your grant runs out, then you don't have enough money to finish that research.  And so everything is (sound), moving on (laughter).
Speaker 1: As a chemist, as a commercial research chemist, well, what's the project that you worked on that you're proudest of, I guess?
Speaker 2: The Primaxin.
Speaker 1: Primaxin, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you say it's still being used today.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 20588
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, during the time you're working at Merck and the National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers(NOBCChE) was founded by Dr. William Gilary (ph.) and others.  So can you tell us about that?  Did you know about it at its formation or did you find out later?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know about it formation, but, as I said, the woman who was head of the Human Resources, she was also a chemist, and she told me about it.  And she said, oh, why don't you go to the meeting?  So I went to the Third Annual or Fourth Annual meeting that they had in Washington, D.C.  She went also, and it was funny because at the company, I was like a little mouse, you know.  I didn't talk, you know.  I did my work and maybe I talked to the guys, I didn't, you know, I wasn't lively.  And so I got, when I got to the meeting, you know, I was seeing more African American chemists than I had ever seen in my whole life.  And so I was, you know, and I'm still single.  And they're mostly guys (laughter).  And so I was going, wow, and I was having a great time talking to them and dancing and doing whatever they were at the meeting.  And she looked at me and says, "That's not you."  I said, "Yeah, you're right" (laughter).  That's not me.  No, but at the time when I went to the first or third meetings or whatever, there were very few women that were involved in the organization.  They were mostly chemical engineers and chemists, male chemists and chemical engineers.  And so I kept going to the meetings, and after a while we got more women involved with that.  In fact, we had a big, we ran a big symposium 'cause at the time, they would have each region decide to run a conference.  Now, they have a professional do it.  And so we did a conference when it was held in New York City, and I did a symposium on Women in Science, and which I invited Dr. Marie Daley who was the first African American woman to get a PhD in Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: I met her in New York.
Speaker 1: Oh, did you--okay.
Speaker 2: I was at the New York Academy for Science.  They had a meeting there, and she was there.  And I went "Oh, my God," you know.  I didn't, you know--
Speaker 1: Did you know who she was?
Speaker 2: I knew who she was because I had seen the children's book on, on Dr. Marie Daley.  And she's such a nice woman, so selfless, unassuming and whatever.  I said, my God, you're a history.  She is the reason why I started researching history because I said, where is everybody else?  Yeah, she was the first woman I had seen, African American woman chemist.
Speaker 1: So here, you know, you said your father collected books on Black History, and tried to get you involved in it, but here you are now starting to pay attention--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but after he died.  And so he's probably rolling over in his grave, you know, because, you know, he wanted to get me involved in Black History, and I said, well, "No, they're not teaching it in school," you know.  You know, that hurt him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he know the historians in Harlem, John Henry Clark and some of the other people, Jay--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He may have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he may have.
Speaker 1: I just wondered.  He seemed like a self-taught man and it seemed like he would have--
Speaker 2: He may have.
Speaker 1: --known them.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so then, more and more--in fact, one of the women in my book, Linda Meade Tolan, was the first woman to be chairman of the board, I think, of NOBCChE (ph.).  Yeah, we, and now, well, lots and lots of women, they're involved in NOBCChE.  They're (unclear) like take over the organization.
Story_ID: 20589
Speaker 1: There's a, a couple of questions.  Let me go back to, you talk about how excited you were when you went to NOBCChE for the first time and how your personality seemed to change.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think, I mean when you look back at, you know, 'cause when earlier I asked you, you know, was there any discrimination or did they--and maybe it wasn't overt discrimination, but do you think that, you know, working in an all-white environment with, I mean, effected your personality in terms of how you relate people in that situation or do you think you were acting normally at work and abnormally at NOBCChE?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  Okay, I went to Merck with--'cause, okay, the reason why I went to Merck was, you know, to do independent research and probably get promoted to the senior level because that's what they said they'd do, even with a Master's degree.  And so I was trying very hard to, you know, get promoted and do my best and do my work.  And I had bosses, well, one boss who said, he was trying to help me.  But I didn't like the way he was trying to help.  And the other one who says, I have a wife and a family and a child, and I cannot be bothered with you.  And we were--that was really interesting because at the time, our whole team, our whole team was being held hostage by the company because our boss, the big, the boss of the team, he was 65 and wanted to work until age 70.  And the company said, "No."  They wanted him to retire.  So instead of, they decided to hold the whole team hostage for five years.  They, no, you know, no promotions, no nothing.  And I'm going, oh, my God.  So that was, you know, that was rough for us at that time.  And then, but at the very end of my career, I got my best boss I've ever had who really sat me down and said, okay, we're gonna see what we can do.  And he would not let me fail 'cause we had to write our own reports.  And as I told you, I'm not good in English (laughter), it would come back to me and redlined, you know,"Do this, that's better;" "write this better;" you know, "Are you sure you're writing it--" and dah, dah, dah, you know.  And so it would take me days to write this report, but he wanted it to be my best report before he handed it off to his bosses because he was trying to get me that promotion.  Well, at the time there was for me, there was an industrial accident.  There was something going on, and I wound up--I was the only one in the lab, and I wound up smelling some stuff that affected my lungs.  Now, you--okay, labs are, are set up so that it doesn't affect the personnel.  Everything we do was in hoods with the proper ventilation.  But we, they were renovating the building.  And the end of our building was wide open to the outside, and the hoods were not effective because of that because they couldn't close the system and get everything to work.  So I was sitting in the lab all afternoon trying to get my work.  Everybody else was at some other meeting.  And there was, people were doing some cleaning outside that, with a chemical that I was smelling--I didn't realize it and then just at the end of the day, I could hardly breathe.  They took me to the hospital and stuff, and so I wound up with reactive airways disease.  And I became sensitive to everything, you know, like perfume bothered me.  So I had to go work by myself in another lab which made it hard for me.  And our team didn't succeed in what we were doing, so the boss I loved, he left the company, and I left the company too because it was the early retirement plan that they had said we could get onto.  And so I, you know, they made me take the early retirement plan.  So that's what happened, but I still remember him.  He was the best boss I ever had because he wanted me to succeed.  I wish I had had him in the beginning of my career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you retired, this was 1998?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when did you inhale the chemicals--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was about a year before that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And the disease is called again?
Speaker 2: Reactive Airways Disease.  It's like Asthma.  In fact, I was using Asthma drugs.  It's occupational 'cause it doesn't bother me anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can smell perfume.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wore off after--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it took about five years.
Story_ID: 20590
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, that's good.  Okay, but, okay 'cause I was just wondering--the earlier question I was asking was just about work environment and how you interacted in a work environment in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, with the guys in the lab?  I had no problem with them.
Speaker 1: Did you, do you think it would have been a different--you would have had a different personality or different experience working in a setting that was--
Speaker 2: The guys teased me in the lab.  Yeah, there were mostly men in our labs.  There were some women and very few African American women.  I became mother.  Anytime they hired a new African American woman, you know, she would come to me.  So I became the lab mother.  One of the, one of the--in fact, there was a summer intern who is my mentee.  She was, she had come from Douglas College, and she worked as a summer intern for two years at Merck.  Then she went off to get a PhD in Chemistry and came back to Merck to try to get a job.  And she had the interview, but they didn't offer her the job.  So she went to Hoffman-Larouche, as strange as it may seem, and she was, became a manager at Hoffman-Larouche.  And, but she still, she still thinks that I'm her mentor, and she really was real excited about me writing a book and stuff like that.  And then, they had never hired--the women that they hired all had BS degrees.  Finally, they hired Leslie Brown with a Masters degree.  This was about five years before I retired.  And I went oh, Leslie and sort of bonded.  And she said, "Oh, my God, you're the first African American woman, you know, woman in the lab with a Master's degree."  They never hired a PhD while I was there, a woman.  They hired a male PhD, Testfif Tu (ph.) who was a, he was from Ethiopia.  We sort of bonded together, but all the other guys were white.  But, you know, we were on the bowling team together and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, oh, Leslie decided, she took a look--all the, everybody, all the girl--women that came took a look around at what was going on, and they left.  And Leslie decided she'd go and get her PhD.  And she's teaching at some college in Maryland now.  In fact, I have to get her in my next book.
Story_ID: 20591
Speaker 1: Okay, now you, speaking of black colleges, I mean, well, I don't know if the college in Maryland is a black college, but you, when you got involved with NOBCChE, you got on the Black University Liaison Committee, right?
Speaker 2: That's from Merck [Merck Pharmaceuitcals].
Speaker 1: That's from Merck?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they've got, so this was actually Merck.
Speaker 2: Okay, at Merck, Black University Liaison Committee.  As I said, Merck was really interested in getting more blacks involved in the company.  So they formed what is the Black University Liaison Committee.  And my, one of my bosses and I and a veterinary, a vet--well, there were five of us or so who were on that committee.  We each were involved with a black college.  I had Grambling University [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and Southern [Southern State University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] in New Orleans.  What, okay, what we did was we visited our school--the Merck Foundation was involved with this too.  We visited our school.  We talked to the faculty members there and asked them what they would need in order to improve the teaching of whatever our Science was and mine was Chemistry.  And so they would give us a list of things that they wanted and we would bring it back.  And the Merck Foundation would fund--at Grambling, I think we funded a laboratory.  At Southern in New Orleans, they also funded a laboratory.  The other request we had was a summer intern.  The summer intern would have to have had majored in Chemistry and be a sophomore, no, a junior.  And they would come--when we first started the program, they didn't have housing for them, so we would house them, house the students.  And they would come and work in the lab.  One of the students that I worked with was from Grambling was Dr. Richard Rayford.  He came, he stayed in my house, and he came to Merck twice.  Now, he had worked at National Lab as a sophomore year.  This guy was really smart.  He had a publication from his summer internship at the National Lab.  He came to Merck for two summers and got two different publications.  In fact, the boss that he worked for used to, every time I would see him he'd say, yeah, I know, I'm Richard's boss (laughter), because, you know, I would look at him, and I'd say, "Where's Richard", you know, okay.  And Richard--now, the object of this was we would, and convince these students that they were gonna go off and get a PhD at a major university and then come back and work for Merck.  Well, Richard did what he was told.  He went to Case Western University [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] to get a PhD in Biochemistry and then he had always wanted to be doctor.  So, and he was from Mississippi.  So he decided he would go back to Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], and at that time they were in--they were letting minorities into the medical school.  And so he went to Ole Miss, and he got his MD degree.  I went to his graduation for his MD.  I went to his wedding.  He's still my mentee.  I just called him the other day to find out, I told him that you--he's supposed to call me 'cause he--I'm his other mom.  And he's supposed to call me to see if I'm still alive.  I said, Hum, you didn't, you haven't called me.  And so, yeah, so that's the program that they had.  Merck had that program for about five or six years, and then they decided maybe it was too expensive.  So now what they do is with the National, what is it, the National Program for Historical Black College, they have a special grant to give fellowships to students to go on to graduate school.  I don't know that Merck has ever hired any of the kids from our program.  We would send these kids off to these research one universities.  I remember one girl, we sent her off to one college, and she came back to Grambling.  And she says, nobody likes me there.  (Unclear) where's the place to have my hair done.  I'm leaving (laughter).  And she came back to go to an HBCU [Historically Black College and Universities], you know, 'cause they were isolated.  And that's the problem, especially--I think there was somebody who talked about that, that when graduate students come with their own money, professors want, would pay more attention to kids that were on their grant rather than kids who come with their own money.  And that's the problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here again.
Story_ID: 20592
Speaker 1: All right, now, tell us about some of the other interns.  We were talking off camera about Danny Hubbard and Connie Walton, right, of Grambling?
Speaker 2: Yeah, while I was going to Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], 'cause I would go once, once or twice a year.  One of the fun things about being at Merck [Merck Pharmaceuticals] was being, that's why the guys in the lab used to kid me a lot because, you know, I had business cards which they didn't have.  And I would get to go on company trips that they didn't get to go on (laughter).  So, I would down to Grambling about twice a year, and what they decided to tear down the Chemistry building and build a brand new one, and, while I was there, and while I was going back and forth.  And one of our, two of the summer interns who came in the program, one was Danny Hubbard and the other one was Connie Walton.  Connie went off, and she started off in industry.  She worked for, oh, I can't remember.  She worked for some company in New Jersey, and she didn't like working in corporate America.  So then she went back to Grambling to be in the chemistry department.  Well, Danny went to Grambling too, and he became head of the--he's the chairman of the chemistry department at Grambling University.  And Connie Walton is now Provost of the University.  And so we have, you know, also Alvin Kennedy was also a summer intern.  Alvin Kennedy was the son of the then chair of the chemistry department of Grambling.  Alvin is now at an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] in Maryland.
Speaker 1: Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Morgan State.
Speaker 1: That's exactly.  We interview--
Speaker 2: That's where he is at Morgan State.
Speaker 1: --we interviewed him last year (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, didn't you do oral history?
Speaker 1: Yes, we did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Alvin Kennedy.  So he's one of the guys that I--in the program.  And, yeah, so there were, Merck had some successes.  They maybe--they just didn't have the success that Merck wanted.  I mean they didn't get them to come and, and work for the company.  But they have them, they're out teaching and helping other kids get into science.  So, yeah, so Merck can be proud of that.  Actually, yeah, they were.  They gave us, when they disbanded the committee, they gave us all an award for the, for being on the committee.
Story_ID: 20593
Speaker 1: Now, you've received quite a few awards.  I've got a bunch of 'em here.  You were elected to the Iota Sigma Pi Chemistry Honor Society?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was right here.  It was funny 'cause here I am a graduate student here at Minnesota [University of Minnesota].  And I knew nothing of Iota, Iota Sigma Pi.  And all of a sudden, I got a notice, I guess, from the office.  And Iota Sigma Pi wants you to be inducted into their--it's this chemistry sorority.  And it's at one of the colleges here.  I think, it's either St. Catherine's or Saint--one of the Catholic colleges is where I got inducted into, into the Mercury Chapter of Iota Sigma Pi.  And now, I'm a--I'm still a member of Iota, I'm a lifetime member of Iota Sigma Pi, but I'm a member at large, which means I'm not really affiliated with this chapter.  I'm a member, just part of the member-at-large group.  And that's a real honor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you retired did you, now, you don't live in Minnesota, do you?  You live in--
Speaker 2: No, I don't live in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're just here now doing this interview, but (laughter), you're still, you're in the New York area or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I live in Hillsboro, New Jersey--
Speaker 1: Hillsboro, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the New Jersey area.  Well, I used to live in Summit 'cause that's where I worked.  And then I moved to Hillsboro because that's where I could afford to buy a house or a townhouse.
Story_ID: 20594
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about some of the projects you were involved in with the American Chemical Society?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, okay, the American Chemical Society is the largest scientific society.  And I became a member of the American Chemical Society when I was at Hunter College [New York, New York].  And then I used to follow, when they had the national meetings--they used to have national meetings in New York [New York] and Atlantic City [New Jersey] and Chicago [Illinois].  Now, they have them all over because it's gotten to be so big.  Some of these towns are too small.  Well, they can't support everything for the American Chemical Society (ACS).  And one of the things the American Chemical Society, programs that they had, was called Project Seed.  It was a program that was started after the riots, the Civil Rights riots or whatever, of kids that, one of the members of the American Chemical Society said, we need to do something about poor students or African--or minority students.  So rather than just say minority, American Chemists are very, what is the word?  They're not very--you would think they were progressive, but they're not.  They've very stayed.  It takes them forever to decide on things.  Okay, we'll call it "Economically Disadvantaged", which will encompass a lot of minority kids.  This program is for high school students, economically disadvantaged high school students who have studied chemistry.  They get to work with a scientist for the summer, and they are paid by the American Chemical Society to work.  The amount now is up to almost as much as they would make at McDonald's because we want them to really focus on research and not have to focus on making money for their family.  They, their mentors teach them whatever their science is, mostly chemistry.  And at the end of the year, they do a poster session.  We do it at the national meetings or, in our section, we do it at our local section.  These kids can blow me away with what they have learned over the summer.  And their mentors are very proud of them.  They can call for a second year now, which means after their senior year before they go off to graduate or go off to college.  And we hope that they go to college.  We have scholarships for them to go to college.  And many of them do.  The program has been in existence for a long time.  We have many of them that have gone on to get PhDs in Chemistry.  We have some that have gone to be high school teachers, which we really promote, that they should get, go on--'cause we really need high school teachers who understand science and chemistry.  And it's a really good program, and that's funded by donations from members and corporations.  And it's been going on for years.  I was chair of--there's a national committee that runs it, I was chair of that committee for a while.  And when I was chair, they were thinking about stopping the program because it was so expensive.  I had to go out and do fundraising for the program.  Now, they have professionals.  But I remember going to different corporations.  I went to Schering-[Plough] and asking for money for fundraising for the program, just to keep it going.  So I helped keep it going, and I'm excited about that.  The other thing I do is I'm on--there are committees on minority affairs and now the ACS--there are a number of minorities who are members of the ACS.  But they haven't gotten into leadership positions.  And we're working now to get them into leadership positions.  I'm on nominations and elections, and we're gonna try to see if we can get more minorities who are nominated to become presidents or president of the society or board members of the society or other leadership positions.  We've just had our second African American who is president of the society, African American male.  We have not had an African American female president yet.  We currently have our first Asian American woman who will be president of the society.  We've just had our first Native American woman to be president of the society and so we're getting there on diversity.  Every, chemists take everything very slowly.  If you go to our board meetings, I mean it's like pulling teeth to get anybody to get anything done.  But we're working on it.
Story_ID: 20595
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you also work with the committee for equal opportunities in science and engineering with the National Science Foundation, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was appointed to CS.  That's the Committee on Equal Opportunities.  Shirley Malcolm, I think was responsible for getting me on that committee.  Shirley Malcolm of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.  I was on that committee for six years.  Now, that program is a committee of the National Science Foundation which was congressionally mandated.  It reports to Congress every two years.  What that committee does is oversee the National Science Foundation to make sure that the awards that they give are given out to women minorities and persons with disabilities or that they are included in, in the awards in some way.  And also, that the personnel of the National Science Foundation are diverse.  When I was on the committee, I remember we talked to everyone in, all the personnel people because they didn't have a diversity chair.  They do now.  They didn't have a diversity office.  They do now, and we make sure that that happens because people who come in to be program officers are called rotators.  And they're scientists from all over.  We wanted to make sure that there are some minority scientists who come in to be rotators and that they respect the personnel because many times, the committee--the agency used to be housed in Washington, D.C.  In fact, it was in a building across the street from the White House.  And the FBI decided that they were too close to the White House.  So they're now out in Arlington [Virginia].  But the people who were working there were mostly minorities, and they wanted to make sure that they respected the people as people rather than as somebody to do their work, you know, say, hello, how are you, dah, dah, etc.  And it was fun being on that committee.  When I was on the committee, Luther Williams was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: He was head of EHR, Education, Human Resources, whatever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the same one that was president of Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and he's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Luther Williams.
Speaker 1: He's at Tuskegee now, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, so, it was fun.  The committee meets four times a year so I got to go to Washington four times a year.
Speaker 1: Now, you were also named the Outstanding Woman in Science by the New York Chapter of the Association for Women in Science.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, they have the (unclear) I'm the, yeah, I was Outstanding Woman in Science for that.  It's just an award.
Story_ID: 20596
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but, okay.  The Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science and Engineering for the National Science--okay, that's National Science.  We already talked about that.  Tell us about the Percy Julian Task Force 'cause I've never heard of that until today.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  There is a video that was done by Nova about Percy Julian, and I forget the title of it.  It was funded by the National Science Foundation, Dreyfus Foundation, the American Chemical Society, dah, dah.   The, we were, I was on the Percy Julian Task Force of the American Chemical Society.  And what our job was to do is to see, once that Nova Video got out where the viewing would be, and it was at the Academy of Science, and who would be invited to that, and all the particulars about that video because we were really excited.  It is and was the only video that was done about an African American scientist on Nova and African American chemist on Nova.  I think, you know, they have--Nova has an astronomer on there now.  But he was the first African American chemist, male chemist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Neal Degrass Tyson has got a show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, astronomer, yeah, right.  So we were excited about getting that out, and so I was on that task force.  It was just trying, the nuts and bolts of getting it going.  There is a video that PBS [Public Broadcast System], Boston, the one in Boston, about an African American woman scientist, "Jewels in a Test Tube", and that's Linda Jordan.  But that video, you can get from, by Inter-Library loan, and it's never been out again.  And it was, you know, a long time ago.  But that shows Linda Jordan in the laboratory at North Carolina A and T.  And she's in my book.
Speaker 1: So WGBH?
Speaker 2: Yeah, WGBH Boston did that.
Speaker 1: Produced that, okay.
Speaker 2: And, but that's, you know, it's not been put on DVD.  It's only on, it's only on VHS video which--
Speaker 1: Her name is Dr. Jewel Jordan?
Speaker 2: No, Dr. Linda Jordan.
Speaker 1: Okay, Linda, Linda Jordan, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's in my book.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that shows her in the laboratory when she was at North Carolina A and T.  She's a biochemist.
Speaker 1: Okay, biochemist.  Okay, so, now, tell us about the Society of--well, the French Society.  I don't wanna, I'm not gonna butcher the name.  You were a fellow of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the Societe Keebe Industriale (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, okay, all right.  We, I've left Merck, and I was in science education for a while at the New Jersey Institute of Technology.  And then that job ended, and I decided to write a book, my book about African American women chemists.  And I applied for a fellowship at the Chemical Heritage Foundation.  And I got this fellowship which is Societe, which is--it's a French, the French Chemical Society.  And that fellowship was to work at the Chemical Heritage Foundation and write my book or do research for the book.  And so I did, and I was there for eight months or so in their offices.  And I had my own little office, and I could do research.  And it helped me get the book going.
Story_ID: 20597
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said you were inspired by Dr. Marie Daley.  She was the first African American to get a PhD in Chemistry, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you actually met her, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I met her.  I was so excited about meeting her.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about some of the other--I know some of the others are Eslanda Roberson, right?  She was a chemist, Paul Roberson's wife, had been a chemist--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, and that's Eslanda, right?
Speaker 2: Eslanda Roberson, yeah. Paul Roberson's wife.
Speaker 1: And there's some others.  But tell us about some of the personalities in the book.
Speaker 2: Okay, when I first started to do the research, I was interested in the lives of chemists, 1865 to 1965, from civil, end of the Civil War to the beginning of the Civil Rights.  So, the earliest woman I can find is Josephine Silone Yates.  She was the first African American woman to head a chemistry department or department of science at Lincoln University.  It was Lincoln Institute at the time, in Missouri.  She grew up in Rhode Island.  Actually, she grew--well, she was born on Long Island, and then she went to school in Philadelphia because her uncle wanted her to have a good education.  So she went to live with her uncle and went to school, a private school run by the Friends School.  So she went there, and then her uncle moved to become dean of Divinity School in Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia].  So then she moved up to live with another aunt in Rhode Island and went to school there.  I mean it's the first African American to do everything there, and went to Rhode Island Normal School.  And then she was recruited by Lincoln Institute.  Now, Lincoln Institute was founded by former African American soldiers who had gone, had come back from the war.  And they said, oh, we have to start a school so we can get African Americans, the former slaves, into doing some work and learning some things, you know, like all of the HBCSs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities].  And they all started out as institutes.  And so, they hired, when they got the black president, he fired all the white faculty members and hired African Americans.  So they got Josephine Silone Yates to come and be head of the science department.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, 18--I don't know, 18, 18--
Speaker 1: The late 1800s is what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, late 1800s.  And so--I can look it up.  So she came out there.  Somehow, I have to--'cause someone who wrote about her in African American National Biology said she's got a Master's degree in Chemistry from a college in Illinois that no longer exists.  And someone said--I have to go find it.  But anyway, she headed the chemistry department--science department there.  And she was there for a while.  And I love her picture.  And, of course, Eslanda Roberson started out as a chemist at Columbia University.  She was gonna go into medical school, but then she was working in the medical school laboratory, doing laboratory analysis, and that's where she met Paul Roberson.  And, but she continued to do research until she decided that she needed to help Paul in his career, after they got married.  Betty Harris is another woman, oh, I have to talk about the woman, Alice Ball, is another pioneer.  Alice Ball grew up in Seattle and went to University of Hawaii to get a Master's degree.  And they gave, someone gave her a project to potentiate something that was used for leprosy, but it was not very effective.  They wanted to make it bio--effective--injectible.  Right now, it was used as a topical drug.  And so she was, worked on the research for that, and she did it in one year, and people with PhDs and everything else couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So she discovered the way to treat leprosy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's called the Ball method.  February 29 of one year was declared Alice Ball Day.  And I thought that was every year because there's gonna be a February 29th this year.  When I looked it up, I couldn't find it, but I'm gonna go check with the University of Hawaii to see whether or not they're gonna do anything about that.  I'm gonna tell 'em that the book is out and maybe they should do something about it, for February 29th (laughter).
Speaker 1: She went to Hawaii to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did it in Hawaii.  There are some books about her, and I got two books out of the library--I got from Amazon about Hawaiians, African Americans in Hawaii.  And there's lot of, you know--my book is just a beginning of research because there's a lot more that can be done.  And I've got the information out there.  And if anybody wants to go and do more, including myself, will do some more research.
Speaker 1: Was it hard to find, now, I've looked through the book.  Was it hard to find photos of the women?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there're some women I don't have photos for 'cause I couldn't find any.  Yes, one of--well, Alice Ball, that is her graduation photo.  That's the only one they have.  I had to cut--there was another guy (laughter) hiding her.  I had to--everybody cuts him out of the picture and put that, but that's the only one that we had of her.  Yeah, and one woman, I couldn't find any photos for.  So that's why not everybody has photos in the book.  Betty Harris is another woman.  She's really contemporary.  I have to go--she would--I have to go see her.  She worked at Los Alamos Laboratory, and she worked on cleaning up the mess after the Atomic Bomb testing.  But she also has a patent on Nitrate Explosive Detector which is now used for Homeland Security.  So when they ask you to take your shoes off, they may swab your shoes with this cloth containing the detector to find out whether you have an explosive on your shoes.  And that's Betty Harris.  She also did the girl scout emblem, a reward for science, the chemistry.  Betty Harris did that.  And she was very involved with programs out in New Mexico, although she was born in Shreveport or that area of Louisiana, and she talks with that accent.  She's so sweet.  I need to see her.  I'm gonna go do her oral history.  She's such a sweetie.
Story_ID: 20598
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the book was just published.  How is, has there been a strong reaction from the public about the book already or is it still just building?
Speaker 2: It's slowly but surely coming.  You know, I've had interviews with three, well, three different African American publications, two--I have an interview--oh, I have an interview with one, Big Science or something next week.  And then my local newspaper in New Jersey, 'Courier News', I had an interview with a summer intern--with an intern, and he's writing an article about it.  So it's just starting.  It was just--the publication date was December 14th of last year.
Speaker 1: So it's just about a month, just about a month.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it should start, it's beginning to grow, the momentum is beginning to grow.  I'm here in Minnesota for my first big book event which was at the Minnesota Science Museum, and I will do book signings at the University of Minnesota bookstore on Wednesday of this week.  And so it's just starting, word gets, you know, it's a slow momentum.  And we, I figured, I have a book signing at a bookstore in Montclair, New Jersey in February, and there will be also one--there's a big program in Rutgers Newark [New Jersey], Marion Thompson Wright lecture series.  She was a historian in New Jersey, and they allow book signings of African American books at that event.  And so I will be doing that, that event in February.
Story_ID: 20599
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look at the state science education especially in the African American community, are you hopeful?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm gonna try.  I, I, as I said, my job between writing a book and retiring from Merck [Merck Pharmaceuticals] was a program at New Jersey Institute of Technology, called the Statewide Systemic Initiative for Math and Science, which was a National Science Foundation grant.  And it was to improve education of math and science.  I can only by New Jersey.  We have what we call the Abbott School Districts which were the economically disadvantaged school districts, mostly Newark and places like that, where we gave a lot more money to school districts.  Well, everybody is complaining that that money didn't, you know, come up with very good education.  It depends on the teacher.  It depends on the school.  And I don't wanna blame teachers for, you know--and it also depends on the family, for not being able to do things.  You have to have good--like my mother and father, they were really interested in my education.  We have to educate families that they have to, you know, be involved with their kids because even in the urban school districts that, when a parent is involved with their kids' education, the teacher is going to react and make sure that she teaches that child.  There is that thing called the chameleon effect.  When somebody thinks that somebody is smart and needs to be accelerated, okay, even if they're not smart.  If they think they're smart, they're gonna teach to that child.  And that's, you know, that's the way it has to be done.  You know, teachers don't have--when I was going to the schools, like my job was to go into the schools of Newark and East Orange [New Jersey], and you'd go in there.  They don't have the equipment that you'd see in an urban school district.  I just recently talked to, in the high school in the town I lived in.  And I looked around at what they have in that high school, and I said, my God, I don't think high schools in Newark have--some do, like Science High, but Science High [Science High School, Newark, New Jersey] is the school that they're, you know, that it's a--that they're trying to make into the best school.  But not every high school has all of this equipment that is needed to get, you know, get the kids, and that's what should happen.  All kids should be expected to accelerate.  And when you, you know, Reatha Clark King will say that.  You know, you have to have your full potential.  And I say the same thing.  They have to go to their full potential.  So, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's not just money.  It's, it's expectations and parent involvement and making sure that everybody gets--is on the same plane.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause.
Story_ID: 20600
Speaker 1: Well, I just wanna ask you--
Speaker 2: Well, now, were on?
Speaker 1: Well, not--we weren't just then, but we're rolling now.  But I was asking, well, I'll ask anyway.  You can answer, formulate a question about the popular culture applications of amateur chemistry in depressed areas around the drug trade, you know.  Some people are learning certain procedures to, and you were saying, there's so much on the Internet now that may or may not be, you know, the right information.
Speaker 2: As the American Chemical Society would say, we don't want people to use that.  We want chemistry for the benefit of people.  That's about all I'm gonna say about that.
Speaker 1: So the chemist has an ethical responsibility.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have ethical responsibility.
Story_ID: 20601
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So anybody going into it thinking they're gonna use it for something wrong probably should not think that way.  All right.  Well, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today as an African American woman and as a chemist?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns is, you know, in my book, you don't have to be a chemist.  I just would like you to study--I mean be a practicing chemist.  I would like you just to study it or understand it because the public, general public, you know, when they talk about toxic chemicals or whatever, you have to understand the risks and the benefits of chemistry and understand enough about it to know when, what is right and what is wrong.  We need people--my hope is we find people who want to teach it, especially in the African American community.  If we have very good teachers who understand their field, high school teachers, that understand their field, they can convey it kids.  Kids with a degree in Chemistry, you can go into business.  You can go into politics, where we need politicians who understand science in order--you know, when they look at research proposals that need funding, and they can't--they don't have to say, oh, we can't fund this.  It costs too much money.  They can understand why it cost so much money, you know, that researchers need money to live in order to do the research.  You could become a patent attorney, just to understand the science for their general knowledge.  And when I saw all those kids at the Science Museum, I was saying, oh, my God, I'm hoping that they all decide that, oh, this is something fun for them to do and they want to learn this just for the knowledge sake.  Where now we're teaching kids to the test.  Okay, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  So you have to pass the test.  But what do they know.  Do they know anything other than the test?  With teachers, when I was working with teachers, that's one of the questions, things that we would ask teachers to do.  If a child would come up with a question in which you didn't know the answer, don't just dismiss that child.  Say, well, okay, let's do some research on it or maybe you'll do some research on it and we'll both come back, and we'll learn it.  That's a teachable moment, not the, oh, I have to go on 'cause we're only on page 25, and I gotta get to page 50, you know, in order, so you can pass this test.  That's not teaching.  That's just going.  So that's my hope, that, you know, all--that we will get people who are interested in science and just for the fun of it.
Story_ID: 20602
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on your career, and all the things that you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy, I think, over all my career, the people, the students, you know, people that I've mentored, the kids--one of the things when I was in science at Merck [Merck Pharmaceuticals], there was a National Science Foundation program called "Visiting Women in Science".  And they were looking for people to volunteer to be in that program.  And I volunteered, and they sent me off to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and, well, the deal was, well, we had to go talk to girls in school, high school, and then later to guidance teachers.  And I, you know, I would--I'm 30 years old, you know, talking to these kids.  I'm telling them about my career, and some of the kids were sleeping, you know, and stuff like that.  But there was, and a little girl, and I still remember that one kid with her big pigtails, and looking up at me and the big bright eyes, and we were going, I'm wondering whether or not she wound up being a scientist.  As I was reading this, as I was reading about the women in my book, there were women like that in the book, you know, who just got really interested in being scientists because somebody was involved with their career or wanted them to do this.  And Linda Jordan who was in that video, she was in Upward Bound [Upward Bound Program], but she almost didn't get in Upward Bound because they didn't choose her to be in Upward Bound.  She just wound up in the--she was hiding from somebody in the school and wound up in the auditorium where the guy was talking about Upward Bound careers.  That's a program where they take kids out of high school and try to get them better in science and math so that they could go on to careers in science.  And she got, she got in, into that program.  So this is what I'm thinking of my legacy.  It's also the book because not only do I talk about the history of all these women, you don't have to read that.  It's how they did it and why, how they, in fact, with all the struggles that they had to, when life is easier now.  And then how you can do it, the back, the whole back chapter is things that are available now that you can access and do it if you want to be in science.  And even money, you know, grants with the National Science Foundation, the American Chemical Society that you can get.  So that's my legacy, is the book and all of the kids that I've talked to.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look--likewise, if you look back at your career to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could go back and do it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Go back and get my PhD, yeah.  I sometimes dream about that and Professor Nolan who was the one I TA'd for every year when I'd see him because at the American Chemical Society in Minnesota comes and has breakfast at every national meeting.  And we have two a year.  Professor Nolan is always there because he wants to eat, and he still reminds me, yes, you know, you could have stayed on and gotten your PhD in Chemistry.  I might have gone back, and, you know, there was--I was having fun in the industry when I was working.  But the company did offer--you could go at night and take courses, and then when you had to go do your research, they would pay you half pay to do your research in the lab.  And I probably should have done that.  And Reatha Clark--Reatha King will say that.  She has already said that to me.  And also another woman in the book too has also said that to me.  So, that's the final degree, is what you should have had (laughter).
Story_ID: 20603
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, your parents are, are they--they're probably passed away now, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --but what did your parents think about your success in chemistry?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were excited.  My parents.  One of the things, okay, one of the things I did, about five years into my job--working at Ciba [Cibe-Geigy Pharmaceuticals], you start out with two weeks vacation, and then we rapidly go up to three weeks vacation.  And so, because it was a Swiss company, they allowed you to take three weeks' leave.  And so what I did was took my parents to Europe.  I took six weeks off, and I took them to Europe, and that was because they had sacrificed for me.  When I was in school, I didn't have to work.  I went to summer camp, okay, I was a camp counselor.  That's not working.  I was getting $100 for the whole summer.  I didn't, you know, I didn't go an bust tables or do anything like that, which, you know, I should have because they said, oh, don't bother.  We'll give you money or whatever.  I didn't need it much in college anyway 'cause it was free.  And grad school, I still have a letter that I wrote home from my mother.  I have, oh, the Metropolitan Opera is coming to Minnesota.  That's $3.00 and I'm going to three operas.  That's $9.00, but I need $10.00 to pay my room and board.  Could you send me $10.00 so that I can go to the opera with my nine pals, and things like that (laughter), and they would do that.  And that was back when they would wire the money, you know.  They would do that.  So my parents, you know, they were really excited about me getting a job in industry.  In fact, one of the things I looked at when I was at the, looking through my mother's stuff, somehow or other, Ciba must have had a meeting of parents or relatives or whatever.  I have a picture of my mother and father which was taken at Ciba at that meeting.  And I go oh, my God, you know, there they are.  My daughter is working at this company (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about, now do you have--did you ever marry or did you have any children?
Speaker 2: No, never married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who would you consider now your family or your extended family in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Well, when I moved, when I bought my townhouse in Hillsboro [New Jersey], about three townhouses from me was this family, and the mother is from Cuba.  The father's African American, and there were six kids.  Okay, we met because as I was moving in, I had this big CRT, you know, this big thing to carry for my computer.  It was too heavy for me to carry up the stairs.  So I went over and knock on the door, would you help me carry it?  So they came, and they helped carry this thing upstairs so I could set up my computer.  Well, after that, we became friends.  So actually, you know, mom's 40 years old.  I don't know how old dad is.  So they're my daughter and son, and then the six kids.  Well, the youngest baby was a baby when they first moved, and she's now 14.  And she's my child (laughter).  We have computers in the house.  I have two computers. I have one downstairs, and one upstairs.  The one downstairs is the homework computer.  So all the kids would come over.  Theoretically, they're supposed to be doing their homework, and sometimes they're playing games.  But anyway, and then there'd be movie night.  So they're my family.  Christmas, New Years.  Theoretically, mom and dad are Muslim, you know, African American Muslim.  But the kids already told me, that doesn't mean that we can't have Christmas presents (laughter).  And so Christmas they would come over and they'd have breakfast, and they'd get Christmas presents.  And then they come over for Thanksgiving.  The oldest is like 23, keeps telling me she's going to college, every year, I'm going in January.  The next one went for a year and split.  But the third one, this January, is going to college, and the reason why she's going in January is dad forgot to sign the papers that were needed for her money, for college, you know, because there are six--even though she's 18, she gets the, you know, the money for college that Obama [President Barack Obama] put in for junior colleges.  But, you know, it has to be signed by the parent.  So she's going in January, and then, I don't know about the fourth--oh, the 14 year old just came over, and she says, I've been nominated the best kid in class.  I go, okay.  So they're my kids (laughter).
Story_ID: 20604
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, my hobbies.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, what I do and my dog.  Okay, I (unclear) have a dog.  I have, my latest dog is named Niecey.  She's a mutt.  I've adopted her.  She's a beagle mix, and God, she loves me (laughter).  And I'm trying to figure out, you know, I have a housemate.  She's, so she's home there, but she said she's moping.  I said, all right, I'm gonna go home.  So I've always had a dog.  My hobbies, I used to go--I'm a member of a hiking club, and I'd go hiking.  It was the City College Alumni Hiking Club, except that it was--when I joined the club, they were all gone.  They were all long past being alumni.  In fact, City College decided to tell them that they can't call it City College Alumni Hiking Club [City College of New York] anymore because they're no longer alum.  So I joined that, and we used to go hiking on Saturdays and Sundays in the woods and backpacking.  That's what I did at summer camp.  I would take kids backpacking and camping.  Skiing, I love to ski.  I went, we went to be a chaperon of my church ski group, and I said, I'm not sitting here in the lodge.  So I went out and got some skis and learned how to ski.  So we used to ski, I used to ski like every weekend, I'd go skiing.  I loved it.  I can't do that anymore.  My knees won't let me.  And I knit and I sew.  My mother taught me to sew when I was a little kid.  I used to sew all my clothes (laughter), and in fact, my interview suits.  I looked at it.  I sewed it.  And it looked, not so bad (laughter).  And I would, I still knit.  And now I knit prayer shawls for people who have cancer.  So these are my hobbies that I do other than writing books or researching.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think I would like to be remember--oh, I forgot one thing about my hobby, I sing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, you sing too.
Speaker 2: I take voice lessons still, and I sing solos in the church when my choir director allows me to.
Speaker 1: And what church are you a member of?
Speaker 2: Well, since my father, my great grandfather was a UCC or AME or whatever the thing is, I go to United Church Christ Church in Summit ]New Jersey] where I used to live.  It's mostly white.  There are about five black families.  Okay, legacy--
Story_ID: 20605
Speaker 1: How you'd like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  Well, I've already written my obituary because when I had cancer, I had to--well, I didn't have to, but I decided to do that.  I would like to be remembered as somebody who really cared, who cared about kids, who cared about science, who was interested in all kinds of things, who was renaissance woman, who had wanted to get married but never did, but now doesn't want to because it'd interfere with everything else she wants to do (laughter).  And to, just, that, you know, because she lives, some kids will be happy as scientists or do some research that will solve some of the world's problems.  That's how I wanna be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you for sharing with us.
Story_ID: 20606
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this picture of my, Jeannette Brown at Winthrop Junior High School graduation in whatever year that was, you'll know.  And if you look way in the background by the steps, that's my grandmother standing there looking at me, where happily that I was graduating from Winthrop Junior High School. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, this was 1958.  I can tell by reading.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, that--and I don't know why we took the picture with, by the tree, but that's me in my Master's robe at University of Minnesota graduation in my cap and gown.  And Master's robes you have short sleeves.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Buddy, my first dog that I had when I was in New York at 436 West 160th Street. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: And there's my book.  That's my book.  My first book, Oxford University Press, "African American Women Chemists", hopefully, not my last.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you want this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess.  Okay, that's the hotel that my mother and father stayed at when they came to Minnesota.  That was the one that would take African Americans in '58' [1958], '56' [1956] and '58' [1958], I guess they were here.  They were here when I first graduated and after I graduated from, yeah, okay. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's it.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: I have more that I can send to you.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, you have my--there she is.
