Story_ID: 197029
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Edgar Carey Lane.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Raymond C. Bowen, that's R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, C., B-O-W-E-N.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your middle name stand for?
Speaker 2: Cobb, C-O-B-B.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September the 19th, 1934 in, I'm from New Haven, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm a retired community college administrator.
Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date sir?
Speaker 2: Today is June 9th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time and you don't have to give your exact address but?
Speaker 2: Okay, we're on Winner Avenue in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And you're home, right?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --my home.
Story_ID: 197030
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth there are five short People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're kind of like a warm-up or something so.  Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is collard greens, and (laughter) I'm serious about this.  I like collard greens with pig feet and potato salad.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like Christmastime, winter, Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida, we have a little, a little condo in Jensen Beach, Florida which is located between Jacksonville [Florida] and Fort Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay and finally do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Gotcha, that's my favorite--you know whenever I see folks, gotcha.  They say here comes gotcha, you know.  It's something I've been saying a lot.
Story_ID: 197031
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family history.  Can you give us your--I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Raymond Curtis Bowen] side.  Now can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother's name was Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, Cobb, C-O-B-B, and of course it was Bowen when she and my father married.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in New Haven, Connecticut on January 22nd, 1915.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us something about her, I mean how did she grow up and, and what kind of personality does she have and what does she do?
Speaker 2: She was, she was a very good person.  Well both she and my father, they just, they just rammed down my throat education, education, and she graduated from high school.  She had a heart murmur so she couldn't participate in any athletics, gym, et cetera so what she did was pick up extra language courses, so she spoke Spanish and French fluently and, but she finished high school.  I believe it was 1933.
Story_ID: 197032
Speaker 1: Her [Bowen's mother, Lucille Cobb Bowen] parents were, her mother's name was Virginia Saxon [ph.] and she was from New Haven [Connecticut] and she married--my grandfather's name was Earl Cobb and he was from Sedalia, North Carolina.  Now that's the furthest I can go back, I, I don't know anything about my great-grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay, are, are there any stories that have passed down through the family about, about your grandparents or?
Speaker 1: Oh, my grand--oh, wait a minute, I do remember my great-grandfather, I do.  He was from, on my mother's side, he was from North Carolina, yeah, Sedalia, North Carolina too and his name was David, David Cobb [ph.] and he came north.  Oh, this is before the, the turn of the century of course and lived in Glastonbury, Connecticut and he lived to be 105.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And he had brother named John [ph.] who lived to be 102, so those, those two old dudes were, I mean they, they were around a long time.  I met him in 1944 so when you--and that was a few years before he died.  So if you go back he was probably born in, back in the 1840s.
Speaker 2: Well that's remarkable, did, did they tell you any stories; did he tell you any stories?
Speaker 1: No, I was young and he was sort of dotty but I did remember meeting him.  They lived on a farm and up in Glastonbury, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so are there, there any stories about your ancestors on your mother's side and, and coming to---
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they were--all I know is he had to leave town quickly.  He was, he was a real light-skinned dude so I, I would assume that his father was white and his mother was black, but you know there was a joke between them you know, he just had to leave town quickly so yeah I had an idea, but no, I don't know anything other than that.
Speaker 2: Okay well that's, that's interesting in itself 'cause a lot of people have that kind of story where they don't know what to, what happened.
Speaker 1: Right and, and nor do I know why they came to Connecticut rather than some other place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was interesting though, so that's on my mother's side--
Story_ID: 197033
Speaker 1: My father's side--
Speaker 2: Now what was his name?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: My father? Raymond.  His name was Raymond Curtis Bowen.
Speaker 2: Okay and, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: He was born on May 9, 1912.
Speaker 2: Okay and where was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born in Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Okay and what kind of personality did he have and what did he do?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was, he was a, he had a very interesting life.  He, he started off working as a Red Cap for the old New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad and he rose from that to a, they called it a "buyer" and he was exempt from World War II [WWII] because his job was to supply the troop trains that went between Fort Dix, New Jersey and Fort Devens, Massachusetts so in other words it was to help the war effort, so he didn't, he didn't go to, he wasn't drafted into, into the [U.S.] Army, but what happened was after the, after the war, well when the troops came home they kicked him out and put in a, a white kid.  Yeah, he said "kid" you know, he lost the job and he was--it was rough because this was in the, around the early '50s [1950s] when you know, when he lost that particular job and I was just getting ready to go to college, so they said that he can go back to his job being Red Cap or whatever it was and he just refused, so when I went to college he took a job in a warehouse rather than do that for ninety cents an hour and it was sort of rough you know, and in fact when I did go to college he was making ninety something cents and my mother [Lucille Cobb Bowen] as working in a laundry making fifty cents, so it's, it was, it was kind of rough.  In those days the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] where I went to school, tuition, room and board was only six hundred dollars a year and they had to take out a loan to do that, 'cause you know we were very, very poor.  So but getting back to, to my father, he rose from, after that he went to work at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] as a steward in one of the fraternity houses and when the fraternity house closed, you know Yale got rid of all of their fraternities like a lot of universities did, he became a, he was a head, they set up something whereby he would train ex-offenders and homeless people to various jobs around Yale, you know custodials, things like that.  So he, he did pretty well and matter of fact he just died two months ago he was--at the age of ninety-one, so he was, he was quite a person.  Now when he went to high school back in the '20s [1920s] in New Haven [Connecticut], oh he moved from Hartford to New Haven of course, as, as you probably surmised, but when he came to New Haven, he went to the "academic high school" [James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut].  We have three high schools there, a commercial, they called it Commercial [High School, later Wilbur Cross High School, New Haven, Connecticut] was mainly for women, typing and secretarial skills.  Then the trade school [ph.] of course with the few blacks that we had in New Haven, they tried to shuffle them there, but he and my mother both went to the academic school and it was funny.  In those days he majored, he majored in philosophy and Latin so he spoke Latin fluently, and when he was at, you know as a steward, and everyone thought he had a college degree because you know, I mean he's--and he was a voracious reader.  When we were growing up we had, we had everything from [Friedrich] Nietzsche to [Arthur] Schopenhauer to [Immanuel] Kant all of these things and you know, then my mother and father, high school kids, we had that just like with--I was brought up on classical music, [Jean] Sibelius, [Bela] Bartok, of course [Ludwig van] Beethoven and [Johannes] Brahms and all of them.  So it was funny because all the kids in the project, we grew up in the projects.  They would come up and just listen to classical music and listen--my mother would help kids with their homework and all this other kind of stuff and, so when I finally got my degree my, you know when I got my doctorate [degree] I had to pass a language exam.  So my mother tutored me in French, which I did so I could pass the exam, which I did.  So, I mean I'm really proud of my parents that they were educators although they never went to college.
Speaker 2: That's remarkable, it really is--
Story_ID: 197034
Speaker 1: Yeah are there any stories from your father's [Raymond Curtis Bowen] side of the family about life in, or slavery or during the Reconstruction Era?
Speaker 2: Now that I don't know about.  My father's, my grandfather [Charles Bowen] he came to Hartford [Connecticut], again early in the 19th century and he was from New Bern, North Carolina and they settled in Hartford  and I know that he, his job was to run an elevator at the courthouse and he ran the elevator at the courthouse.  My father had two brothers, two younger brothers, Jim [ph.] and Charlie [ph.] and what happened was when my grandmother, whose name was Hattie, Hattie Curtis, and that's where my father got the Curtis from.  Hattie Curtis when she died then my father's two youngest brother were, was adopted in Hartford and my father came to New Haven [Connecticut] to stay with a cousin who, I think it was his mother's first cousin so I ended up calling her Grandma, you know even though she was a really a cousin, but my father, he was, he was, oh he would join everything like from the Mystic Knights of the Sea, well no, it wasn't Mystic Knights of the Sea, but--
Speaker 1: That's when he was an (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Everything, yeah (laughter).  Well he was big, he was a, he was a.
Speaker 1: Was he an Elk [The Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks]?
Speaker 2: Um?  Oh, yeah he was a, a past Exalted Ruler in the Elks and when he died a couple of months ago, he was the oldest black Past Master in you know from the Masons in the State of Connecticut, so but he was big in the, the Episcopal church, he was a vestrymen, he was a senior warden and everything, but he wasn't home that much 'cause he was always going to some kind of meeting, you know, but everyone knew him and as I said he, he counseled so many of my friends to go onto college you know and his whole thing was you know, I couldn't do it, but boy, you better do it.  You know I mean that was the sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about why he wasn't able to do it?
Speaker 2: Wasn't able to what?
Speaker 1: Go, go to college, 'cause he's a very bright man, a studious man and your, your mother [Lucille Cobb Bowen] as well, you know.
Speaker 2: What I heard about him, now I, I don't know if it was true, but he's--that evidently when he got out of high school [James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut] he had a--they gave him a scholarship to go to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  Ohio State offered him a scholarship, so the, you know the neighborhood collected all of this money and, and put him on the bus and when he got to Ohio State they stated that they didn't know he was a Negro and sent him back home, because the scholarship was for a white boy.  But Bowen from Connecticut and there weren't that many of us you know as I said in Connecticut, so I guess they just assumed that he was white, and he was very bitter and you know a scholarship that's one thing but of course he could, living with a foster mother so to speak, he couldn't afford to go to any of the black schools, he just didn't have the money.  So his thing is well, if I couldn't do it, my, my kids are gonna do it.
Speaker 1: He might not of even had the connections to get into black, you know that, that network with the black college you know, 'cause it's, it's a connection related thing too so I don't know.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but see again, and, and growing up in New Haven, there was only black doctor that I knew of and one black lawyer, you know, but people think of the North, especially New England as being so liberal but it wasn't.
Story_ID: 197035
Speaker 1: Now I grew up in the projects, did you ever hear of a segregated projects, one side of the street was where the whites lived and the other side was where the blacks lived, well the blacks and everybody else, but it was one project.  We all went to the same schools that were integrated, but we were separated by one street running down the middle of the projects, the whites on one side, and the African Americans on the other, weird, weird (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah that's something that people wouldn't suspect would be true but it, yeah the North is not.
Speaker 1: Right, they aren't no, and you know and as I said we, we played together, we did everything together except go to the, go to the barbershop and the--what is it, barbershop and church. You didn't do that together, but everything else was fairly open.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's a small black population in your--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think growing up I doubt if there were more than 20,000 blacks in New Haven [Connecticut] out of about maybe 120,000 or 150,000 yeah, but.
Speaker 2: Did, did most of them have roots in Carolina, and (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People in Hartford [Connecticut] mostly came from the Carolinas, yeah, I would say yeah New Haven too.  The Carolinas for some reason they--we had a relatively large southern population you know, I should say that--
Story_ID: 197036
Speaker 1: --But what's interesting was that my maternal grandmother [Virginia Saxon (ph.)] and my paternal grandfather, I'm sorry, my paternal grandmother [Hattie Curtis], both of them, maternal and paternal, they had been in Connecticut a long time.  I mean their parents and grandparents and all of that.  So I don't know, my brother [Robert Thomas Bowen] was trying to do something when and well you know you could do a lot now with the Internet and all but it appears that they had been in Connecticut prior to 1750 which is, which blew my mind, you know.  I said, "Now wait a minute now (laughter) come on," but he's still doing, he's still doing some research on that, but it's been a long, long time.
Speaker 2: So this is your, this is your?
Speaker 1: Maternal grandmother and my paternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But see, they both married people from you know, Carolinas but--
Speaker 2: That roots went back that far (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I didn't know there were black people, I mean we're, we're talking pre-Revolutionary War, you know I thought that Crispus Attucks was the only person that (laughter) only person that lived in New England.
Speaker 2: You know they actually had slavery in Connecticut and in those other states.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Prior to 1830 I guess and so.  So.
Speaker 1: Now they, they my, my father [Raymond Curtis Bowen] did tell me that, that his, he had some Indian [Native American], Indian ancestors but every black I ever knew said they had Indian ancestors, but I never really you know, we never really got into it, but now that I'm retired, I'm, I'm starting to have some fun now you know.  My wife [Joan Massalina Bowen] she's doing hers, her family history which is, which is I mean great.  They got streets named after her down in Panama City, Florida; I mean her family and all.  So we're working on hers and then eventually we'll get to mine.
Speaker 2: What's her family's name?
Speaker 1: Massalina, and I mean gee whiz I wish she was here 'cause would of, aw man.  Like her great-grandfather, in 1840-something [1836] he was a black Spaniard.  His name is Jose Massalina and how he, how he jumped ship and went on down there to in the Panama City.  Well's it's called Bay County [Florida] now area and, and had a couple of sons.  One son was her grandfather who, who she remembers and I mean, I mean it's just weird, how he was, how he smuggled guns.  He stole guns from the rebels and gave them to the Union Army you know during the Civil War.  I mean it's fantastic, but anyway, that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's quite a story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 197037
Speaker 1: What was the name of the project that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Elm Haven, you know New Haven [Connecticut] use to be called Elm City, that's the nickname of it but, I grew up in the Elm Haven Projects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Another thing that's interesting about, again I'm going back, I know I'm going back and forth.  When I graduated from high school, this [James] Hillhouse [Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut], by the way which I went to, my mother [Lucille Cobb Bowen] went to, my father [Raymond Curtis Bowen] went to, all of us, my brother [Robert Thomas Bowen] and sister [Lucille Harriet Bowen (ph.)] went to.  We must've, they must've been--it was a big class those days.  We must've graduated about 200 blacks and of those 200, I would say about 175 went on to higher education, because see New Haven is where Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] is.  Now we use to emulate the "Yalies."  I mean you know it was cool to wear as they did the "white bucks" and what else did they wear?  Those chino pants and going down to the library.  I mean that, that's it man, I'd carry my books and all that, and, and so there was, this culture, the fact of being into in an Ivy League setting and you're emulating these Yalies so to speak and then so you'd go to the library, you'd study (unclear).  Many I got more beatings growing up from bringing home Cs.  "Boy, you'd better never bring home Cs from, from school," no, no.
Speaker 1: Cs now that's really, that's a high standard if.
Speaker 2: Yeah, C man.
Speaker 1: You get a beating for bringing home a C.   That's--
Speaker 2: Right, so the thing is with my brother--it wasn't whether you're going to college, you're going to college, it's where can we afford to send you?  That was the, that's the limiting factor. I mean I wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know all, I couldn't afford to go to Howard (laughter).  So I went to the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 197038
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna backtrack to growing up and we always ask this question of people we interview, and that's, give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: The smells I could do first.  Fried fish you know we had Wilson's Seafood [Company of New Haven, New Haven, Connecticut] and I just use to love the seafood because my, my aunt was a Roman Catholic, this was actually was my mother's [Lucille Cobb Bowen] aunt and in those days you know the Catholics didn't eat meat on Friday so she would always send me to get, you know, "Go to the fish market and come back son, I'll fry up some fish for you," so and, and it was good you loved her to do that, I loved fish.  So that's, the, that's the smell.  The sight was the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]-Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] football game.  Now my father [Raymond Curtis Bowen] always, he loved football, he always use to take me to the Yale-Harvard football games or to the [James] Hillhouse [Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut]-Commercial [High School, later Wilbur Cross High School, New Haven, Connecticut].  Those were the two high schools and they would always play Thanksgiving morning, so we would always bundle up, you know, it's not as cold as Chicago [Illinois], but it's, it can get pretty cold in Connecticut, and, we, we would just go there, sometimes there'd be a parade and all these other things.  So we'd go to the football games.  So I always think that's the sight I remember so the smell, the sight, the sound is I told you music, all kinds, classical this and that.  I remember again, this was during the War [World War II, WWII].  My father, since he worked for the [New York, New Haven and Hartford] Railroad he would have these passes and he and my mother would always go down to the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] you know and different places, but I remember they came back with a, the first 'Porgy and Bess.'  I still got the records, it was Todd Duncan and Anne Brown, that's who, and I still got these 78s someplace.  So it's music, music and then a couple of times he took me down to see a game and then we would go over the Apollo and I remember Erskine Hawkins and, and I'm a jazz freak right now, but I, but you know back then of course [Count] Basie and Duke Ellington, and Fletcher Henderson and all of these, these old dudes, so the music is the, is what I'm into and what I could remember growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I gave you the sight, the sound and the what, smell.
Story_ID: 197039
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young man, as a little boy, as a young man.  How would you, you know what were you interested in what kind of personality did you have?  What did people say about you?
Speaker 2: I, I would say I always wanted to be the head of something.  Now we have with our little, well it wasn't really a gang it was more or less a club you know, I mean we were little kids you know 10, 11, 12 years old, but I always had to be the boss.  They said, "Here comes the boss."  I always had to be the boss and maybe that's why--led me to eventually be a college president, because I just wanted to be number one and I would fight like heck to be number one.  Now of course--so that I would always hang around with guys that were or a lot of the guys I hung around with were younger than me, younger than I 'cause I could beat 'em up you know.  So I could I be, whereas I wouldn't hang around with the big boys cause they would never let me be number one.  So that was it; I liked school, really liked school and did fairly well, you know I did pretty well in school.  What else?  Loved to party, loved to go to party but I couldn't dance (laughter).  As they use to call me "slow drag" that was a, do you remember we use to "slow drag," that's what I--remember--the other guys were the jitterbugs, jumping and throwing people in the air and I know what (unclear) I was just (demonstrating dance moves) (laughter).  Yeah, that's so that's what I remember and that's roughly what I was doing growing up and it was, was good, it was a great time in that, in--and you know growing up and I guess you've probably heard this from a lot of, lot of--I didn't know I was poor until after I got out and went to college [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] and oh you know his people, I mean everybody was in the same boat.  Nobody had a car, you know we took the train in fact I went to the prom on a trolley car.  Took the girl to my senior prom on, on a trolley car, everybody did it you know.  So I can't remember in--that many people that had automobiles, and I remember another thing in, I think it was 1946.  We got the first black policemen in New Haven [Connecticut] and Ray Horner [ph.], Clarence Jacobs [ph.], Horner and who was the other one?  I forget now, but you know I hung out with all the kids so that's how we knew each other and then, then aw gee whiz, I mean they were the heroes growing up.  Those two guys and those were the heroes because we knew 'em.  Another hero, his name was Levi Jackson.  Levi, do you know, have you ever heard of him?  Levi Jackson well he was a star football player [at James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut] and then I guess he went to the [U.S.] Army during the war [World War II, WWII] and came back and went into Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and eventually became the captain of the Yale football team.  So the cops and Levi Jackson were our heroes.  Levi, his roommate was Henry Ford's son or Henry Ford's grandson [William Clay Ford, Sr.].  So when he graduated he had this big job at Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan].  He just retired and a few years ago, but you know growing up you know these things.
Speaker 1: Who--was, was he the only black player on the Yale team when he played?
Speaker 2: I really can't remember; there may have been someone else but I mean he was the star, he was the star and he had a big job and he finished with--his wife grew up in the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut], well she was older than I, but I remember her.
Story_ID: 197040
Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you name them for us, and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother is Robert Thomas Bowen; my sister is Lucille Harriett Bowen [ph.].  She, my mother [Lucille Cobb Bowen] wouldn't--my father [Raymond Curtis Bowen] wanted to name her "Hattie" and my mother said, no, no I ain't playing, you ain't gonna name no daughter of mine "Hattie," but so they--it's Harriett, and Bob retired from, I think he was the assistant director of health for Los Angeles County [California] and then he always wanted to be a teacher so he went and got an M.B.A. [degree] and now he's teaching at Antioch [University], out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], out in Antioch, L.A.  So he's doing that and my sister I don't know what she'd doing now, but she was a hospital administrator working personnel, and she retired and now she's got a part-time job, but they've both been out in, in Los Angeles for more than forty years so you know, they're born.--Bobbie went to University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut], first he went to Lincoln [ph.].  He went there one year and then he switched to the University of Connecticut and, and you know got his degree and went in the [U.S.] Marines and then he was stationed out in San Diego [California] so he just stayed out there you know in the West Coast.  Again, first he was, he was a sociology major so he went into social work and then eventually he went into hospital administration and doing quite well.  He's got ten grandkids (laughter), I only have five, but no, he's, he's doing quite well and my sister is still out there and her son is in New York [New York].  You know you get these young kids that go to New York, they won't leave and he could probably make money going someplace else, but he's living in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and he loves it.
Story_ID: 197041
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about school and what was the name of your grade school you attended?
Speaker 2: It was called, I went to two of them, first was Baldwin [ph.] and Baldwin was named after the governor.  We had a governor named Raymond E. Baldwin in Connecticut.  So I went to Baldwin for first grade I believe it was and then second grade I went to Winchester [Elementary School, New Haven, Connecticut].  Well you know Winchester Repeating Arms [Company, New Haven, Connecticut] use to make guns, that's big in--that's New Haven [Connecticut] 'cause either you worked for Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] or you worked for Winchester or you didn't have a job.  I--no, you know but it's--I mean thousands of people, as a matter of fact that's when the black population in New Haven especially exploded during the war [World War II, WWII], because a lot of, a lot of people from, from the South came up to New Haven to get these good jobs at the, at Winchester's, you know, Repeating Arms.  So anyway the school I, I went to as--in the elementary level was Winchester, and then.
Speaker 1: Well, well tell us about the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Tell us something about elementary school, like.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What, who were some of the, what was it like, how many you know black students were in school?
Speaker 2: All right, well.
Speaker 1: And how were you all were treated?
Speaker 2: All right, well, sure.
Speaker 1: What did you, what were you favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I would say that in elementary school it was about 50 percent black, and 50 percent white because it was--as I told you the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut] where I grew up had half of white and half black.  So that you know the school was integrated and that was--and not only that, but that led to friendships growing between you know the blacks and the whites, and we remained friends until we got to high school and then the guys would think we wanna start dating their daughters you know and they (laughter) and the blacks and the whites sort of went like that, but elementary school and junior high school I'd always say very, very integrated.  Now getting back to this, I hate to keep talking about education, but this is the way it was.  In elementary school, especially sixth grade if you're a good student, do your homework and all like that, the teacher would let you put all the books in the wagon and take them downtown to the library, so again you know if you're good your reward is that you can collect the books from the class, put 'em in a wagon and take it down to the library.  So again, this, this whole education thing, so it wasn't surprising to me anyway when I look back at it that the vast majority of the black kids that graduated from high school, everybody graduated from high school, but I mean we must've had a dropout rate of about 2 percent, but they went on to some kind of higher education, and not all of 'em finished, but just the fact that they went there.
Speaker 1: So you had a decent education, basically, in the grade schools (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, very, very good education in those days.
Story_ID: 197042
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you remember or?
Speaker 2: Every single one of 'em, every single teacher I had from Ms. Fusco [ph.], no even though Ms. Brown [ph.] in nursery school, Ms. Fusco [ph.] in kindergarten, Ms. Scully [ph.] in first grade, Ms. Lapedes [ph.] in second--I mean I could go all the way through and--only funny thing about it, not funny but the sad thing about it, I never had a black teacher.  Never.
Speaker 1: Were there any in the school?
Speaker 2: No, not, not until when I got to, when I went to junior high school I think they hired a black teacher then, but I never, I never had a black teacher from, from kindergarten all the way through my Ph.D., never had a black teacher.  So it was, it was you know weird and it was--and when I hear these, these folks talking about the that they're going to predominately black schools and things like that, I mean you know they say, wow that's, that's great.  I knew, I knew of teachers when you know once I left the system of course, a lot of my, a lot of my colleagues became teachers but it was weird.  So you're talking about a black man that had a white education, I am number one there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But just about where everybody--I mean all the people that were in school with me, all of the kids in school, they never had a black teacher.
Speaker 1: Now did, did, did you notice, well especially with Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] being there you'd think there'd be somebody trained at Yale that might come over, but there, were, were there that many black students at Yale that (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, no they took three a year.  You know that was my first choice, that's where I really wanted to go but you know hey, I didn't have--and they only took three a year at Yale.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was a prescribed number that they took?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 197043
Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Hillhouse, James Hillhouse [Comprehensive] High School [New Haven, Connecticut].  [James] Hillhouse, he was one of the big abolitionists you know during the, in, in the mid-19th century, Hillhouse, yeah he was a, he was a big abolitionist.
Speaker 1: That's all one name, Hillhouse?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hillhouse, right, and it was a pretty big school, he must have had about twenty thousand people.  Well, see in New Haven [Connecticut], again I, I got out of high school in '52 [1952] and they only have three high schools, let me see were there three?  Yeah, three of 'em the trade school [ph.], the Commercial [High] School, [later Wilbur Cross High School, New Haven, Connecticut] and, and the academic school [James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut].  So there were only three high schools in the whole city.  So as a result we had you know a large graduating class about 1500, 2000 or something like that.  Matter of fact I had a couple of years ago, I went back for their fiftieth high school reunion and it was you know, it was quite, quite good to see a lot of folks that from all over the world really that came in.  One of my, one of the guys I know is Jerry Post [ph.], he's, you may have seen him on CNN and this.  He does all that stuff on Iraq, he's a, he's a professor, I think at George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.] or Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] one of those things, but he was, he was one of my colleagues and a Jewish guy and, so I would say, I wouldn't say that we had a lot of white friends, but you know integration, things sort of rub off on you and we weren't brought up speaking Ebonics.  You know, it just, just didn't happen so you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was a big high school, good high school, great sports.  I was on the soccer team.  I can't find my um, maybe I'll look again, in, my, my yearbook that showed me in my soccer uniform and I was on the, of course I was on the in the biology club and the chemistry club.  I was, I, I always liked the sciences, and the reason I liked the sciences is because, math and science, see if you major in say English, and you, your, your English teacher or professor can say, "Oh, no, no you didn't say this right, you didn't explain yourself right," and so forth and so on.  In the sciences and in math, well let me just take math, three and two are always gonna equal five.  Now you could be the racist teacher in the world, the most racist teacher in the world and, and you can't dispute that.  Whereas in some of the humanities, they may dispute what you're saying or you're not interpreting this right and so.  I, I gravitated toward the sciences and even though I ended up working more in psychology you know and this other.
Story_ID: 197044
Speaker 1: I had tremendous science teachers [at James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut], very good you know.
Speaker 2: Can you remember some of the names of some of those teachers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah Mr. Garland, Howie Garland [ph.] was one.  He was a math teacher, Gordon Christopher [ph.], Ray Burton [ph.], I, I, but they didn't push me really, it was my folks [Lucille Cobb Bowen and Raymond Curtis Bowen].  It was and not just my folks, there were, there were other people.  I mean if you were playing hooky from school then, I, I mean, the lady next door will whip your butt and then bring you home and your mother, your father will whip your butt.  School was everything.
Story_ID: 197045
Speaker 1: Were you involved in church activities when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah I went to St. Luke's Episcopal Church [New Haven, Connecticut], which by the way, just celebrated its 160th anniversary, and I sang in the choir.  I was an acolyte, we had a, a church team called the [St. Luke's] Crusaders basketball team and yeah, I, I was heavily involved in church.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, any other clubs I mean, you were involved in Boy Scouts [of America] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Boys Club [later the Boys & Girls Club of New Haven], the Boys Club.  In fact when I was in the fifth grade, we use to go down to the Boys Club after, that's where I learned how to swim.  Everybody knew how to swim, you know, we'd--of course we'd go down to the Boys Club or we, we'd go down to the Jewish [Community] Center [JCC of Greater New Haven, New Haven, Connecticut].  You know they had Jewish center there and the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], Jewish, I mean so yeah, heavily involved in sports.  I, I was no, no star athlete or anything but yeah, I liked it and got involved in, in that, and then of course we had our little clubs as I was telling you, little gangs or so to speak the Hornets and I still see of those guys when I go back there to, to New Haven [Connecticut]; but my roommate in college [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut], Russell Hamilton, he, I mean we from first grade on up you know we were together and he, he eventually ended up--he just retired as dean of the graduate school at Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  So you know, he was, and then another, another guy Jimmy [Dr. James E.] Lyons [Sr.], he's younger than I, but he grew up in the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut] with us and, and right now he's the president of Cal [California] State [University] Dominguez Hills [Carson, California] right outside of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and he was president of Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and president of Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] here, so, again a--people growing up in that area just went on in higher education and lot of 'em did well.
Story_ID: 197046
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut], I mean what did you envision yourself doing as a career, what did you see your career (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I had no idea, I really and--I liked the sciences, I, you know, but unfortunately I didn't know any black scientists.  As a matter of fact, the--where was I? I was in the--I must've been in the tenth grade, yeah, the tenth grade you took biology, the eleventh grade you took chemistry and the twelfth grade you took physics, that's the way it was set up.  My teacher told me one time, he said, "You know you ought to get a shoeshine box."  I said, "Well, I wanna be a biologist you know."  He said, "Well they don't have no black biologists."  Well he didn't say "black," he said "Negro" biologist.  "You ought to get a shoeshine box", and when I got my Ph.D. I sent him an invitation.  I mean, oh that--I mean oh I guess that just said it, I mean, but again, it, it, there was no such thing as black history or--and I couldn't argue with him, you know.  You know I didn't know about [Charles R.] Drew and I didn't know about, well I, I don't wanna--[Dr.] Caldwell McCoy [Jr.].  You ever hear of Caldwell McCoy?  Caldwell McCoy was the guy that, oh, oh he was a top scientist for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  He died, but he did so much, he had a Ph.D. in physics and a Ph.D. in mathematics, and that--he was one of my [Beta Sigma Gamma] Fraternity brothers in, in college [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut], but I mean, I'm saying there were guys that were doing all kinds of all--but I didn't know.  Growing up in Connecticut, at least people that went to black schools, they, they knew, people would tell 'em, but you go to a predominately white school, and, and they, there's no such thing as black history or black culture and all these other things and you look and you only know one black doctor in town or one black lawyer and so, so what do you know?  The guy said there were no black biologists, and he may, he may have really believed that (laughter).
Speaker 1: He probably did, that--it's funny but you're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he may have really have believed it and it may not have been as negative as it came to me, he may, but if he didn't say "shoeshine box," "get a shoeshine box," you know, I've--but I'm saying that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a little animosity in that remark (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean come on now (unclear)--
Story_ID: 197047
Speaker 1: How did you decide on which college to go to, you knew you were gonna go and so what?
Speaker 2: Well it was the only one they [Bowen's parents, Raymond Curtis Bowen and Lucille Cobb Bowen] could afford.
Speaker 1: And that was the university of--?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], but as I said they were only taking a couple of students, three, four, five, something, but a small number of students.  So I couldn't go to Yale, plus you know I was no straight A student.  I had good marks, but, and they couldn't afford to send me to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or so the state school was the only one available to me.  Now my brother [Robert Thomas Bowen] when he went to Lincoln [ph.] for the first year, he got a scholarship there but you know, but you know, I, I went, that's how I got up to [the University of] Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay now what was the University of Connecticut like then?
Speaker 2: Oh it was I, I had a ball, it was, when I got there though I think there were only, there were no more than fifteen or twenty blacks on, on the whole campus.  At that time they must've had about 13,000 or so, 10,000 to 13,000, very few blacks and there was a lot fraternities.  There was one fraternity that was integrated, when I say "integrated" I mean a couple of others had one black but there was a fraternity Beta Sigma Gamma [Fraternity], that's, that's what I joined and I would say it was about maybe oh, I'll, I'll when you get the picture, I got a picture upstairs of the fraternity, and we must've had about maybe one-third blacks, but, we, we had a, it was nice, and a bunch of white guys.  They didn't like the idea that blacks couldn't get into a fraternity, so the blacks and whites got together and forced the university to set up a fraternity house on campus, this integrated one, and so as a result, now up at, at the, I think at the university now they have you know the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], but back then they wouldn't allow a black fraternity on campus.
Story_ID: 197048
Speaker 1: --Now when I went to [the University of] New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] the president [Thomas Lafayette Popejoy] would pay one of the athletes so much money to have parties for blacks so they wouldn't go and try to integrate the other fraternities.  It was, it was rough, it was you know, but you know they didn't, you don't want to join a white fraternity anyway, at least I didn't.  So I mean but as we didn't have the black fraternity so that's what we did, but when I went to New Mexico now my, my wife [Joan Massalina Bowen] that's where we met and eventually got married.  She, in, in fact I think that she was one of the first blacks, it was one only other with her to get a, a nursing degree from the University of New Mexico.  So and there were very few blacks there.
Story_ID: 197049
Speaker 1: At the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] now, you said your social life was all right now, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were majoring in?
Speaker 2: I majored in, in biology yeah, zoology, I majored in zoology and really goofed around, really goofed around, C student.  I was a C student and so when I eventually--well after I graduated I went in the [U.S.] Army for three years but that's another story, but when I went to [the University of] New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] and the guy looked at my, looked at those grades, he says, "You got to be kidding, you can't get a master's degree."  He said, "Look at here, you barely graduated."  So I, I, more or less bs'd my way in.  I said, "I'll tell you what, I'll take any graduate course you give me and I'll get at least an A in it."  I could do it you know.  So he gave me, I had to take four courses, that were not in the sciences to see if I could do graduate work and you, they wanted you to get four A's, you had to get four A's.  I got three A's and a B, and so you know he said you know come on yeah you could do it.
Story_ID: 197050
Speaker 1: Before you went to the University of [New] Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico], now New Mexico you said you went to the [U.S.] Army for a couple of years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, see a degree in biology, I couldn't get a job.  The only job available, now this wasn't a black, white thing.  This was just you know, I didn't take any education courses so I couldn't teach in a high school or, or thing like that.  So the only, the only thing was the Army, so they drafted me and they wanted to ship me over to Korea, I said "I don't want to go to no Korea."  So they said the only thing you could do if you don't want to go to there is that you have to go R.A. [Regular Army], you know you have to extend and instead of two years, I was in there three and then they sent me down to Fort Sam Houston [San Antonio] Texas to be a laboratory, medical laboratory technician which was biology, see which was science.  So that's how I got there and then when I , then when I got married and all I worked in a hospital as a lab technician while I went to school and my wife [Joan Massalina Bowen] went to school, but in, you know even though I graduated in--they weren't hiring any place.  You know you got to have, you had to have at least a master's [degree] to do something, to work for one of the drug companies, let's say or things like that but with a bachelor's [degree], and a maybe a C-minus average, there was no way I could have gotten a job.
Story_ID: 197051
Speaker 1: You're at University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] around 1957, I'm thinking, is that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959] I started.
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated [from the University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] in '56 [1956] and I went in the [U.S.] Army for three years and I ended up at Sandia Base [Albuquerque] New Mexico.  So then Joan [Massalina Bowen] and I got married and I was working a three [p.m.] to eleven [p.m.] shift at the hospital, and she was going to school during the day and I didn't have nothing to do during the day so I decided, look why don't you get a master's [degree]?  So then I finally got that and when I finished the master's I wanted to get you know the--I said I might as well go ahead and get a doctorate [degree], and I was accepted at two schools, University of Connecticut and University of Illinois [ph.].  So my wife hadn't, hadn't met my folks and all so we went on back to Connecticut and I said, "Well let me show you the university where I went."  We went up there and I happened to run into my old, one of my old professors and he said you know, "What are you doing now?"  I said, "Well I just got my master's."  He said, "You, you got a master's," you know, that sort of thing, and I said, "yeah," and he said, "oh, what are you gonna do?" I said, "Well I got accepted to Connecticut but I think I'm going back to Illinois," and he said, "well look, one of my graduate students just left" to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], some place like that.  And he said, "And, and there's a position opening and if you know if you work as a grad [graduate] assistant, first of all, you don't have to pay tuition, and you get"--I don't know three thousand dollars a year or something like that.  So I said fine, so that's how I ended up back there.
Story_ID: 197052
Speaker 1: And then my wife [Joan Massalina Bowen] went to work at the hospital [Windham Hospital], you know, she was a nurse right down the street in Willimantic, Connecticut, so but anyway then, then when I finished my doctorate [at University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] then I got a post-doctorate.  It was called a "teaching fellowship" at Ohio Wesleyan [University, Delaware, Ohio] and that's how I got into Ohio Wesleyan and this was a, a Kettering Fellowship.  You could teach a year, you're, you familiar with [Charles F.] Kettering?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Dayton [Ohio] my hometown.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay and the thing was this was, this was to prepare people to teach in the small Great Lake Colleges, like you know you got Ohio Wesleyan, Albion [College, Albion, Michigan], Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio], Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], all of these things.  So that's get, get young or, or newly new professors or new, new grad students and get 'em to, you know to do this.
Speaker 2: This was around 1961, '62 [1962]?
Speaker 1: This was in, this was in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] okay.
Speaker 1: Yes '66 [1966], so then when I finished I went on up and I--in fact I, I interviewed at Albion up there in Michigan and I interviewed at the school I really wanted, I didn't get was Earlham College in, in--
Speaker 2: In Richmond, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah 'cause they had--I really wanted to go there but I didn't go there and then I interviewed at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], but you know Joan said no, she wanted to get in a big city 'cause she couldn't stand that so.  Then I went up to Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] so that's how I got at Cleveland State.  I was there for, it as I was telling you before I started off teaching my sciences and then with the riots with, with Fred Ahmed Evans and all of that I became an administrator.
Story_ID: 197053
Speaker 1: Now tell us, kinda slow down a minute and tell us what happened with Fred Ahmed Evans and as far as you can recollect--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I don't know what precipitated it but what happened was that Fred Ahmed Evans was a, well had his troops.  I don't know how many guys were there but for some reason they started, what, what the police would do every once in a while, they, they would do what you call a "sweep." There were cars that were ticketed in the ghetto; you know they would stay there just, oh, sometimes months, so they'll do a sweep.  They'll bring in tow trucks and start cleaning out everything, so he and his groups they were on, they were waiting for 'em.  They were on rooftops and doorways and I think they killed, I know they shot at least ten or fifteen and killed maybe ten.  I don't remember what happened.
Speaker 1: So the police were engaged in a sweep of cars basically and, and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were taking all these cars out, they bought in tow trucks and everything and just taking them to the pound or, or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And these guys started firing, I mean they had all kinds of weapons and stuff, so the next thing I know.
Speaker 1: Do, do you remember who he was affiliated with or was it his own organization?
Speaker 2: It was a local, yeah.
Speaker 1: Local, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, it wasn't with the [Black] Panthers or anything like that, no this was his own.  I forgot what he, what they called them.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember the photo in the paper of him on a rooftop.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: With a rifle.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know in the news shooting at (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And that, that must've been no more than maybe ten blocks from Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] where I was working and.
Speaker 1: Was that over in the Hough neighborhood [Cleveland, Ohio] or?
Speaker 2: Hough and Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], they're right together, Hough, Glenville, and they had, they just had a few years before a big one in Hough [Hough Riots, 1966], remember it, right after the, the [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] thing then they had one in Hough, so this was the Hough, Glenville again.  And you know a lot of the students were coming to me, "Hey Doc," they called me Doc-- "man, if go home, you go around this way because it's, it's a war zone in there," and the next day they actually had tanks rolling down the street, you know the [U.S.] Army or the Reserves [sic. Ohio Army National Guard] who whoever they were.  Tanks were, oh, man it was, it was a frightening sort of a thing and some innocent people got killed.  Crazy--the cops, the cops, you know they're like this, you stick your head out and boom, they'll just shoot you.  So about three or four of the people there--I forgot how many, how many--twenty-something?  I can't remember you know, it's thirty-something years ago, but you know some innocent people got killed and, and the cops were just, they were like that and it, it was a rough time.  Cleveland [Ohio] was rough then, but there was something I was gonna tell you.  Oh, yeah I know what I'm getting back, so the black students you know they were, they were feeling their thing so they went on up to the President [Harold Enarson] and said, "We look we want a black administrator here," because--I mean Cleveland at the time was 30 percent black, and here's Cleveland State, an urban college, and they only had maybe 5 percent of the students were black in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--in fact I think in those days a percentage of blacks in the city may have even been higher than 30 percent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it could, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they turned around and elected a black mayor not too long after that you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, Carl [B.] Stokes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I worked on his campaign.  So any that's when Harold Enarson was the president and by the way, once he left Cleveland he was president of [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] for ten years.  So I went on and got--the students marched me on up to the president's office and he, and I became the president, I mean, I'm sorry I became the assistant to the president, but see I knew, I knew what it was.  It was 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door.'  He wanted me to, he said, "Look you should.  I'd like to see you increase these student," you know, "see if you can't bring more students in," now I wasn't getting paid.  That's a dean of students or the vice president of students, said, "You want me to and maybe you could recruit some black faculty."  Now you needed to have a Ph.D., and heck I couldn't, I couldn't I mean I didn't have any power.  How am I gonna--it's the vice president and/or the dean of faculty that, that brings in faculty.  I can't do that.  So, but I learned administration, I learned administration.  So then when I went to New York [New York], at LaGuardia [Community College of the City University of New York, New York, New York] the first time, then I had, I mean I knew how to operate.
Story_ID: 197054
Speaker 1: Now explain like what happened how did you come to leave Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] and go to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I did do I started making a lot of speeches you know around and all like that and they were setting up this new community college in, in Long Island City [New York, New York], LaGuardia [Community College of the City University of New York, New York, New York].  This was 1971.  Now my, my wife [Joan Massalina Bowen] had gotten her master's [degree] in education but, but her internship was at Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio].  So in, in my recruitment my wife who went over there and, and my charge of recruiting you know I got to know the community college and I really, really said, hey this is nice.  So one of the, one of the deans of this new college, it wasn't even open yet in Long Island City.  They were opening up in an old bag factory you know where they make burlap sacks.  So he came and asked me would I be interested in being an assistant dean or be associate dean.  Now I was already a full dean, so I said why I don't know so they said they were gonna--they flew me in for an interview and I said well this is nice because at least I can take the train up and visit my folks [Lucille Cobb Bowen and Raymond Curtis Bowen] in New Haven [Connecticut] you know.  So I went there and I liked what they were doing, I mean I, these guys, how old was I then?  I think I was thirty-six.  I was the second oldest person there.  These are all young Turks talking about doing this and doing that and so forth and so on.  So when I went back, well I went ahead and said, yeah, I'm coming, I'm coming to this thing, I like this, and I didn't tell my wife (laughter).  I was scared to tell her you know, 'cause you know she you go there but don't make any commitments.  Well I made a commitment (laughter), so I really liked that, and then when I was at LaGuardia she was teaching nursing at one of the other ones.  You know where Queensborough [Community College of the City University of New York, Bayside, New York] is don't you?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well she taught it, she taught nursing at Queensborough and I was the dean [of academic affairs] at LaGuardia and we stayed there for five years and then I got in some trouble, I won't mention what.  But I slapped the president and he fired me.
Story_ID: 197055
Speaker 1: We're going back to Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so you know 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Cleveland [State University, Cleveland, Ohio], Cleveland is a big deal, you got Jim Brown; you got the black economic football.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: [Black Economic] Union going, Bobby Mitchell, John Wooten and all of them.
Speaker 2: Leroy Kelly.
Speaker 1: Did, did you know all, all those guys?
Speaker 2: I, I met 'em, I wouldn't say I know 'em, but there was a place called The Lancer [Steakhouse, Cleveland, Ohio].  Lancer's was on Carnegie Avenue, there was, one side was the Lancers and the next side was the Carnegie Hotel, and after the [Cleveland] Browns football of all of us would meet in there, you know have beer and drinks and all like that and the players would come in and all.  And it was a thing, every time the Browns were home you know, the, this would happen.  Now in nineteen--must have been 196--I forget it was '68 [1968] or '70 [1970] 'cause I think Jim Brown left in '67 [1967, sic. 1966] or.
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]?
Speaker 1: I think it was, yeah I think it was '69 [1969] he--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969] okay.
Speaker 1: Naw', yeah, yeah, I think you may be right '67 [1967], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was '67 [1967] 'cause it was, it.
Speaker 2: But you ever hear of Don Perkins?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, Don Perkins played for the Dallas Cowboys.  This, this is funny, he and my wife [Joan Messalina Bowen] were engaged you see, and, and when, when I was in the [U.S.] Army and this guy named Mahoney [ph.] bet me ten dollars I couldn't pull Perkins' girl.  So that's the way, that's the way we hooked up you know.  But anyway Don and I we're all friends, we, we get together every two years for a--we, we have this club, organization it's called Jocks Before Civil Rights because you know he was playing the guy--people don't even know about Chuck Roberts.  Chuck Roberts was one of the first black quarterbacks at a white university in 1957.  He played for the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico].
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's somebody--I knew about Sandy Stephens up in Washington [sic. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I didn't know about him, Chuck Roberts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chuck Roberts, right, Albuquerque, New Mexico. But anyway Dallas was playing Cleveland.  At the time Cleveland must've been, I don't know, let's say they were "0" [zero] and five and Dallas was five and "0" and they all came out to our place.  We were living in Willowick [Ohio] which is a suburb out in the Euclid [Ohio] you know, on the outskirts of Cleveland, and they came and Don came.  There were two Dons, Don Perkins and Don [Meredith], who was the white quarterback?
Speaker 1: Meredith.
Speaker 2: Don Meredith, right.  They all came on over to the house, they had given me tickets.  I'd bring over my neighbors, they'd give us all tickets and, and "Well we won't--boy, we won't hurt you too bad (unclear)."  Cleveland kicked butt, beat 'em like thirty-five to six, you know and Cleveland who hadn't won, won anything, so that's what--I mean that was some of the good things, there were good things and bad things in Cleveland, but I mean--but Cleveland in the late '60s [1960s] I mean that thing was something else.
Story_ID: 197056
Speaker 1: --And the 'Uptight' movie we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: That was the first big black blockbuster in major theaters.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It started I guess with the trend of the black movies of the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and--
Speaker 1: And, that, that took place, the movie takes place in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was shot in, it was shot in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it was shot in Cleveland, that's how I got to know all those people that Raymond [St. Jacques] introduced me to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now tell us about Raymond St. Jacques.
Speaker 2: Raymond St. Jacques, his real name is "Chubby" [James Arthur] Johnson and he and--
Speaker 1: He's from New Haven [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: From New Haven, yes, his sister's name is Barbara.  I saw Barbara [Ann Johnson] recently, you know, and, and we use to go to the Community House [ph.] and, and the camp, and I remember Raymond St. Jacques, he was like a counselor 'cause he's about four or five years older than I am or was before he died and he came on over.  We were all sleeping in the tents and he threw all, you know dumped everybody out of the tent and they kicked him and sent him home, but he was a jokester, he was, he was something else, but yeah, I know yeah he and Russell Taylor [ph.], and oh anyway, a lot of us all grew up in the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 197057
Speaker 1: Now something else you mentioned during the break was the first black graduate of Ohio Wesleyan [University, Delaware, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles.  I went out, I went out to, I was teaching at [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] what--as I think I told you I was the second black ever hired.  The first black, a fellow named Butler Jones who he came there in '50 [1950], 1950 and I didn't get there until '66 [1966], but I was saying, "Man they don't have that many blacks around here" and he says, "well you know they just graduated the first black" in you know, it was something, I said who, he said "Melvin Van Peebles" and I didn't know who Melvin Van--until that 'Sweetback' ['Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song'] came out, that 'Baadasssss Song' and now he's, you know his, in fact in I was looking that Mario [Van Peebles] is doing something.  I saw in Jet--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the movie ['Baadasssss!'] starts Friday.
Speaker 2: Oh, the movie, okay
Speaker 1: The movie starts here in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In Baltimore [Maryland] on, on, on Friday, it's a--where he plays his father [Melvin Van Peebles].
Speaker 2: His father, right, right.
Speaker 1: In, in yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember seeing that, that movie.  Did you see it, 'Sweetback?'
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah everybody saw it in those days, we--it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm saying until that I didn't know who Melvin Van Peebles, when he told me Melvin Van Peebles I hadn't seen the movie.  I didn't know it was out then, but anyway, you know the guy said, "Oh yeah, he graduated from Ohio Wesleyan."
Speaker 1: Yeah it wasn't too long after he graduated then that he wrote 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' which is a poem.  It starts as a poem--
Speaker 2: I remember that--
Speaker 1: --and he developed it into a Broadway show ['Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death,' Melvin Van Peebles] and, and the movie 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song,' but it's all informed by that same poem, you know 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death.'
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just all, I just wanted to go back and get all that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 197058
Speaker 1: We had you before we took the tape change we were talking about the LaGuardia Community College [New York, New York], your first term there.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah. I went there as a--
Speaker 1: And oh, hit, yeah how you left, you said you hit the president [Joseph Shenker].
Speaker 2: Well that's how I'm gonna lead up to it.  All right I went there as the associate dean of--associate dean and then eventually they fired the dean and I became the dean, and the president was messing around with this chick and, which is fine, but everybody knew it.  Well, I'm sitting in a meeting one day and the president said, "[HistoryMaker Raymond] Bowen, come here," and so "okay, I'll, let me just finish this meeting."  He said "No, I want you to come here now," and I said "what is this, you don't talk to me like that," but I didn't say anything.  Okay, I excused myself and I went up to him.  He said, like, first of all he shook his finger in my air and that got me.  He said, "Don't you go around spreading rumors about me and--" so-and-so.  I said, "Who told you that, that I was spreading these--?"  I said, "I don't care who you sleep with."  He said, "Well don't you spread the rumors, and, and otherwise you're gonna regret it."  I said, "First don't shake your finger and you're calling me a liar?"  He said, "Well, you heard what I said."  So I grabbed him by his throat, a little short dude.  I grabbed him by his throat and put him up against the locker, and bam.  Well I knew I was going, (unclear) I was gonna go anyway after that. So what happened was that you know and he told me later.  He said "Well this--your contract expires at the end of the, you know term and don't even think of coming back."  So I said, "Fine."  So I'm-- applying around you know I knew I wasn't gon' (unclear).  So I got a job here as vice president in Baltimore [County, Maryland at Community College of Baltimore County].  So fine, then while I'm here he calls me one day and he says, "Look, you're blackballed from New York.  You can never; you'll never get a job in New York." Right ready, I'm ready to go fight him again, you know, but I wasn't planning on coming.  So I stay here for six years, seven years and then I got this job in Memphis as the president.  So I left here and went to Memphis [Tennessee] and I was doing great, liked Memphis and everything.
Speaker 1: And you're president?  What the name of the college?
Speaker 2: Shelby State, Shelby State Community College [later, Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Shelby County [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Right.  So after a while you know and then after I was there seven years I get a call from one of my buddies back there.  He said you know, "Joe Shenker just got another job."  Joe Shenker was the president.  They--he said "You want make, make him and some other people mad?"  I said, "Yeah, yeah I'd like to do that 'cause I can't stand him."  So he said, "Then why don't you apply for the presidency?"  I said, "Okay."  So I applied you know and they since I was a pres--, I knew I wanted to get an interview so I went on up there and old people were (unclear), "What you doin' here?" (Laughter) He tried his damnedest, the old president, to keep me from even getting in the finalists.  I, you know, my first interview, he said, "Well you know why would you like to be president at LaGuardia?"  They ask everybody these stupid questions.  I said, "I don't; I just came up her for the ride."  I was just blowing it 'cause I knew they weren't going to invite me back.  The next thing I knew they said, "You're, you're a semi-finalist."  Boy, I came again, so then I just knew I wasn't going to hear from 'em again, and then by the way we were in Morocco, I was helping them set up community colleges in Morocco.  So I got a call from New York [New York] and Morocco and they said, "You know you're one of the finalists and the chancellor would like to see you tomorrow."  I said, "Is it a sure thing?"  They said, "No, you're just going be in,"--I said, "no I ain't gonna leave Morocco to go back on something like that.  I said you got to be out of your mind."  So I knew that was it.  The next day I get another call in Morocco.  "Well when can you be here?"  So I said, "Well you know this assignment ends next week.  I could come next week."  So anyway (laughter), then next week, jump on the plane, you know in, in my tee-shirt and all like that for this final interview with the chancellor.  They lost my bags, so I got to go on an interview with a tee-shirt on or a sweatshirt. That's what it is and all like that, you know sneakers and (unclear).  So I go up to see the chancellor and he says, "[HistoryMaker Raymond] Bowen, I wanna ask you this one question and I want you to answer me truthfully."  He said, "What did you think of Joe--what do you think of Joe Shenker."  I said, oh here goes the job, I said "Well, chancellor do you really want me to answer you?"  He said, "Yeah answer me truthfully."  I said, "I can't stand that mother," (unclear).  "I can't stand that m-f."  He said, "Neither could I, you got the job."  That was it, that was it (laughter).  Yeah, so that's how I got back to LaGuardia 'cause first of all he said I could never get a job in New York and here I am taking his school over 'cause he was the founding president.  So I stayed there until, I told the people I was fifty-five when I, when I took the job.  I said, "I'm only gonna be here ten years, cause at sixty-five I'm gone" and, and that's what it is, so I, I quit in '99 [1999].
Story_ID: 197059
Speaker 1: Now was Joe [Joseph] Shenker any relationship to Albert Shanker--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --of the teachers union [United Federation of Teachers and American Federation of Teachers (AFT)]?
Speaker 2: No, everybody use to ask that, no he was, no he was something different.  Real bright, he became college president at twenty-nine years old, I mean you know to set up the thing, but and you know we see other occasionally and laugh about it, but telling me I'm spreading word about him sleeping with--I don't care who he slept with (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well was the woman he was sleeping with black or something?
Speaker 2: No, no, no she was one of his deans, white, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, now I wonder why he would focus in on you in terms of that but (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well I don't know I think that--well see he told me one time, you know, he said, "You're not after my job are you?"  He just thought I was you know--I said, "You're the president, man."  He just swore I was after his job and he was very insecure, smart as hell and plus you know I mean I, I couldn't be intimidated or threatened by anybody so, you know I'd laugh at him and this and that and say, "Man you're--that's something stupid.  Why are you saying something stupid like"--well he didn't, you know it shook em 'cause nobody else would say things like that, you know they'd want to bow and scrape and.  So when I came back there boy, all the blacks that were you know years ago when we opened the school, oh they were just so happy, jumping up and down and this and that and I had to fire some of 'em, but you know they, man you know.  What did, what did Benjamin [O.] Davis, Sr. say: "You may be of my color but you ain't my kind" or something like that.  Well that's what I, you I can--just because I'm black and you messin' up you think I'm going to keep you around (laughter)?
Story_ID: 197060
Speaker 1: But then when I went back [to LaGuardia Community College, New York, New York] it was nice because, oh, I mean, it was rough, because I was the, see I was the first black college president in Queens [New York, New York], and Queens got two million people so for the first year or so I had to go to every black church, and you know they all wanted me to be a speaker and you can't say no, you know, so but then my buddy helped me out and--[HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Floyd Flake, 'cause his, his church Allen A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal Church, later, Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, New York, New York] is in Queens, so you know so he--
Speaker 2: Yeah he's now the president of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Wilberforce, yeah, and he's still got that church there.  So, he's like, who is, what's the guy's name [HistoryMaker William H. Gray III] that used to fly home every--from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you know who I'm talking about, what--was--the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]?
Speaker 2: Not Lee [ph.], no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, UNCF, who is head of UNCF?  He was a congressman, remember?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, not [N.] Clay [Robbins], but oh, I can't think who--
Speaker 1: No, the guy that, oh, I can't think of his name right now.  He was a congressman now he took over the United Negro College Fund.  Now he just retired from that and [Marc] Moriel is the new head of that, but this guy is a minister and he was a congressman and but he use to fly home every night. He was on finance, I'll think of it in a minute. I know you know him.
Story_ID: 197061
Speaker 1: It's just like in Memphis [Tennessee].  Now Memphis is a Bible Belt and one time--my first I went to this church, I went to this church to speak and I was real academic, you know. I--black churches, and then afterward I finished, you know people were real polite and this old sister grabbed me, she said, "Son," she said, "look you don't come here with that kinda speaking like that.  You talk funny anyway 'cause you're from the North."  That's the first thing she said, and then she said, "And secondly they didn't like what you was saying."  I said, "Well you know what should I, how do I know if they like it?"  She said, "When they start waving that handkerchief you on track."  So I learned how to, how to speak the way black, black preachers speak.  I learned how to grunt, I learned how--and you repeat yourself.  You, you say a sentence and then you say it over and you say it over and over, and once the old sister saw me doing it, "You on track."  Second time I talked man, I got a standing ovation.  I didn't say anything, but you know, I repeated myself and I watched, watched the old sisters and they will let you know if you, if you're coming through, and then I had to go one time to a church in Detroit [Michigan].  I spoke on their 150th anniversary and--but I remembered my Memphis ties and that was a good one, that was a good one (laughter), that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Now what was your message though when you go in, go, go to the community?  What do you want people to really know when you, when you (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well the whole thing, well I had some what I called "can speeches."  It's, it's Hebrews 11, it's "faith," you know you gotta have faith and you can have faith in whatever you wanna talk about, but if you hit one theme then you can expand or you can you know, start, start taking off from, from there or you look and see what the lesson is and something like that--it's hard, it's much easier--anybody can get up in front of an audience and give a graduation speech, that's easy, but boy you know, you try to get these--speak before a black audience in a black church and unless you're good, it's hard--
Story_ID: 197062
Speaker 1: In Memphis [Tennesee] again, they, it was funny when I got there [Shelby State Community College, later, Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee] because they, they knew I wasn't from--well first of all it was hard for me to even--Lamar Alexander was the governor and he had told Harold Ford [Sr.] that he would have a black--'cause the black community was up in arms, they, they wanted a black community college president in Memphis because you wouldn't go get one in Nashville [Tennessee] or some of these other little towns.  So Alexander promised what's-his-name that he would get a, a black person as the first president in, first black president in Tennessee, he'll be in Memphis.  So I applied, I just happened to apply.  I didn't know all this other stuff and it was sort of funny, the--they didn't know if I was black or white.  Why?  First of all you got a bachelor's [degree] and a doctorate [degree] from [the University of] Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut], a master's [degree] from [the University of] New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico].  You were a biochemist and a parasitologist.  Nothing, they looked they didn't see anything that said Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] or the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  Naw' this guy, dude gotta be white, dude gotta be white, but he's a, again he's, he's--thing looks good, we're going to invite him down.  So before they invited me the chancellor of the system called my president here in Baltimore [County, Maryland at Community College of Baltimore County] and you know, "Well, how is [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Raymond] Bowen and all of this?"  And then finally he said, "Well let me ask you a question if you hope you don't mind.  So he--Catada [ph.] was my president, he said, "By the way is Ray Bowen black or white?"  And so the--he's the president, my president just said, "Well last time I saw him he was black, I don't know what happened in the last hour or so," you know or something like and the guy said, "oh man that's good we got a president now."  'Cause and that's how I you, know when I'm down for interviews and things but it was a lot of fun--
Story_ID: 197063
Speaker 1: Harold Ford [Sr.] and I, the senior became real good friends, real good friends.  One time I was flying back to [Washington] D.C. from D.C. and I was sitting next to him.  He said "[HistoryMaker] Ray [Raymond Bowen], do you like gin?"  I said, "Hell yeah," he said, "well look, I gotta case that I'm bringing.  I'm gonna give it to you."  I said, "What?"  He said, "Here you know somebody gave it," but he can't, he said, "I can't accept these kind of gifts" (laughter).  So, yeah, and young Harold [Ford, Jr.] I know the congressman now because he and my, my daughters [Rebecca Bowen and Ruth Bowen] are close.  They were in Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] together so and of course when I was the president there [at Shelby State Community College, later, Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee] [W.W.] Willie Herenton, the mayor , was superintendent of the schools, so we worked very closely.  So I know a lot of people in Memphis.
Speaker 2: Now you have a lot of connections in different places you know, in diverse places, Memphis, New York [New York] and Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Right, oh yeah, Cleveland, New York, and here in Baltimore [Maryland] of course.
Story_ID: 197064
Speaker 1: Well tell me about what your--I guess your objectives were as president of LaGuardia Community College [, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well LaGuardia I had two, really I had two things I wanted to pursue.  One was economic development and the other is multiculturalism, because see LaGuardia at the time was the most diverse, at least the community college in the country, maybe, maybe even of colleges.  We had, we had students from eighty countries that spoke 120 languages.  So I could ride up on the elevator, blablabla, I don't know what they're talking about, but we're very, very diverse, but what we wanted, what I wanted to do which I finally accomplished was to incorporate pluralism in every single course there.  That's, that's possible you know, it's kinda hard to do pluralism in, in algebra or something (laughter), but you know for the most part, try to get it incorporated in there which we were able to do.  We spent a year of revising all of the courses and as much as possible put it in, 'cause I didn't want a separate black history or this or that, because we had too many people, too diverse.  So we, this is what we ended up doing and the faculty members that did it, I mean, oh gee whiz they became consultants going all over the, all over the country showing 'em how to do it and we had a very diverse staff.  As a matter of fact, we had more black women, Ph.D.s in math than any other college in the country.  We had about eight and I was teasing this woman from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She thought that she had it, you know she was head of the department.  I forget her name now, but she had six.  I said, "We got you beat, got you beat." And the thing was, it was hard though, you really had to, how shall it say it?  It was, it was hard to keep those folks together, everybody wanted 'em offering 'em more money and this and that, well yeah we had a union, there's a big union there and we just, I just couldn't give them extra money you know, but just made it, made it livable, made it nice you know to show 'em that you cared that you liked what they were doing and, and pull it, pull it together.  So that and then LaGuardia had a big cooperative education, a co-op thing and in fact every student had to take so many co-op internships.  So that's where the economic development comes in because I was able to meet with presidents anywhere from Citibank, Citicorp [later, Citigroup, Inc.] to you know all the big hotels and things, 'cause our students would go there for a month for an intern and we were able to get, get the companies to work with us.  For example, we had a big contract with Citicorp because I'm talking about ten, ten years ago now when not that many companies had computers.  So we got a contract to teach every single secretary in Citicorp, they must've had about 200 or 300, teach 'em how to use the computer, and I mean now it's easy you know there's no problem, but, but these are the kinds of things we did, and we, we worked with communities.  Did a lot of training, we, we ended up working with the [New York City] Police Department because the mayor, [HistoryMaker David N.] Dinkins was the mayor then, he wanted new people before they went to the academy to have at least an associate degree.  So we set up this program to give them the associate degree and then they can move to the police academy.  So we did a lot of those things but my two main goals were the cultural pluralism and then the economic development.
Story_ID: 197065
Speaker 1: How is a community college different from a four-year institution as--I mean from an administrator's perspective?
Speaker 2: Administrative, it's much more difficult, much more.  First of all we don't have the funds.  Our students are usually or not usually, but many of 'em are, cannot get into a four-year school, so we have to do a lot of remedial things, you know a lot of high school things to get 'em prepared.  A lot of our students, especially in a place like New York [New York], English is not their first language.  So you gotta do a lot of English [as a] Second Language [courses, (E.S.L.)].  You know you gotta build up their, their skills so they can go there, at the time same time you've got people that don't want a degree, they just want a certificate.  They wanna get in there, learn a certain and get out.  So you, you, you do a lot of continuing education.  You set up courses just to teach 'em what they want and they, they leave.  Then you got the traditional student that would like to go to a four-year school but can't afford it so they'll come to the community college for two years and then they'll transfer out.  So I'm saying our roles are multifaceted and then at a four-year school, especially the big ones, the president is really a fundraiser, going around giving speeches and bringing in money, you know getting things like that.  Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] they, they bring in five hundred million dollars a year just from the federal government (laughter), not to mention the other things.  You know well, I mean gee whiz, I think my total budget was only about ninety million dollars, and that's including the financial aid.  So there's a, you know there's a big difference but it's--the community again, they, they, everyone wants you to speak and you gotta do it, you know it's funny, but then our graduation--we held our graduation--we had so many kids that we held it at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  That's where the graduation is held now, yeah, but it's--I like it.  After, after working a few years as that I couldn't go to a four-year school, it's too stoic and it's too, I mean I couldn't go in there as an administrator, you know.  You're freer you know, you don't need to and once you come home your time is your own.  You don't need to worry about your wife having to serve teas to the trustees and all that other kind of you know, crap.
Story_ID: 197066
Speaker 1: What's the toughest thing about being an administrator in that situation?
Speaker 2: I think your time you know, you're always on call, you, you always are, I mean you try to plan to do this and then something comes up when you gotta go here and you gotta go there.  In Cleveland [Ohio] I had to go down and get people outta jail you know with the riots and things somebody, "So-and-so is in jail."  "Is he one of your students [at Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]?"  "Well, how do I know?"  You know then, but you say, "Yes," then you gotta go down and "okay, well you'd better tell him to watch it."  Nothing, nothing big, but it's--but I think it's not so much community college and four-year school as urban, an urban community college.  I mean that's it.  Somebody told me that the toughest job in administration is being a president of a private, a small private church-related black school.  The second is an urban community college, you know, but if you're at a place like Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida] or--I mean those things are rough 'cause they want you to--I mean you're competing with people and, and it's hard for you, what's that one that just--Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I think they're--
Speaker 1: Yeah, closed yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I mean that's, that's rough, that is rough course you don't have the money and sometime they don't have the money to pay the faculty and then all these other things.  Well we don't need to worry about that, pay a salary, but there's a lot of things you know.  Like [Rudolph "Rudy"] Giuliani, and that's, oh I wish I had of had some of those articles. I had some articles that I really got into it with him.  We had this verbal thing going back through the papers.
Speaker 1: What was the contention about you know?
Speaker 2: Well first of all he said that, what did he say, you ought to close community colleges because you know nobody--none of 'em graduate in two years. Well first of all if you got a person that doesn't speak English and you have to let 'em in the school, you know.  It may take a year or two just to get him to read (laughter).  So you can't compare a community college to a four-year school.  You have to do that and then, then they say, "Well, look you only got, you got a low graduation rate."  Well as I was just saying, not everybody that comes even wants to graduate. We have physicians that come to learn computers.  Now you know you're a physician you're not going to stay there two years and then go, you learn what you wanna do and you go.  So, so these are things that are problems I have with Giuliani so I but I had already put in my, I already put in my papers that I was, I'm gonna retire so he couldn't bother me, but yeah they printed some of my writings on Giuliani in the New York Times and all of this, but yeah.  "Bowen slams mayor" (laughter).
Story_ID: 197067
Speaker 1: What was the most rewarding aspect of being the president of LaGuardia [Community College, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think, I think seeing some of these old women, old minorities.  I mean, when I say minorities--see we were, LaGuardia was, predominately Latino--but you know, but seeing some of these old women, when I say old, I mean like fifty or sixty years old that just wanted a degree.  To see them walk across the stage, you know that, or, or to see--well most of the kids were first generation and when they walk across the stage to get a diploma, man the family stands up and claps and all like that.  It's good feeling and just to know that you're part of this you, this, this balkanization, you know bringing people from all over the world and seeing them walk across the stage, whether they go to four-year school or not, you know you can't--but just know that you're helping 'em make a difference. That's rewarding.
Story_ID: 197068
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your homes and concerns for the black community today in general?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my concerns is I have to agree with all of these things, you know what Bill Cosby said, you know a lot of it is, and I notice this because I know middle class parents that are, you see the guys walk around in these two hundred dollar sneakers--
Story_ID: 197069
Speaker 1: --I think that one of the things that bothers me as Bill Cosby said, is that a lot of the kids now--I don't think they're getting the parental or the community help and their values are just shattered you know.  Now Bill was concentrating on least what I read, I don't know what he--on, on mostly the lowest economic stratum, but I think it's, it's sort of infused throughout.  I mean I see middle class kids acting the same way.  I was mentioning before how growing up our whole, every--all of our parents all they did was stress education, education; you gotta do this, you gotta do, but that's not happening now you know and a lot of the kids are just I mean now it's the dollar and I don't mean that--I mean everybody isn't on the corner selling drugs, but yet I don't think that the education, that education is as important as it, as it once was you know.  You get these folks that, that--the, the dropout rate in Baltimore [Maryland] now is almost 55 percent and you know here we, here we like forty years ago people are struggling like heck to get into college or get into school and now they're, you know it's ridiculous, they're not finishing, they're not finishing, and more than ever now you need the education because we're a technocratic society and you know, we are moving from manufacturing to all of these other things and it's no jobs unless you, unless you get prepared for it.  And, and I think that, that economics is, is one of the concerns I have now.  I mentioned that in LaGuardia [Community College, New York, New York], I tried this economic development because I foresaw just like a lot of people that, that's the wave of the future you know, but I, I don't, I don't know what's gonna come of it, but, but the dropout rate that really, that really frightens me and it's not here, it's just about every urban area that there is, and I don't know.
Story_ID: 197070
Speaker 1: Community college has been is usually a first step you know towards higher education, if, if you can get out of high school or get a G.E.D. [General Educational Development].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right--
Speaker 1: A lot of people they get G.E.D.s--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --that go to the community college first.
Speaker 2: But you know what, I mean with, with a, just a high school diploma now it is hard as heck, you end up at McDonald's or something like that.  I mean there's nothing wrong with working at McDonald's but it's not gonna, you can't support a family just working at McDonald's so, no you, you gotta move and unfortunately--I, I guess as people some people are saying and I, I don't know how to, if I really believe it but it seems that with integration, you know we don't have the, the, what's the word?  The black cohesiveness that we once, once had you know and not so much in New Haven [Connecticut] and because we don't have that many black people, but you know I'm sure in the southern towns you have your black doctors, your black teachers, your black this and that, but now these folks have just spread out.  I, I was talking to a friend of my mine, he's a lawyer.  He was telling me that when he was in law school he had a, what was his name?  [A. Leon] Higginbotham [Jr.] was teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Thurgood Marshall, Patricia Roberts Harris, all of these black folks in one thing.  Now you got people like Cornel West at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and you got [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip"] Gates [Jr.] up at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know [HistoryMaker Molefi Kete] Asante in Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or wherever so I'm, I'm saying that, that we don't have the things that, the, the role models now that we once had in the black community.  So we're gonna have to find some, some other way to alleviate these concerns.
Story_ID: 197071
Speaker 1: I wanna backtrack a little bit, we didn't talk about Carl [B.] Stokes' campaign.  I know you worked on the Carl Stokes campaign which also occurred in 1968 in Cleveland [Ohio], so--
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't, I wasn't really you know a paid worker but what I was doing was help organize the students [at Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] to you know to support 'em which was, which was really something because he was running against Seth Taft, and you know the Tafts in Ohio (laughter), they're--so we had to get, we had to get out there you know and these students were out there pounding on doors and handing out flyers and all of these other things and it was, at least his first term it was real, real close and when Carl won, boy the whole, the whole city went, went crazy and it reminded me when I was growing up, I keep going back and forth, in the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut] when, back in 1947 when Joe Louis beat Billy Conn and man the whole project, people screaming and I'm running outside and little kids you know and all like that, but that's the way it was when Carl, when Carl won.  He, he did great, but after two terms he, I don't know he's, well he was a playboy from what I heard, I, I don't know--but just to do it 'cause he ran he won and at the same [HistoryMaker Richard] Hatcher won in, what was it?
Speaker 1: Gary.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gary, Indiana so that was crazy.  Now another thing when I was at Cleveland, you know I told you I taught actually for a year or so before I went.  One of my students was Dennis Kucinich (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, he's now running for president.
Speaker 2: Right, right, Dennis was one of my students and he, I think it was biology or something like that he took so (laughter) then I see him now running for president but--
Speaker 1: So, he, he went to community college.
Speaker 2: No, no this was Cleveland State.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Cleveland State was a four year, your right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But.
Speaker 1: So he became mayor of Cleveland after--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --after Carl Stokes at one point. Yeah, uh-hm.
Story_ID: 197072
Speaker 1: Then we were involved in Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio].  Have you heard of Karamu House?  Yeah I was on the board in Karamu House and a lot of the students you know were actors and participated there and, I mean Cleveland [Ohio] in the late '60s [1960s] I'll tell you it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Ron O'Neal is from Cleveland too who is also (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ron O'Neal, oh yeah that's who I was thinking of.  He was 'Super Fly' wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay I was trying to think of, yeah that was the other guy, and what's his name, grew up in Cleveland, Maynard Jackson, 'course I remember him coming and speaking you know when I was there.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that really? Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so no it was sort of fortunate, but the, you know, the--I didn't know this at the time but the real politician was [HistoryMaker Louis] Lou Stokes.  I mean Carl [B. Stokes] was, he was good, he was more flashy, but Lou was, was the one that you know, he was a politician.
Speaker 2: Right he's endured sort of over the years, I think.
Speaker 1: Um-hm yeah.
Story_ID: 197073
Speaker 1: Oh, did you know [Lawrence] Larry Cox?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois], he was at, he was the president--[HistoryMaker] Wayne [Watson] fired him but he was the president of Olive-Harvey [College, Illinois] for a while.
Speaker 2: No, I just knew Horace [ph.], I can't think of his last name now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was the president.  No, I didn't know Larry Cox.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Larry Cox, but I know people that know him probably.
Speaker 1: All right, he replaced me at Shelby [State Community College, later, Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee] when I went to New York [New York] and then he left Shelby and went up there to--well it was, it was, oh what's the guy's name?  Ron [Ronald J. Temple], who was there before, before Wayne Watson?  Ron, I can't think of Ron's name now.
Speaker 2: Oh, [Ron] Gidwitz?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The head of the--
Speaker 1: I'll think of it, see when you get older you forget names, you see faces.
Story_ID: 197074
Speaker 1: So, when you look back on some of the things you've done is there anything that you wanted to do that you didn't get a chance to do or something that you would change?
Speaker 2: Well, how do I say, sometimes, you know sometimes I wish that I had remained a scientist, you, you know but what happened was that I, I sort of figured if you're a teacher, maybe you could influence forty, fifty students, fifty students a year, but if you're in administration you could, you could have impact on thousands.  However, you don't get any recognition, I mean that's, that's one thing that you have to realize, you know unless you're a super person like a Benjamin Mays, presidents don't get--you know, I mean just like if I, if you asked me who were the principals in my school.  I could tell you the teachers, I don't, I don't--when I was in elementary I don't know who my principal was, you know.  High school [James Hillhouse Comprehensive High School, New Haven, Connecticut] I remember, but it, you mean, that, you know it's a sad thing, sometimes you sit back and, and you say, "Well gee whiz, what else, what would I have done differently," but--and, and then when the students come across you they shake your hand and all like that and they're not gonna remember, I mean they--we, we had thirty-five--I had thirty-seven thousand something students at LaGuardia [Community College, New York, New York].  They don't know, I mean they, they know who taught 'em English or who taught 'em this or that or something, so sometime I do it but then you say well then you could have (laughter) so--But they in terms of that, that's one of the things that you know that I wish I had done, but overall I'm pretty satisfied with my life.
Story_ID: 197075
Speaker 1: In that regard now, you're involved in a lot of volunteer activity and a lot of organizations.  You're involved in, in an organization that's trying to alleviate AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] in Africa and a lot of other, you know just tell us about some of the things that you're involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, see what, what we do we have an organization it's called the H.B.C.U., Historically Black College and Universities/Minority Institutions and about oh, three or four years ago we went to USAID [United States Agency for International Development] and found out and asked them you know we'd like to get, we, we see that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], all of these big schools are getting all of this grant money to do work in Africa, and you know we wanna do some work.  So they said, well look let's, let's face it.  Individually these, and you can name just about with the possible exception of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but they're politically connected, you can't touch them, but like Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] or Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] or Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], all of these black schools, they can't compete with a with the, with the Ivy League or Stanford [University, Stanford, California] or [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California], but if you get a consortium, get 'em all together then you could compete, you know.  So we founded, we started off, we brought in about seventeen black schools with some--a few white as associates, such as St. Jude [Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee] they're with us.  Vanderbilt's [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] with us, in addition to you know Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and [Charles R.] Drew [University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California] and all of these, so we got together and next thing we, we did, we said now this has to be put, we got to understand the politics.  You know I can't think of when, I can't think of names now, but we got the, we went down to see this woman [Alma Adams].  She was a congresswoman, I think she just stepped down and her son took over from, where was she from?  North Carolina, North Carolina, the Charlotte [North Carolina] area, can't think of her name.  Anyway, we went, we went down to Washington [D.C.] to see her and she, we said you know could you get the black politicians to support this grant--that black congresspersons.  She said, "That ain't the way you do it."  She said, "I'm gonna get white and black, democratic and republican."  So she got about fifty, so we got that, now the next thing we have to do--if you understand the way USAID works, or a lot of these grants is that the county, the host country has to endorse it.  In other words, I can't go and write a, a grant saying in want to do this in Ghana unless Ghana says I want you.  So we went out, we went out and got ambassadors from about seventeen countries and, and we stayed away from South--see everybody wants to go to South Africa.  But no, no, we went to Gabon, we got Gabon, we got Namibia, we got Zaire, Ghana, Ivory Coast about ten.  We got their ambassadors to write USAID saying to support this grant, so, it's all set, we, we got a good grant, we got people that ready to go, now there's no money and I don't think there is going to be any money because this country's in debt, you know debt just keeps skyrocketing, so even though we, we got the people together, we did everything right and so forth and so on.  We asked for $30 million out of a--$30 million over a five-year period.  I told you we got Northrop Grumman [Corporation, Falls Church, Virginia] that has signed on to do all of this stuff, but there's no money, but yet, this is the way black schools have to work I think. They have to form consortiums, and the thing about it not all, but so many black presidents, quite a few and I don't want to name 'em, but they all want to be the king.  See they don't wanna share, they don't wanna--I mean, give, give the money to me, I'll take care.  You can't do that, you can't compete with, with these high-powered colleges and universities unless you form a consortium, unless you work together.  Work together, I mean you could compete then, but individually you can't do it, but that's, that's what I've been doing since retiring.  I taught a course at Morgan State.  Morgan has a very good program to train community college presidents and what they do is they get people that, are usually most of 'em are working in community colleges and they'll get a Ph.D. in community college leadership or something like that, and it's the first black school that has, is doing something like--I think University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and one school in North Carolina [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina], but this is the first black school that's doing it so that was a lot of fun, but again this other was more down my line and it's and again I'm getting back into the sciences you know, this even though I won't be doing the actual research, it's a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 197076
Speaker 1: And you're involved in some sickle cell anemia research too, right?
Speaker 2: Well that was before, that was before I had retired, that's when I was still doing the sciences and you know parasitology and working with malaria and things like that and then realizing that people with the sickle cell trait are immune to malaria and the thing is what other diseases you know.  What is the relationship between you know a lot of the epidemiology studies is.  Now another thing is interesting which we found out was that there are more people dying from parasitic diseases than AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome], you know but yet it's very difficult to get grants to support--you know grants here to support this other kind of research.  I talked to one of the--
Speaker 1: You're talking about in Africa, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Africa, sorry.  You know one of, one of the ambassadors said well, yeah, we do have an AIDS epidemic but more kids are drying from schistosomiasis, from malaria, from certain types of parasitic worms than from AIDS.  We want you to do it--but see our granting agency won't do that because that's not a threat to the United States (laughter).  You know people aren't dying from malaria, I mean dying in the United States from malaria, and or from schistosomiasis.  Therefore all of the research money is going towards the--you know, the AIDS.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting that you should bring that up.  There was, pubic television did a special on that once where they, they went through like a whole catalogue of parasitic diseases and their devastating effects, everything from river blindness to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Very horrible diseases--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Worms that you know attack and coming through the cracks of their feet and work their way up to the bottom--
Speaker 2: Sure, right, right, yeah, yeah,
Speaker 1: and--
Speaker 2: Right, right so, but again and, and you know, I mean were not as altruistic as we think but in many third world countries, is I mean there's still epidemics and these parasitic diseases, but we know that we can't do anything about it, or we won't do anything about it.
Story_ID: 197077
Speaker 1: Now talk about your book, now you've got--I think you've co-authored a couple of books right on, on--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on diversity and--
Speaker 2: Well one ['From the Projects to the Presidency: An African American Odyssey,' HistoryMaker Raymond Bowen] was more or less a biography about some of the things you asked me from the way we started, the way I started growing up in the [Elm Haven] Projects [New Haven, Connecticut] and then ending up as a, as a community college president, and the other ['Gateways to Democracy: Six Urban Community College Systems,' Raymond Bowen] was taking different urban areas, different urban colleges, and it shows that we all have similar concerns, similar problems and similar aspirations.  So that's--a lot of people contributed to that, but whether you are in Baltimore [Maryland] or Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  It's, it's all the same, you know we have the same concerns and again, that's trying to get minorities, mainly minorities into the economic mainstream, and trying to preach that this is not the only way but it's the easiest way.  You know you go to the community college and, and get your degree then you get a job and you may have to go to night, but go at night but get that bachelor's degree and eventually move up because if you don't have that, it's not gonna work.  So that's what it's just showing that whether it's a Hispanic or a black or this or that, we all got the same problems and this is the way to do it.  Use education a tool to break through.
Story_ID: 197078
Speaker 1: Now, see in--what's good--that's why I like, that's what I like about this area you know, Baltimore [Maryland].  You got, well myself, you know strictly community college going that way, then over there [HistoryMaker] Earl [S.] Richardson at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], I mean he's got his thing doing like that.  [HistoryMaker] Freeman Hrabowski just wants to leap, so there's a--in other words we're not stumbling over each other.  I mean Freeman, heck he'll tell you, "Look, I want top students," which is good, which is good so you don't have to worry about that.   He doesn't want the kind of students that I want and I don't want his students.   You know what I mean, so this is a, this is good, but community colleges, you'll, you'll find that in the urban areas they're all, they're all the same.  I know it's rough.  At the community college of Baltimore [Baltimore City Community College, Baltimore, Maryland] the majority of people that leave there go to Morgan, you know.  At Catonsville [Maryland] which, do you know Irv [Irving Pressley] McPhail did you, he's the chancellor of the County Community College [sic. Community College of Baltimore County]?  He's a brother and his graduates go--who are primarily white--they will, they'll go to Freeman's school [University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), Catonsville, Maryland] out there in Catonsville.
Story_ID: 197079
Speaker 1: Now what are the names of your books?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What were the names of your books?
Speaker 2: The names of?
Speaker 1: Your books?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: The first book (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think it's New Directions of Community Colleges [journal series] in, yeah New Directions, there were two of 'em.
Speaker 1: And there's a biography too you said (unclear).
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: You had, had a book it's a biography basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, let me, yeah where is it, which one is it?
Speaker 1: Now I think it's important to get the names on record (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, New Directions when did it come out?  Oh, here's, here oh yeah, here one is, one is, it's called 'Achieving Administrative Diversity' [ HistoryMaker Raymond Bowen and Gilbert H. Muller], that it's a Jossey-Bass publication and what's the other one?  The other one is 'Gateways to Democracy: Six Urban Community College Systems' [Raymond Bowen], yeah those are the two right there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right there so you get them outta there.
Speaker 1: All right, now you're putting together you said you've written a biography too, or an autobiography of yourself or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no they want me to do it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right so it hasn't come out yet but you're still working on it.
Speaker 2: No, no, it's hard to do, it's, it's, well let me put it, it's not hard to but it's just like when we're talking you said oh, by the way.  It's one of those things, so you.
Speaker 1: Yeah a lot of connections to make.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but it's good now that you got computers you know, you just put it on there and just sit down at night and put it in and then add, delete, paste, this and, yeah.
Story_ID: 197080
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at the things you've done to this point, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: God I hadn't even thought of that, you know I don't know, it's not about me, it's about, well for example one of the things I'm most proud of is the way my son [Raymond C. Bowen, III] turned out.  He has probably, the if not the largest if one of the largest, no the second largest.  He's president of his own computer firm [Exceptional Software Strategies, Inc., Linthicum Heights, Maryland] and he does a lot of business with the Feds [federal government] and this and that, and you know you look back and you think of your kids as running around and now here's a guy that got over a hundred employees and you know bringing in--making millions of dollars, you know his company and things like that.  That's, that I like that and then my daughters are, the fact that all my kids are married and got good--you know, I mean that's what makes me feel proud, you know the, the fact that you know president here, ah, ah nothing, but you know to see your kids turn out right and, and knowing that they're, that they're that they're gonna--that they, they are succeeding in, in moving forward, you know and making a difference that, that's what I, you know so it's a personal thing and it has nothing to do with career or what you wrote or where you spoke.
Story_ID: 197081
Speaker 1: How many children do you have?  I mean, how--
Speaker 2: Four. Four kids, five grandkids.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and I guess, is there anything that we should ask you that we haven't or anything that you want to talk about that we haven't talked about?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it's sort of funny because when you talk things come out.  Like you, like you as, as you said, now I never would have thought to mention "Chubby" [James Arthur] Johnson [later, Raymond St. Jacques].  Had we not started talking about 'Uptight' and all of these other things, you know or, or [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles or things like that.  So it's just hard to--hard to (unclear).  No, I'm sure that tomorrow sometime I might say you know I should of spoke about this or said this or that, but no, I can't, I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think this is great, you know again what you're, what you're doing and it's, it's relaxing speaking like this rather than a canned speech you know, 'cause you didn't tell any--until we at least started talking, I had no idea what you were talking.  Now if you had of said, "Look, I wanna know about what were you doing the day that Fred Ahmed Evans was shooting," but I'd probably go back and do a lot of research, look at this and that and comment, but it's not just like speaking spontaneously so--like you could tell Julieanne [sic.], what's her name?
Speaker 1: Julieanna Richardson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that the process, I think it's very, very good you know because when you relax and you're not speaking in a certain way, then you get more information.  I think that's good.
Story_ID: 197082
Speaker 1: One last question, similar to legacy, but sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to be remembered as a guy that, as an example, let me, let me get back and maybe this will sum up a lot of you know--whose parents [Lucille Cobb Bowen and Raymond Curtis Bowen] of course didn't have a college degree but were very supportive and insisted that you study, insisted that, insisted that you, you know did the right thing and so forth and so on and even though we were poor went on and got your degree and then moved on and ended up doing something pretty good you know.  I'm not making my, I may not be making sense but what I'm saying you know started from here and ended up, I think I had a good life, I think I made a difference in a lot of peoples' life but through education and I, I hate to keep harping on that but and when I say education I don't mean everybody has to go out and get a Ph.D. but I mean you gotta understand, you gotta read, you gotta support and do things like that and I think if people could remember, hey, there's a dude that you know that did it and if he did it, I know I can, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 197083
Speaker 1: This picture is, was where--right when I was getting ready to retire from LaGuardia Community College [New York, New York] in 1999, as you can see I was there from '89 [1989] to '99 [1999] and as I mentioned earlier, LaGuardia is one of the most diverse colleges and the, the two balls this one and this one it shows the world.  We have people from eighty countries, spoke about 120 languages, so that represents the world and of course the apple, New York City [New York, New York], in--LaGuardia is in Queens, New York [New York] so that's the, that's the apple and the other part also shows the diversity of the college.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: All right this picture was taken in 1976 when I became the vice president of the Community College of Baltimore [sic. County Community College, Baltimore County, Maryland] and of course I'm on my left.  I'm sitting down on the left with my wife Joan [Messalina Bowen] in the middle and the little girl on her left that's my daughter Rachel [Bowen].  She now is the director of marketing for the American Bar Association, so you can see that's quite some time ago.  Standing behind me is my son Ray [Raymond C. Bowen, III], Ray III actually and he's president of his computer, computer company [Exceptional Software Strategies, Inc., Linthicum Heights, Maryland], rather large one, probably the largest or second largest computer firm which is headed by an African American, and next to Raymond is daughter Rebecca [Bowen] who works for the [U.S.] Department of Justice in, at Fort Meade, Maryland and next to her is my daughter Ruth [Bowen] who also works for the Department of Justice and she works out of [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: What about the year of this picture?
Speaker 1: That was taken in 1976.
Speaker 2: Ok.
Speaker 1: All right, that's, that's a picture of my grandmother [Virginia Saxon (ph.)] and grandfather [Earl Cobb] which taken I believe it was 1914 in New Haven, Connecticut and my grandfather, Earl--Saxon, and Virginia was his wife, those are my mother's [Lucille Cobb Bowen] parents.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That, this was taken around maybe 1985 and I--the person to my right is the administrative assistant to the mayor of Shelby County [Tennessee].  That's the mayor [Richard Hackett] to my left and the other fellow is the president of the State Technical Institute in [sic. at] Memphis [later, Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: See if the--I don't know if I should take these out or not let me see what they look like.
Speaker 1: You want both of them?
Speaker 2: No, just, just the bottom one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: I am, I am there with president.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's the cardinal, the cardinal from New York and President [Josephine] Davis of York College  in Queens, New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Tell me what year is this?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: No that's all right, I don't know half the people in there.
Speaker 2: Okay, what about this one?
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad I lost weight since I retired.  I was a heavy dude.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you were bigger then (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right, the, the person to my left is she's the president of Dr. Carolyn Williams, she's the president of Bronx Community College [New York, New York] and next to her is the chancellor of City University [of New York, New York, New York], Christopher, Christoph Kimmich and next to him is the president of York College, King [ph.].
Speaker 2: (Unclear) What about these?
Speaker 1: Naw'.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, this one?
Speaker 1: Let me see, I'm trying to think of who this guy is.  No, I don't remember, 'cause you know if I can't identify 'em--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, that's Joan and I forget her name but she was, she was the governor's wife, it's hard to remember so you know its--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes and the president here and [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton and Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was around '97 [1997], 1997 Isaac Hayes and I received an award from the, from one of the kings in Ghana and that was taken in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: I thought it was in Memphis [Tennessee], I would have said Memphis if somebody asked me.
Speaker 1: No, that was in New York.
Speaker 2: Okay, the top one.
Speaker 1: Oh you want the top.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right I was, I was on the, on the board of the American Council on Education [Washington, D.C.] and President Bill Clinton spoke and after his speech he went around greeting all of us.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) I hate to take them out (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, just pull that thing back, can't you?
Speaker 1: Let's see which one do you want, this one?
Speaker 2: No, we don't need this one.
Speaker 1: What about the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, they're all the same, thought it was some different ones.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Are you in that one?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  No, I don't even know what that is, oh yeah, let me see, I know what that is.  These are, all right, these are all of the black community college presidents in the United States.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is.
Speaker 1: That can't be all of 'em?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all of 'em.  There weren't that many.  We didn't have that many.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Watson] in this one?
Speaker 2: No, that was, no the other guy was Ron [Ronald J.] Temple that's who I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: Ron Temple, I remember him.
Speaker 2: Ron Temple he was the president [of Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] at that time.
Speaker 1: Right, [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates should be in this one too?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Harold Pate should be, where, where was this shot?
Speaker 2: This, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s] or '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: No, it was in the '90s [1990s]. It was in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Harold Pates should be on this one from Chicago [Illinois] and [HistoryMaker] Zerrie [D.] Campbell and.
Speaker 2: No, Zerrie wasn't in, that was before Zerrie was president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, then we'll (unclear) just say who it is and we don't have to remember all of them.
Speaker 2: All right that is called the [National] Council on Black American Affairs [NCBAA] and it is all of the African community college presidents, part of that organization.  I don't remember where we were meeting, but that's who it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is about what year?
Speaker 2: I would say that was about the early '90s [1990s].
Story_ID: 197084
Speaker 1: That is, one of the--the king of Ghana and that is the same night that [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes and I got the award, so it's you know it's related to that other picture of Ike.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the award?
Speaker 1: Um?
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, (unclear) another stage in life.  That skinny tie that looks so much like a '60s [1960s] picture or '61 [1961], remember when we were wearing those real skinny ties, those continental suits?
Speaker 1: That was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was, that's.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, that was 19--that was taken in 1952 that's when I--
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: That's, that's when I graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], yeah I wanna say the (unclear) ties.
Speaker 1: Skinny ties (laughter) you can tell by the ties?
Speaker 2: They came back 'cause they--I remember in the '60s [1960s].  They must've come back, 1952.
Speaker 1: That's 1952.
Speaker 2: Yes, '52 [1952] when I graduated from [James] Hillhouse [Comprehensive] High School [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Yeah here it is, this, up--It fell out.
Speaker 2: Oh, it sure did.  I was looking for it (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: No we don't need this, I don't even know these.
Speaker 1: News clippings don't work out that well (unclear), but.
Speaker 2: Do you know Art [Arthur] [E.] Thomas?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, he's president at Central [State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he is a friend at (unclear) state--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: We, we use to play basketball together every day.
Speaker 2: Aw, Art's crazy, that is a crazy joker there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're right, that's him, Arthur E. Thomas.
Speaker 2: Who [HistoryMaker Reverend] Calvin [O.] Pressley?
Speaker 1: Oh that's, that's not you.
Speaker 2: No that's Calvin Pressley.  That's, he is I think, where did I hear his name recently?  Isn't he on the board of your organization [The HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: He might be, there's a, I know we interviewed him (unclear).
Speaker 2: I think the only other picture you need is that baby one, remember that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You had it someplace.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) babies.
Speaker 2: 'Cause all those others are pretty much the same.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Maybe it was on the back of one of those other ones.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) on the first.  It's always so much fun to see, people love babies (laughter).
Speaker 2: That there is something else.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: All right, that was taken in 1935 when I was one year old (laughter).
