Story_ID: 631322
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers today, and our inter- our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Larry D. Bailey [HistoryMaker Larry Bailey], Larry, L-A-R-R-Y, and the last named is spelled B-A-I-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Now did your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the middle initial is D.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Did your parents name you Lawrence or--?
Speaker 2: No, my real name is Larry.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: As my mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] has had to correct people throughout my life when they would send my report card home with Lawrence.
Speaker 1: And D stands for?
Speaker 2: Donovan, D-O-N-O-V-A-N.  I was hoping you weren't going to ask me that.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah.  Well you, you're looking at another Larry who just got named Larry.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Your name is Larry too, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Yes sir, no, not Lawrence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, mine is Larry.
Speaker 1: So, and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 11th, 1950, Sanford, Florida.
Speaker 1: Sanford, S-A-N-F-O- ?
Speaker 2: F-O-R-D.  You heard of that in the press recently.
Speaker 1: That's, September 11th, that's--that was yesterday.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Happy birthday.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And now, sir what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well I'm retired as a--I was a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers where I retired ten years ago.  I'm a certified public accountant by training.  I currently have a consulting firm under the initials of LDB Consulting [LDB Consulting, Inc., Washington, D.C.] where I'm the president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 12th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C.  You want--1615 L Street Northwest.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you.
Story_ID: 631323
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they don't require anything other than a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well I just went vegetarian so I would say probably right now, nothing in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall and the spring.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wow, probably Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite, well a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: God's gift to you, the talents and the skills He give t- gives to you.  Your gift to God is what you do with them.
Story_ID: 631324
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Richard Bailey] side.  We'll start with your mother's side first and then when we do both sides, we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Inez, I-N-E-Z, Kendrick, Bailey [Inez Kendrick Bailey].
Speaker 1: Kendrick is--?
Speaker 2: K-E-N-D-R-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is January 27th, 1931, Sanford, Florida.
Speaker 1: All right, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side and what were they doing?  And are there any stories on that side?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's side of the family, I can go back to two great-grandparents that I knew up until the time my last great-grandparent on that side passed when I was forty-one.  So I knew my great-grandfather, my maternal great-grandfather very well.  I, I knew--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: James Martin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And my paternal great-grandmother was Mary Lou Singletary [Mary Lou Singletary Kendrick (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Paternal?
Speaker 2: Paternal.
Speaker 1: Paternal.
Speaker 2: I mean, I'm sorry--it was my mother's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was my mother's father's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You can fix that up okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes sir.
Speaker 2: The great-grandfather was my mother's, mother's father.
Speaker 1: So James Martin was--
Speaker 2: James Martin was my mother's, mother's father.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) grandfather--James Martin was the great-grand--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: That was my mother's--yeah.
Speaker 1: And the great-grandmother, her name--?
Speaker 2: Her, her--my great-grandmother was Mary Lou Singletary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my grandfather's mother.
Speaker 1: Singletary, spelled like Mike Singletary?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  And okay, now how far do we--does that take us back to?  What, does that take us back to the 19th century?
Speaker 2: They were, yes.  Yes, they were all born in the 1800s, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now had they--were they born after emancipation?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were both.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that survive in the family of slavery or the emancipation (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, on my--probably more so that I know about on my great-grandmother's side because we have a family reunion which, every two years, which we just had in July of this year, where they talk about her father and grandfathers.  And my grandfather has told me stories about them so they would date back to slavery, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were actually--
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything that was said about their--?
Speaker 2: Well not--the stories I hear are, are primarily about how you know they all helped raise my grandfather.  They were down in De Soto, Georgia with--right outside of Americus [Georgia].  No my grandmother, that was my, yeah De Soto, Georgia down by Americus and Plains, Georgia is where they were from.
Speaker 1: Home of Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Plains yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And then they, they all moved to Sanford I think in the early 1900s, 1920.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about why they moved?
Speaker 2: Well I think my, my grandfather went down there and found work and he came back and got my grandmother.  Her husband had passed away and he came back and got my grandmother and his younger siblings and brought them to Sanford.
Speaker 1: Now what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Jessie Kendrick, Jessie Lee Kendrick, Sr. [Jessie Kendrick, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mindell Kendrick, Mindell Martin Kendrick.
Speaker 1: M-E-N-D-E-L?
Speaker 2: Yep--M-I-N-D-E-L [sic.].
Speaker 1: M-I-N, okay.
Story_ID: 631325
Speaker 1: Any other stories about that, about life down in Florida in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it was those typical stories of my [maternal] grandfather [Jessie Kendrick, Sr.] working, driving a bus to pick up crews to work in the fields down in Florida, the celery fields for the most part.  He was the guy that would go by, pick up the crews either on a bus or a truck for the good people to go pick the oranges and pick the celery back in those days.
Speaker 1: Did he have like a responsibility of managing the--?
Speaker 2: Well I guess he picked them up.  I was very small.  I mean I, I left there [Sanford, Florida] when I was four years old I think.  So I don't have--other than the stories of going back in the summer but I knew that's what he, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, mostly celery pickers (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did your mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: They grew up on a farm that my grandfather managed for someone else originally and then they actually moved off of the farm I think when she was seventeen, sixteen or seventeen years old.  And they you know, my grandfather built a house that's still down there now.  And so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you mother, did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Just how they were a close, very close family and, and the things that she did as a girl, church of course surrounded their lives and was the centerpiece of their lives growing up for not only she and her, her brothers and sisters but all of us.  When we would go back to Florida for whatever, you know, we, our lives centered around the church because my grandmother's [Mindell Martin Kendrick] life centered around the church.
Speaker 1: Now, any clergy in the family?
Speaker 2: I have a younger cousin who has just gone into the ministry in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what denomination, what--and--?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know the name of the church?
Speaker 2: No I don't.  No I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 631326
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] share with you what her aspirations were you know when she was a youth (unclear) you know--
Speaker 2: Well I think growing up you know, she probably wanted to do things that most kids wanted to do, make a better life for herself.  But she got married and they started having a family.  My father [Richard Bailey] was in the [U.S.] military and they were young so you know, we stayed with my [maternal] grandparents [Mindell Martin Kendrick and Jessie Kendrick, Sr.] when my father went out to sea.  And then eventually you know, as my sister [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] and I were older we both moved back with my father to--and my mother to first, Virginia Beach, Virginia for a short while then to Washington, D.C. and spent most of our life here, went back to Virginia Beach, Virginia once my father was in the [U.S.] Navy.  And he was a jet mechanic so he was out at sea quite a bit back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to get to him in a second but I just wanted to make sure I covered the bases on your mother 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --sometimes people wanted to be a teacher, a nurse or something you know else.  You know they want to be an entertainer or whatever.  I just don't know.
Speaker 2: No I don't think--
Speaker 1: See now I don't know, you know so that's why I ask the question--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --like you know what--did she share any aspirations?  Like, "When I was young, I wanted to do this."
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did she have a chance to go to school and finish high school or--?
Speaker 2: Oh she, yeah.  My mother, my mother finished high school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she finished high school.  And did she have a chance to do any college?
Speaker 2: She went to college for one year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did she go?
Speaker 2: She went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that kind of indicates to me that she had some kind of professional aspiration.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She was, she was bright back in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But she only went one year.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but she didn't have an aim for what she wanted to--?
Speaker 2: Well I, you know I don't know.  I mean she may have wanted to be a teacher, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 631327
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me go to your father now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Richard Nelson Bailey [Richard Bailey], N-E-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 29th, 1929.
Speaker 1: And--okay and all right.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was actually born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But only stayed there, I don't think he was a year old they moved to Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was raised in Richmond?
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's mother and it was--my father's mother was Jeanette Bailey [Jeanette Dilworth Bailey] and my--his father's name was Russell Bailey.  My grandmother was a nurse.  My grandfather died when, at a very early age and I can't remember exactly what he did but I was, I was very young when he passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories in the family about once again about, you know that go all the way back to slavery or emancipation?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I knew, I knew his--my grandmother's mother and father also--so they were alive.  But they didn't live as long as the people on my mother's side of the family.  I think they were in their late seventies when they passed away, James [William James Dilworth] and Mary Dilworth who, who were--both lived in Richmond.  My grandfather was, my great-grandfather I think worked on, as a porter on the train.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my great-grandmother, I don't remember her working any years but like I said I was young when they passed away.
Speaker 1: Sounds like they were probably born in the 1880s?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah definitely, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did they share any stories with you about life in Richmond?
Speaker 2: I would have been so young that, don't remember.  But we used to, we used to go to Richmond on the weekends you know sometimes because we lived in Washington [D.C.], we'd drive to Richmond and spend time with my father's parents.  But no stories that I can remember, particular stories about anything you know.  I remember going through the city and watching the people demonstrating to integrate the movies back in those days because Richmond was totally segregated back in those days.  This was--well most places in the South, this was in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And even in the North.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, let's see here.  Now is there a reason--now why was your father born in New York, was--what--?
Speaker 2: That's where they were living at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so your grandfather was working and living in New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 631328
Speaker 1: So what did your father [Richard Bailey] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: He had to work hard (laughter).  I think he had three jobs when he was fifteen years old, and he dropped out of school and went in the [U.S.] Navy at seventeen, eighteen and eventually got his high school equivalent.  And--
Speaker 1: Now did he come from a large family?
Speaker 2: Eight, I think eight or nine.  My mother's [Inez Kendrick Bailey] family was larger.  There were ten of them.
Speaker 1: So your father's in the Navy during World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: No, he would have been Korea.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Korea.
Speaker 1: Oh Korean, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Korea.
Speaker 1: That's right, '31 [1931].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Korean War.  Did he serve in the Pacific?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure whether he actually served the Pacific.  He may have back in those days.  But most of the time that I remember from when you know I was alive, he was in the Atlantic, in the, in--well in the [U.S.] Atlantic Fleet and most of the time they were over in the Mediterranean.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about the Navy?
Speaker 2: Well you know, yeah I mean we lived it.  I mean you know 'cause we, we lived on--we were at Oceana naval station [Naval Air Station Oceana, Virginia Beach, Virginia] in 1962 and that was during the Cuban Missile Crisis which was a very scary time for everybody.  My father was out at sea and it's a time that you know they don't really talk about that much now (background noise). But they all knew how close we came to war at that point in time.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah.  It was 1962.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Cuban Missile Crisis.
Speaker 2: Very scary time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father made the Navy a career?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father did twenty years active duty and then when he retired they wanted him to stay around afterwards, after a year he was away.  And he came back and I think he did another twenty or twenty-five as a civilian jet mechanic testing jet engines for the Navy.
Speaker 1: So he was a jet mechanic in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was one of the first African American jet mechanics in the Navy.
Speaker 1: That's a--okay.  So did the Navy train him, you know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes, yes, trained him.  The funny story is my father can fix anything in a car and I just barely know how to put the key in to start it up.  So--
Speaker 1: Because I think that whole generation knew how to do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah they knew how to do all that stuff, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay so now what is the--is there a--oh, what was your father's rank in the, in the Navy?  I guess he was--
Speaker 2: He was a first class, first class petty officer, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I just figured, so.
Story_ID: 631329
Speaker 1: Now is there a story, I know there must be a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] tells me my father [Richard Bailey] was walking, cutting, taking a short cut through their yard and he saw my mother 'cause it was a naval base [Naval Air Station Sanford] in Sanford [Florida] and he saw my mother and they met, and they got married.
Speaker 1: It's just that quick?  I mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But so they met and he was cutting through the yard and that's how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then eventually they--
Speaker 2: Got married.
Speaker 1: How long was it after that that they got married?
Speaker 2: I don't have--
Speaker 1: You don't know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right, so did they meet what in the--well you say that--when did they get married?
Speaker 2: They got married in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They've been married almost sixty-one years now.
Story_ID: 631330
Speaker 1: Now when you, you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their habits, their looks, the way they--way they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: A little bit of both.  Yeah, a lot of it's on my mother's side of the family.  But I think I've picked up a little bit from both of them.  A lot of the personality is probably my mom [Inez Kendrick Bailey].  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one sister.
Speaker 1: One sister.  Okay and is she younger than you?
Speaker 2: She's younger than I am, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and what's her name?
Speaker 2: Brenda.  Brenda Bail- Brenda Elaine Carpenter [Brenda Bailey Carpenter].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you all grew up together so in the household that you grew up in was it just your mother and father [Richard Bailey] and you and your sister or did relative, other relatives live with you?
Speaker 2: It was just, just us, the family yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you grew up basically in D.C?
Speaker 2: D.C., yeah.
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: We lived in Virginia Beach [Virginia] like I said once, you know.  And I, I--the first four years of my life I lived in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay so you started off in Sanford, Florida?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And at age four--
Speaker 2: Four or five but I say--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother says four.  I thought it was five but I came--I was in the first grade [at James A. Garfield Elementary School] in D.C.  I know that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved from Sanford to Virginia Beach.
Speaker 2: Right just for a short period of time then we came to, to D.C.
Speaker 1: Into D.C.  And you grew up in Southeast D.C., right?
Speaker 2: Southeast D.C., and, and, and then my parents in the '60s [1960s] moved into Prince George's County [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you go to high school in Prince George's County?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes [at Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 631331
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I guess the memory that sticks with me mostly as a child was when I was twelve years old, the Cuban Missile Crisis.  It was a very, very scary time.  And the irony of it was that we were living in Oceana, Oceana naval station [Naval Air Station Oceana, Virginia Beach, Virginia], the military housing and the irony of it was that the school bus came on the base and picked up the black kids and took us to one school and picked up the white kids and took them to another school because the schools were totally segregated down there.  And then here we--our fathers were in the [U.S.] military you know serving our country and we were going to segregated schools.  But I'll tell you the funny thing about that story, one of my clients that I served for many, many years and, and was a fellow by, gentleman by the name of Admiral George Anderson [George W. Anderson, Jr.].  Admiral Anderson was a chief of naval operations during the Cuban Missile Crisis and he was the guy who was commanding and calling the signals of the blockade around Cuba.  So I thought that was very ironic that here I was you know, going to school down there and the schools were segregated and when I you know started my professional career he was one of the first clients I ever worked on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a white guy (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I would guess in those days, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, yeah the military had been integrated since 1948.
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948], right.
Speaker 1: And almost twenty years later you know, or fifteen years later, the State of Virginia is still segregated.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Story_ID: 631332
Speaker 1: Considering all the places you lived and then, you know growing up in the [U.S.] Navy, what are some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the sights, when you're a kid you know, you don't really identify I think sights.  You, you notice things that I think have an impact on you.  I, I noticed from my early days in, in school, in elementary school, I was in the second grade and this was back in the days before the helicopters brought the president and national leaders in from Andrews Air Force Base [Joint Base Andrews, Maryland].  And I was attending Garfield Elementary School [James A. Garfield Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] which is on Alabama Avenue and Nikita Khrushchev came to the United States.  And he and Dwight Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] came down Suitland Parkway in an open car is how far back it was, and they let all of us out of school to line the parkway to greet Khrushchev when he came to the United States, and I remember that.  It was funny because you know back in those days in the '50s [1950s] we used to have the air raids when at two o'clock the sound would go off and you'd have to orderly go into the, into the, into the auditorium and get under the desk, under the chairs.  That was the way we practiced air raids back in those days.  And then here the head of the Soviet Union [Russia] came and we went out to honor him and I think he was quite moved by that.  But then that was the same year I think he went to the UN [United Nations] and pounded on, on the tables and said, "We will bury you."  So I, I always remember that.  I was seven years old I think when that, when that happened.
Speaker 1: Now that's worth considering for a moment 'cause here's--considering the times we live in today--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --twenty twelve [2012].  This is twelve--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --eleven years after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], the attack on the World Trade Center [New York, New York] and no one today--in fact in 1964, we couldn't imagine the president riding in an open car--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But in 1960 or so?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], yeah '57 [1957]--
Speaker 2: You had our president and the head of the Soviet Union in the same car.
Speaker 1: The, yeah the biggest enemy of the U.S.A.--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was Nikita Khrushchev.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And he's in a car with Dwight Eisenhower.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Open car coming--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --down the street--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and kids could wave at him.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was '57 [1957] or '58 [1958].  I think it was '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're probably right.  Yeah, cause he was out by '60 [1960].  When I said '60 [1960], that was the year of the election.
Speaker 2: Well Eisenhower was out in '60 [1960], right,
Speaker 1: Yeah and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Khrushchev was still there.
Speaker 1: --but he was still president 'til--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the following year.
Speaker 1: --that January of '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But he, but that's, yeah that's about right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Khrushchev was still head of the Soviet Union when the Cuban Missile Crisis came, came along.
Speaker 1: That was the tour where Khrushchev came and he went out to Disney.  He wanted to go to Disneyland [Anaheim, California].  They wouldn't let him go I think.  That's--I believe, yeah.  Any rate, okay any other sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, 1968 when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  I mean you know to, to be--at that time we were living out in Prince George's County [Maryland] and we could see the smoke from the city burning.
Speaker 1: Now you would have been seventeen.
Speaker 2: No, I was--I was seventeen, almost eighteen.  Yeah, it was my senior year in high school [Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland].  And then later on that summer is when the people had the March on Washington and you had Resurrection City down, you know we came down to look at the people and pitched the tents and stuff like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Poor People's Campaign.
Speaker 2: And then you know of course 2011--I mean 2001, I was out in northern Virginia and driving back and I heard that a plane had hit the World Trade Center and I said to myself, that is not--there's no way in the world a U.S. pilot would have flown a plane into the World--and I kind of knew something was there.  And by the time I got back home, got back downtown I saw what was happening on television and then shortly thereafter the plane hit the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].  So, of course, I mean that, that will always live with me you know, see--watch those towers tumble on television, you know.
Speaker 1: And that was your birthday too?
Speaker 2: It's my birthday, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, that was my birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 631333
Speaker 1: Growing up, now what was--now, I know you know the Southeast side [Washington, D.C.].  We were talking about that before, before the interview.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the Southeast side like, sights, sounds, smells?  What was going on over there?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were black people doing?
Speaker 2: --you know it's, it's interesting when you think about it because although Southeast was you know not considered uptown, Northwest [Washington, D.C.] or you know, we were--but everybody over there was, were, they were people that went to work every day, you know kids were obedient.  You didn't see some of the stuff going on that you see now.  I mean no one was getting shot you know and the way it is now that you see things happening.  But, because I think we had, there was--I think the parents were more involved with their kids.  I mean we--my parents [Inez Kendrick Bailey and Richard Bailey] knew where I was at all times.  I knew had to be home at a certain time and I think all the other kids in the neighborhood knew that.  I mean you know, so to me it wasn't that much of a different than when I was on a military base, military housing.  I mean you know there was, there was discipline, you know.  There was you know not the same type of discipline so to speak, but there was still discipline in the home and, and everyone was very obedient.  I mean you know when I--you respected your elders.  So it, it wasn't like what you see I think in some of the inner city neighborhoods now where you know, it's, it's--I think chaotic is not the right word but I think that it's--you don't see people striving I think to--the way we were all you know basically trying to, trying to do the right thing and our parents were very involved in what we do.  But I think, I think it's a different time.  I think people have different pressures on them now and, and it's just a different time.  And--but you know I think, I think some of those neighbors get a bad rap now because I think people are still trying to do better, do better for their children and I just think that sometimes you just get just overwhelmed with you know the thought of trying to, to, to make life better for yourself.
Speaker 1: So would you say it's a lot different now than it was when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I think that, I think certain of the neighborhoods are, are different now but you know I mean I still go back into some of the neighborhoods.  Not--I haven't--don't go back as much as I used to but I mean not my neighborhood but over in one of the other public housing projects I spent a lot of time over--many, many years ago I actually had a Little League baseball team over there because I sponsored a team and bought all the equipment and everything for the little kids to-'cause you know, black kids had just stopped playing baseball in the inner city.  I grew up playing baseball and I'll never forget the first day that we went to practice, I had gone and, and bought bats and balls and ordered the uniforms and the first day we get out there no one had a glove.  And back when I was growing up no matter how poor you were, you had a glove.  Everybody had a baseball glove.  And so I went back to the store and bought the gloves and then you had to show the kids which hand to put them on.  They didn't know.  And so we had to teach them the sport.  But by the middle of the summer I mean I watched them pulling off double plays.  I mean it was so like--you know it said to me, don't tell me you can't teach kids.  I mean you know, you just got to take the time and teach 'em.
Story_ID: 631334
Speaker 1: Now so when, when you were growing up did you play baseball?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you play in the Little League?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I was living in Virginia Beach [Virginia] the Little League was segregated, and so I couldn't play in, in Little League.  But we had our own leagues for the different schools that we went to down in Princess Anne County [Virginia].  So I went to Seatack Elementary School [Virginia Beach, Virginia] and Seatack had a league and a team and we played against the other all-black teams, black schools down in that area.  And then when I came, when we moved to Washington [D.C.], I played of course for the junior high school team [at Maryland Park Junior High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] and then my high school team [at Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland].  I was captain on my high school team in 1968.
Speaker 1: Now you were playing in Virginia Beach when you weren't even--you were about six, right?  You were--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That, this was--we went back to Virginia Beach--
Speaker 1: Okay, you went back?
Speaker 2: --in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah we went back in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were ten years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--we went back, I was nine.  I turned ten later that year.  So I was there for the rest of the fourth grade, all the fifth grade, sixth grade and seventh grade and--yeah.
Speaker 1: So you moved around quite a bit then (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I mean a lot of the kids that were in the [U.S.] military moved around a lot more than we did.  I mean we, we went there for those three years but for the most part I was here in D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was in D.C. first, second, third, most of the fourth grade year [at James A. Garfield Elementary School] then I came back and was here eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade.  So I was mostly here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--
Story_ID: 631335
Speaker 1: What school did you start at?
Speaker 2: I started out at Garfield Elementary School [James A. Garfield Elementary School] here in Southeast Washington [D.C.] on Alabama Avenue.
Speaker 1: Now this is a mostly black school?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was all black.
Speaker 1: All black, okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't think that was by the segregation thing.  I mean but I, because that was the neighborhood school.
Speaker 1: So the neighborhood was all black.  Now what about the teachers?
Speaker 2: The teachers I think were all black, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so they're some designs in here, in this?
Speaker 2: Well you know it's really funny, I, I don't think I had a, a white teacher until I got to the eighth grade when I went to Maryland Park Junior High School [Capitol Heights, Maryland].  But I mean I, I must say that all my teachers were as interested in my education as--whether they were black or white.  I, I, I had some great teachers you know in elementary school, junior high school and, and they were of all races and ethnicities.  And I, I never had a teacher that, that I felt did not care about me.
Story_ID: 631336
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started off at Garfield Elementary School [James A. Garfield Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], most of your teachers are--were, well all of the teachers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teachers were black, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you said, and, and the principal, everybody, huh?
Speaker 2: Principal yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Principal was Ms. Alarcon [Hilda K. Alarcon], I still remember her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember how you spell Ms. Alarcon.
Speaker 1: (Pronunciation) Alarcon?
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Alarcon.  I know she passed away.
Speaker 1: Alarcon.
Speaker 2: Alarcon, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alarcon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That sounds--I'll try to write it phonetically.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And Ms. Bionchi [ph.] was my fourth grade teacher.  I had--
Speaker 1: Bionchi?
Speaker 2: Bionchi.
Speaker 1: Is this a black woman?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  My first--I remember Ms. Barclay [ph.] was my third grade teacher.  I think my second grade teacher was--one--first grade was--one of them was, I think Ms. Green [ph.] was my first grade teacher and Ms. Pitts [ph.] was my second grade teacher or vice versa.  And then fourth grade when I went to Virginia Beach [Seatack Elementary School, Virginia Beach, Virginia] it was Ms. Corporal [ph.], fifth grade was Ms. Freeman [ph.], sixth grade it was Mr. Williams [ph.], seventh grade, it was Mr. Skinner [ph.].  My teachers were, they were good.  And then I came to Maryland Park [Maryland Park Junior High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] in eighth grade.  I'll never forget my homeroom teacher was a fellow by the name of Mr. St. Clair [ph.] I think his name was.  He had, you know--I remember all my teachers for the most part.  They--I--
Speaker 2: That's all the grade schools one.  And now did you have a favorite teacher of all these teachers or--?
Speaker 1: Not--well you know there was, there were some teachers that fit different roles in my life.  You know there were, there was--Mr. Skinner and Mr. Williams in like sixth and seventh grade, they were not only our teachers but they--'cause you changed classes in the seventh grade.  And Mr. Skinner and Mr. Williams were involved with the sports for the most part.  And you know my dad [Richard Bailey] was gone because he was at sea a lot and these men were father figures to me while my father was not there and not only to me but all the other boys in the school.  I mean this was back in the day where you could still you know exercise corporal punishment so the switches and the paddles were, were used.  But I mean and then Ms. Wilson [ph.] and Ms. Freeman I mean, I never forget the--beautiful ladies, I'll never forget you know as my--they were just beautiful women.  And they were very stern (laughter) but they were beautiful women, and they were great teachers.
Story_ID: 631337
Speaker 1: Now did you like, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I liked school.  Yeah, yeah I liked school.
Speaker 1: Did you have a fa- a favorite subject or activity at school?
Speaker 2: Well when I was, when I was in, in my earlier years I loved history; that was my favorite class.  And I always loved history, particularly world history.  I remember, I still remember my tenth grade world history, her name was Irene De McCaulis [ph.] at Central High School [Capitol Heights, Maryland], who was just a great teacher, pushed me.  Ms. Photos [ph.] was my teacher in eleventh grade who pushed me in history and as much as--she probably--if--I don't know if she's alive but Ms. Perkins [ph.] was my French teacher.  She was always on me because you know I, I--things kind of came easily to me, very easy to me.  And Ms. Perkins was my French teacher.  And she used to always listen in on me and I would know when--I could hear when she was listening.  I wouldn't repeat until she got there but she was a great teacher.  As a matter of fact when I went to college I, I, I took a, an advanced test and I actually got twelve, twelve hours of college credit for French when I went to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right--
Speaker 2: And then there were, in high school even there were guys, men who again they--these men weren't African Americans but they were my high school baseball coach and my high school basketball coach.  Coach Dave Lefcourt [ph.] when high school was a big influence on my life and the Coach O'Brien, Bob O'Brien [Robert O'Brien] was our basketball coach and cross country coach.  And these guys all had a big influence on my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you played basketball in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: I didn't play much but I was on the team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I had a bad habit of shooting all the time.
Speaker 1: Now did you run point, were you the point guard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We had good basketball teams.  We had two good guys on the team.
Speaker 1: Okay, did--what about baseball?  What position did you play?
Speaker 2: Well I played second base, and then when my junior and senior year I played third base.  But in my senior year, I also played some short stop.  But mostly I was a third baseman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you started off at Garfield School [James A. Garfield Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then you all moved?
Speaker 2: And I went to Seatack Elementary School which is in Virginia Beach [Virginia].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-E-A-T-A-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's in Virginia Beach, okay.  But you were there you said only--?
Speaker 2: I was there for the last three months of fourth grade and then sixth, seventh--fifth, sixth and seventh grade I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you did eighth grade at--?
Speaker 2: Eighth and ninth grade at Maryland Park Junior High School, which is out in Prince George's County [Maryland].  And then I did my tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade at Central High School, which is out in Prince George's County.
Story_ID: 631338
Speaker 1: What did you like to do growing up?  I mean what--how would you spend your time?  Did you have to work (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I worked in, in my junior year in high school [Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] I worked.  My very first job was at McDonald's so whenever I see that commercial with the McDonald's--McDonald's gave me my very first job.  And it was actually a fellow who was the manager of that store, Mr. John Knight [ph.] who was the person who took an interest in me.  And you know, I worked there in my junior--between my junior, senior year and between my senior year before I went off to college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I worked at McDonald's.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well how did you spend your free time when you were a little kid growing up then?
Speaker 2: Well I--mostly I played a lot of sports.  I mean sports dominated a lot.  On Sunday of course where--church, Sunday school and church services after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of your church and--?
Speaker 2: Well we went to the--on the base we went to the base church.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they interdenominational kind of a church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, interdenominational, yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: On the [U.S.] military base, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now in Southeast D.C. [Washington, D.C.], did you go to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well we went to various churches there.  We didn't really have a church per se.  My parents [Inez Kendrick Bailey and Richard Bailey] now if you say we had a family church it's Highland Baptist church [First Baptist Church of Highland Park] out in--in Prince George's County [Maryland] is where my parents go.  You know and our family church was always St. Matthews Missionary Baptist Church in Sanford, Florida where my father--my [maternal] grandfather [Jessie Kendrick, Sr.] used to say my grandmother [Mindell Martin Kendrick] should have a bed there because when their doors was open she was there.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you like to read?
Speaker 2: Yes, I liked to read.  You know when I was a little kid my mother starting reading to my sister [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] and I when we were very young so we were always you know reading and, and, and when--taught the importance of reading.  I was different though.  I didn't like to read a lot of books.  I mean even as a young kid I liked to read magazines.  I liked to read about current events, you know grew up reading sports magazine, Life magazine, Ebony you know, Jet.  I always was interested in what was going on out in the world.  And you know then when I got older, particularly professionally because my expertise was in tax, you know this was all I read, you know tax journals, tax letters and everything.  So every now and then I'll pick up a book and if I find one I like, I read it.  I read it very, very fast.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about television and movies and that sort--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I'm not a big movie fan.  I can't sit still that long.  Most of the movies I see are on a plane when I can't go anywhere else.  Television you know when I grew up you know the comedy for mostly that which, you know, which I would look at you know, 'All in the Family,' 'Sanford and Son,' 'The Jeffersons,' you know things that are light, you know.  You know now sometimes I'll watch the news shows but it's hard to get news now.  Everything is opinionated so whether you're watching one of the conservative stations or the liberal stations it's somebody else's opinion.  And when you get to be a certain stage in life and--you know every day I read The Wall Street Journal, not as much as I used to but I still read The Washington Post every morning or whatever paper I am and I read the Financial Times to get the international news.  And you know I'll read the USA Today most days.  So you know I get my news there and so when I--I'm not really interested in someone else's opinion.  I think I can formulate my own opinion so very few times do you get pure news nowadays. In the local stations you still get news but most of the other stations are, I think they're, they're too staged and somebody else's opinion, which I don't really want to hear most of the time.
Story_ID: 631339
Speaker 1: In those days growing up did you, did you, did you watch a lot of news on TV?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, I--for a young kid, yes, I grew up watching you know Walter Cronkite and you know some of the other people that were on the news back in those days.  But I remember Walter Cronkite.  Used to watch Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] every--you know, that wasn't the news but I think I remember The Beatles were on it their first time. I remember when Michael Jack- The Jackson 5 were on there their first time.  I remember those days with--you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't watch a lot of television.  I mean you know you watched some cartoons but I never was a big cartoon fan.
Speaker 1: Now what about music?  Did you have an interest in music growing up (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well you know I listened to the radio.  I listened to the songs and stuff like that but you know was I a big music buff that had a bunch of records?  No.  I had some you know, I you know listened to The Temptations.  You listened to [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and Gladys Knight and The Supremes, Martha and The Vandellas, you know.  And, and you know I always tease the young kids now when I listen to the music they listen to today and what we listened too, I say I wonder if thirty or forty years from now you guys will remember the songs, the words like we remember the songs and the words from the stuff that we listened to?  They swear they will so I don't know.  I'm--yeah, I'm, I'm--(laughter) I don't know either.  But you know I'm sure our parents looked at us when we were coming along the same way, but yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know whether--I mean there was a time I bored with love songs and now I wish they'd come back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 631340
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, okay.  So you're, you're the oldest now in the family?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So yeah, so you were the trendsetter I guess for what was going on in terms of the young people in your household.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, but you didn't really--
Speaker 2: Well it was only my sister [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and, and you know it was--I think my sister and I grew up a little bit differently than each other. But by the time she was a teenager the family had really moved into the suburbs by then and I was off away at college [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  So I don't think she got exposed as much as I did to the inner city as I did, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: And did you have a lot of friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, had a lot of friends.  I mean I, I mean that's part of my nature.  If one of my friends said--told me years ago that it was a gift that just my, my people skills.  I'm the kind of person, my wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] says if I meet you the first time, if I meet you once, the second time I meet you, you're one of my closest friends.  So, no I'm, I'm very outgoing.  I like to talk to people.  I mean I think I like to find out where you're from, you know, what are you doing?  I mean and it's really interesting, I think everybody has something to share no matter who you're talking to.  No matter what the, the person is doing at this particular time, there's always something you can learn from people you know because everybody's got a gift you know and everybody's got a story to tell.
Story_ID: 631341
Speaker 1: You lived through a lot of historic things, you know, incidents.  The, the March on Washington actually came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Did, did you--did your family go (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I'm trying to remember whether we were back then 'cause that was '63 [1963] if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We came back from Virginia Beach [Virginia] in the summer, late summer of '63 [1963] so we may not have even been here.  I just don't--I remember the march but I don't remember whether we were here or not.
Speaker 1: It was in August of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think we--
Speaker 1: --about '63 [1963] so I--
Speaker 2: --we came back in, I think we came back in June or July so we really hadn't gotten settled you know in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that particular point in time but I do remember the march, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we talked about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being assassinated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: And you seeing the flames (unclear)--
Speaker 2: April of '68 [1968], I remember it.  I remember when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: --sixty-three [1963].  I was in junior high school [at Maryland Park Junior High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland], and we had just had basketball practice and, and, and they sent us home.  I was in the eighth grade and practice got cut short because Kennedy had been shot.
Story_ID: 631342
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Inez Kendrick Bailey and Richard Bailey] good--since you became an accountant I think this is an appropriate question to ask I guess--were your parents good money managers?  Did they--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean you know, I think--
Speaker 1: As far as you knew (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all families back in those days to make it through I mean, I--sometimes I tease my parents about how I got through undergrad [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and grad school [at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with the small number of loans I had.  And my parents were never wealthy or--I mean but they made sure that my sister [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] and I had whatever we wanted.  And you know when I went to college, if I wanted to go to college it was--the money was never a major concern of mine, I mean they made it happen.  So to me they were--they're the greatest money managers in the world.  I mean I don't ever remember--I mean there's always things you want as a kid that you're just not going to have.  But I can remember growing up there wasn't anything I needed that I didn't have.  I mean I can't ever remember anything I needed.  And, and a school trip you know, I, I had it.  I mean it was never a question.  And it was you know you go through life just assuming it's there, and my parents, I, I never worried about it, you know.
Story_ID: 631343
Speaker 1: Now in high school did you, did you assume any leadership po- positions in high school?
Speaker 2: Well I was captain of my baseball team, high school baseball team.  And in, in my senior year I was elected captain by the team.  So I'm not sure it was something I went after but I was kind of surprised that I was elected captain.  But--and we were, we had, we had a pretty good baseball teams back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't run for student government or anything like--?
Speaker 2: Nah, no, no.
Speaker 1: And what was the composition of Central--this is Central High School [Capitol Heights, Maryland] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Central High School was very predominantly white back in---
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I came out.  My sister [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] graduated three years later, it was predominantly black.  That was what, what happened in Prince George's County [Maryland] back in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: So where is Central High School in P.G. County?
Speaker 2: It's off Central Avenue.  If you go straight out Central Avenue, not far from the new stadium, it's, it's very close to there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what other little towns out there is it close to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well Central Avenue is--Central High School is in Seat Pleasant, Maryland [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think the--I'm not sure whether they changed some of it from Seat Pleasant now.  Some of that area is called Capitol Heights [Maryland].  I think my mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] and father's [Richard Bailey] post office box is now actually Capitol Heights.  I was watching basketball recently and saw Kevin Durant and they said he was from Capitol Heights and I, I knew he was from that area but you know, but I didn't know that they had changed that whole area out there to Capitol Heights as opposed to Seat Pleasant.  It's still the same thing to me.
Story_ID: 631344
Speaker 1: All right, so in, in high school [at Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] now did you have any--were, were, were you a good mathematician?
Speaker 2: I was okay in math, yeah.  And you know it's really funny, people think that you know they look at you, you're a CPA [certified public accountant], you're good at math.  And I just laugh at them.  I think you have to have good analytical skills, particularly today's environment because you know everybody uses a computer or a calculator.  But you know I've always had very good analytical skills and that's what I think it takes to be a good accountant or a good financial advisor, not math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So young people watching this if they're--they don't have--they're not natural mathematicians, that's not a hindrance?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I mean if you're a mathematician, maybe you're going to be in physics or engineering or something like that.  But you know in, to be in business you have to have good analytical skills.  You have to have good--you know.  And, and one of the things that troubles me now is, is that I don't think you know and even mine are slipping now with the--because of the way you write on your iPads and your BlackBerries.  And your good--the writing skills just aren't what they used to be.  And, but I think you have to have good oral communication skills and, and I think that you know the math skills yeah, I mean you know it's mostly the computer and I think if you have good analytical skills you can find your way around the computer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in terms of just thinking about this now, reflecting back on it, what influenced you in terms of you know developing an interest or some kind of a grounding in business when you were a teenager?  I mean what did you see around you?  Who did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, well--
Speaker 1: I mean you worked at McDonald's, that has to be some--
Speaker 2: Well that was good, but I--be--after my freshman year in college [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I worked for my uncle up in Rochester, New York, my Uncle James [James Smith, Sr.] and my Aunt Emma Smith [ph.], they had a grocery store.  It was called J-E Grocery [J-E Grocery, Inc.] in Rochester, New York. And I went up and worked for a summer there for them in their store.  My uncle was one of these people that you know both of them believed in hard work.  They started out buying a little store and lived in the back room and they kept building and building it.  And the first year I came up there I was mopping the floors, stocking the shelves and it was a good sized grocery store and worked the cash register a little bit.  The second year I came up I was working the cash register and, and in the office a little bit.  And then the last year I came up which was the year before my senior year I actually ran the store.  I was in the office making deposits.  I think it was the first time they ever took a vacation during the summer.  They went away and left me in charge.  So that was my really first exposure to, to the business world.  The true business world, you know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, other than in school and academically but it was the first--and, and it was the first time I ever really knew what it was like and I tell my students this and my staff this, that you know if you finish something, step back and look at it and see, does it make sense?  That way you know if it's right or wrong 'cause I'll never forget, I was filling out a payroll tax report for my uncle or some type of tax report and I looked at the way it was worded and the percentage to me meant a certain number the way to do it.  And so I--and I brought it in to my uncle to look at it was, it was a big number.  And he said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Bailey], but just think about it, if the number was that big, I would be out of business."  And so I had interpreted it wrong and it's, it's something that stuck with me.  And I tell young people you know when they would bring something to me you know and you know when I, when I--as I went--worked my way up through the firm [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KMPG] and I was reviewing other people's work.  And I would say if you would stop and look at this, you would see it makes no sense.  It's wrong.  I learned that from that one experience with my uncle and I've never forgotten it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to think in terms of proportions and what's appropriate--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, what makes sense, does this make sense, okay?  And when you look at it you know--I, I--just recently I was looking at something and a client is selling an asset and he wanted a proof of funds and what they sent us, I just looked at them.  I said, "This, this deal is never going to close.  I mean this number makes no sense.  It makes no sense."  And it didn't make any sense and the transaction never closed.  So, but I learned that from my uncle just step back and look at it, you know.  You know sometimes you can get caught up with trying to get something to, to close and be done that you kind of lose sight of reality.  But you know if you step back and look at it, I think it, it really will, will save you a lot of time, a lot of frustration.
Story_ID: 631345
Speaker 1: Let me go back to high school [Central High School, Capitol Heights, Maryland] for a second.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And get you out of high school.  Now when you were in high school, were you, were you taking--did, did they have you all in tracks?
Speaker 2: Yeah we were in tracks, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you take the college prep track or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took the college prep track.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took the college prep track.
Speaker 1: I was wondering if you took the business courses--?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't have that when I--well when I was in college [sic.], if you were on that track you weren't deemed to be smart in coll- going to college.  That's--business was downplayed.  I mean a lot of these kids that were on that track when to school only half a day and went, they went to jobs, you know.  I remember some of the guys that did that you know they only wanted to work a half day cause they wanted to buy a car.  I'll never forget, you know.  But you know that would never work for me 'cause number one that wasn't what I was interested in.  But more importantly you couldn't be on one of the sports teams and I was always playing some type of ball you know.  So--but no, I was on the college prep course--track.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  Okay.  So when you were approaching graduation, what kind of counseling did you get?
Speaker 2: Well I mean our counselors were you know who wanted to go to college?  Where you wanted to go to college?  You got to realize back in those days every, a lot of it was steering you to the state school.  So a lot of my, my friends were going to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], they were going to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], they were--at that time it was Maryland State [Maryland State College], it's now Maryland Eastern Shore [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland].  And then at the same time there was Frostburg State [Frostburg State College; Frostburg State University, Frostburg, Maryland] which was a teachers college, Towson [Towson University, Towson, Maryland] which was a teachers--I wanted to go away from home.  I knew I did not want to stay home.  And I wanted to go to a school that, that had a diverse background and I wanted to get away from home and that's why I chose Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did--how did Southern Illinois you know come to your attention?
Speaker 2: Well I was going through a bunch of schools and it was Lovejoy's College Guide back in those days.  I was looking at all those schools and Southern Illinois had a great baseball team and I thought I wanted to play baseball and got out there and never played.  But that's really why I was attracted to it.  But it was away.  It was away, it had a mixed population which is what I was looking for.  I was looking for a school that had some diversity in it.  At a very young age I knew that's what I wanted.  And when I first got there, I was like, "Whoa, why did I come here" 'cause I went out there sight unseen.  I'd never been to the campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah now the, the year before you started school, Walt Frazier and the Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they, they, they won the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] in 1967.
Speaker 1: Won NIT, yeah that's right, in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, I was-Walt's just opened a new restaurant [Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine] in New York [New York] and I was in New York at the U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] this past week and I went by the new restaurant with a friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Now did you know anything about that before you went there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew they had won, yeah but--yeah, I knew they had won.
Speaker 1: I think the profile sometimes of schools is raised by their sports you know accomplishments?
Speaker 2: Always is.  Always is, but when I got out there I realized that SIU has a very, very strong academic background.  You know SIU was, from what I was told the way--at the time President Delyte Morris [Delyte W. Morris] built the school he went to the state legislature and he says, you know, "You give me enough money and I will give the kids that don't go to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] a great education at this school," and that's where--that's how Southern was built during his time.
Story_ID: 631346
Speaker 1: I mean I got a great education there.  My--in the school of business I just got a great education.  I mean some professors identified my you know talents at a very early age and, and pushed me and, and you know I, I always teach people, I got the foundation of my business education at Southern Illinois.
Speaker 2: And you--
Speaker 1: Definitely.
Speaker 2: --started off as a business major?
Speaker 1: I started off as a business major but I started off as a management major.  But back in those days everybody had to take a certain number of what was called the core courses and in the core courses were three accounting classes and I did very well in the first accounting classes.  And one of my professors pulled me aside, Dr. Schmidlein.  I understand he just passed away, E.J. Schmidlein [E.J. Schmidlein, Jr.], who--Dr. Schmidlein pulled me aside because I was getting the highest grades in the class and, and he says, "Why are you a management major?"  And he said, "The accounting majors get jobs faster and they make more money." So I said, "Sign me up."  But I really liked accounting from day one and my--so a lot of my friends thought I was weird but I've always liked accounting.  I like the way they taught it at SIU.  They taught accounting not just to learn the debits and the credits but they taught us to understand how each particular transaction impacted a financial statement which is why I think now I'm able to look at a financial statement and really tear it apart because of the way I was taught, you know.  If you have a transaction you understand whether it affects both sides of the balance sheet or whether it affects the balance sheet of the P and L [profit and loss], at the end of the day you know what is the ultimate impact on a financial position?  That's the way we were taught accounting back in those days.
Story_ID: 631347
Speaker 1: How did you like Carbondale [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Carbondale, once I got my feet on the ground as I was telling you the first night I was there and the NBC station signed off and it said, "We're broadcasting stations from, from--," well it's from Paducah, Kentucky, the NBC station was from--but it had broadcasting stations at Monkeys Eyebrow, Kentucky.  I'm like, "Who--where am I?"  Cairo, Illinois was fifty miles away and you know what was going on back in the '60s [1960s] in Cairo, Illinois.  It was a lot of racial stuff going on down there and it was--
Speaker 1: Reverend James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone]?
Speaker 2: Yeah it wasn't far away.  So it was some interesting times back there.  You had the, you had the Black Panther Party very active back in those days down there, the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] was very active, so it was interesting down there.
Speaker 1: Yeah you mentioned earlier and well I didn't really follow up on it.  But you remember watching the members of the, I guess Richmond Improvement Association boycott theaters in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, that's where Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] and all them got this far.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But you know what I tell people all the time, particularly--you know I'm sixty-two years old and one of the things that you look at now is that you try not to--too much impose some of the, the stuff that we went through on the next generation.  While they should be aware of it, but there are certain things that I think you know impact the way we think and how we feel about certain things.  And, and you just try to look at what progress has been made over the years and hopefully the kids pick up on the progress and pick up from that point and move on as opposed to reliving some of that stuff, 'cause sometimes you can, you can transfer some of your anger back there.  And I think those of our generation, my generation in particular, we have to be very careful about that.  And I'll give you an example.  My dad's [Richard Bailey] from Richmond, as I said he grew up--and I remember I was in the banking, financial services group at my firm at the time and I was a manager and we went to Richmond for a, a meeting for the Mid-Atlantic region and it was at the Commonwealth Club [Richmond, Virginia].  And so anyone who grew in Richmond knows that the Commonwealth Club's history, African Americans were not allowed in there and you weren't even--my father says he had to walk on the other side of the street.  And so when I came home that Sunday I was telling him, I says "Hey, you ever heard of the Commonwealth Club?"  It was one weekend and he says, "Yeah."  And I said, "I went to a meeting there." And he looked at me and he says "You went in the Commonwealth Club?"  So he told me the story.  And, and you know it was like these things happen, you know what I mean?  And, and they are--things have changed, you know.  It's like the story I told you that the school bus came and picked me up and took me to a black school [Seatack Elementary School, Virginia Beach, Virginia] and it took the white kids to a white school and, and by us being [U.S.] military kids, we were aware of the Cuban Missile Crisis.  But I think most of our classmates could--were not aware of it because they were eleven and twelve year old kids, ten--you're not aware of something like this.  But when you're living it because your fathers are not there and everybody's gone and you know what's going on, it's different.  But as I told you the story, I went on to be the financial advisor for the man in the family that commanded the blockade around Cuba [George W. Anderson, Jr.].  So those are the kind of stories you like to remember, you know.  Those are some you don't want to remember but, but there are some good ones too and so that progress is what you try to instill upon the next generation.
Story_ID: 631348
Speaker 1: Carbondale [Illinois], once again though, was a cultural kind of a change for you, I guess?
Speaker 2: It wasn't--I mean you know it was different, but it was a college campus.  So I mean we were all young kids you know so yeah Carbondale was totally different than D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but when you're on a college campus as large as that one was back in those days you know because at that time Edwardsville [Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, Illinois] was not as big as it is now.  It's a major, major institution in its own right in, in Edwardsville now.  But Carbondale [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] was a pretty big, big school and it was self-contained.  The university was self-contained.  I mean you went to class and all your parties were right there and you know you went to class, all your parties were right there, you went to the football games, the basketball games and everything else.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you a member of a fraternity?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now they should have had them there by (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh they had them all.  They had, they had the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], the Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], the Phi Beta Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], they had all the fraternities.  I was just not a fraternity guy.
Speaker 1: Why not?  Well what happened?
Speaker 2: Well just wasn't something that interested me.  And the, the group of guys that I was the closest to, there were a bunch of us from D.C. out there from the D.C. area, we all stuck together.  None of us went to fraternities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None of us pledged.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: We were kind of like in our own little world and I was in the school of business which was pretty demanding.  I mean and back in those days you pledged for three, four months at a time.  You know it wasn't--you know a big difference.  You, you know and, and you know you, when you pledged, you pledged.  And everybody's grades suffered when they pledged and you know I just, I was doing too many other things.
Story_ID: 631349
Speaker 1: Were you a member of, of a black student organization?
Speaker 2: Well yes, myself, and some other people, Tom Nottingham [Thomas Nottingham] who is deceased now founded an organization called Blacks in Business--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  There were not that many black students in the school of business back in those days.  Tom was a marketing major.  I was an accounting major.  There were maybe, you know a few of us in the accounting department, a few in marketing, even fewer in finance.  I don't think too many were in finance.  But we formed this organization I think in my junior or senior year.  Organization is still there right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Still going strong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what kind of activities would you all do?
Speaker 2: Well back in those days it was primarily us getting together to learn about opportunities in the business world.  I think right about that time was when Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] started publishing Black Enterprise.  I think right about that time it was as time they found the, the Congressional Black Caucus started having its foundation weekend.  So just being aware of things like that and, and helping put together events to expose more blacks to professional opportunities and careers in businesses.  So we were doing--I mean we had no budget so yeah, it was--it was primarily an awareness thing.  Like a lot of black organizations that were business related back in you know even in the colleges and, and professionally back in the '70s [1970s] primarily were organizations to make blacks aware of the opportunities in the profession.
Story_ID: 631350
Speaker 1: At the time that you were I guess approaching your senior year [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], you're right, a lot of the--Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] was coming out with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Black Enterprise.  Tony Brown had a strong business with the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'Black Journal'.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think.  But those are the--Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration started the black capitalism.
Speaker 2: Well right.  I mean I tell people all the time, you look back in history you know my friends think I'm crazy when I say you look back in history, Richard Nixon may be perceived as one of the most effective presidents in--that we've had and people look at me like I'm crazy and you look at the things in terms of you know listening to Henry Kissinger to take a look at China.  You look at the [U.S.] Department of Commerce when Maurice Stans, head of the Department of Commerce, looking at the, the programs, a lot of the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] and minority set aside programs were all started during that time for the most part.  And, and so it was--a lot of the stuff that, the economic development, black empowerment were started during the Nixon administration.
Speaker 1: Now did you have political (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Maurice Stans was a CPA [certified public accountant] also.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you have a political affiliation in those days or--?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really.  You know--
Speaker 1: And did your parents [Inez Kendrick Bailey and Richard Bailey] have one?
Speaker 2: I'm sure they did but we never talked about it.
Speaker 1: You all never talked about that?
Speaker 2: No, we never talked about politics.
Speaker 1: So when Nixon ran against John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in 1960, did your parents take any kind of position on it?
Speaker 2: I, I'm sure they did but you can imagine I was ten years old and I was worried about playing baseball and find--trying to figure out what Willie Mays was doing at that particular time.  So no, politics you know never was--I, you know I'm--even now I, I follow politics only to the extent I read the business side of it and the impact on business and I really don't get--I, I make my contributions, there are a few politicians that are--that I, I think the world of but you know.
Story_ID: 631351
Speaker 1: You spent the summers at your uncle's store [J-E Grocery, Inc.] in Rochester [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was when--well between, in my college years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My-two, two of my summers as a teenager I got shipped off to Sanford, Florida (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hanging out with some people my parents [Inez Kendrick Bailey and Richard Bailey] didn't think I should be hanging out with.  So I got shipped down to the [maternal] grandparents [Mindell Martin Kendrick and Jessie Kendrick, Sr.] for the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Really?  So what kind of--did you get in any trouble?
Speaker 2: No, never got in any trouble but they wanted to make sure I didn't get in any.  So--
Speaker 1: What were you friend--were your friends really doing anything wrong or--?
Speaker 2: Not, not compared to what you think of wrong is today.  But maybe hanging out in the pool hall a little bit too much, I was doing, you know.  I liked to shoot pool.  There was a pool hall and you know, and you know a few fights that happened in the neighborhood but nothing like what you see today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they just thought I had too much idle time on my hands and so my mother loves to tell the story about how she shipped me off for those two summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the early '70s [1970s] was a time when businesses started offering--well it was right after the riots they started offering internships to black college students.  There were all kinds of programs that corporations were opening up, the (unclear) and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], everybody, Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  You know I've interviewed I don't know how many people you know, talked about they had applied for a job before the riots and couldn't get in.  And after the rights you saw everybody running through the door, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did you take part in any of those programs, internship programs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not, not during the summertime, summer internships.  I, you know my, my summer internships were working in my uncle's grocery store when I was in college [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].
Story_ID: 631352
Speaker 1: What about when you were on the verge of graduating, would, did you have anything lined up?
Speaker 2: I had some interviews.  Nothing had come along.  I mean I think I interviewed with Monsanto chemical [Monsanto Company] in St. Louis [Missouri], but I knew I wanted to come back home to the East Coast.  And so I actually came home without a job but I was home for like maybe three or four days and I got a call from the Internal Revenue Service which I had signed up before because one of my instructors in, in--when I was in undergrad school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I always liked tax.  You know there was one level tax course which, which was mandatory for everybody and then I took the second one to advanced tax.  I still remember my tax instructor, her name was Dr. Mary, Mary Barron who was just a great instructor and she was the one who really just peaked my interest in tax when I was young.  And I wanted to you know, I pursued a career in tax and, and in my senior year one of my instructors told me the best experience that I could get at an early stage was to go to the IRS and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is 1972--
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972] is when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I started working for the IRS in June or July, I can't remember, in 1972.
Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with any sort of honors or anything?
Speaker 2: No, just graduated (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But your record was good enough to get you a job at the IRS (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 631353
Speaker 1: So, you're working at IRS here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, out in Bailey's Crossroads, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now Bailey's Crossroads in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I used to get that story all the time.  You call someone up and say, "My name is [HistoryMaker] Larry Bailey.  I'm from the Internal Revenue Service and I have your tax return for audit."  "Are you related to the Baileys?"  "No."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Bailey's Crossroads, Virginia, okay.  So what was that experience like working for the IRS?
Speaker 2: Great.  I mean I got some great experience.  I had some guys there again, my supervisors, my on the job trainers were great guys.  Really I got pushed very early on handling some pretty big cases and I, I enjoyed it.  It was a great experience, great--I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some cases?
Speaker 2: Well I mean you know--
Speaker 1: Without naming names, yeah.
Speaker 2: --without naming and being specific it's very difficult.  I mean I have to be very careful about that, what I talk about.  But they were--you know you start with the typical cases, auditing, you know a person's tax return mostly businesses.  You know we were--those of us who had accounting degrees would go out into the field.  We were field agents.  The office auditors were the people that didn't have accounting degrees.  They stayed in the office and you would come in and bring your receipts and stuff like that.  And so I was a, a field agent so I would actually go out to a business and go through the books and records and, and actually you know make sure the tax return was accurate.  So I had a, you know audited a few people with race horses and a couple of gas stations, a couple of doctors, a couple of lawyers, a couple of real estate developers you know, so it was the--it ran the gamut.  I was actually involved with a one criminal investigation so it ran the gamut.
Speaker 1: Now by the time that you, in '72 [1972] when you were going out, when--were people surprised to see a black IRS--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah particularly out in Bailey's Crossroads, Virginia.  And, and even more so when you went down to Front Royal [Virginia] and to Middleburg [Virginia] which is--we covered all that.  Now they have offices all out in those areas but back in those days we went all back down those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  People are often hostile to IRS (unclear).
Speaker 2: And no one was ever hostile to me.  I never had anyone be hostile to me.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: I never had anyone be hostile to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how long did you work for IRS?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two years.
Story_ID: 631354
Speaker 1: So what did you do after IR- IRS [Internal Revenue Service]?
Speaker 2: I went to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I went to Wharton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to, to, to graduate school.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: Prompted me to do that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) sparked the idea?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was actually recruiting at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I was on the recruiting team for the IRS and we were at Hampton recruiting and they had all the recruiters at lunch one day.  And the fellow that sat next to me, his name was Sid Credle [Sid H. Credle], he's now Dr. Sid Credle, dean of the School of Business at Hampton University and he was at, at Cornell [Graduate School of Business and Public Administration; Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management, Ithaca, New York] and he asked me had I ever dis- considered going to graduate school and I said, "Not really."  So he says, "You ought to consider it," and he said, "You should--," he told me about this program called COGB which was Consortium for Graduate Minorities and Business [sic. Consortium for Graduate Study in Management], I think was the name of it.  It was a, a program that was set up to provide scholarships for minority students to go to at that time it was the top tier schools, it was Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], Wharton, Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], I think Columbia [Columbia Business School, New York, New York] was in that group, Cornell of course was in that group.  So it was the top Ivy [Ivy League] schools.  And so you know I said, "What do I have to do?"  And he got me all the information for Cornell and I was--I filled it out.  It just so happened the young lady I was dating at the time, my wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] knows the story 'cause she, she thinks she's a wonderful person, was at Drexel [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And she said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Bailey], if you're going to go to graduate school why don't you go to Wharton?"  And my, my background, I didn't know anything about Wharton and I applied and I got in.  I got accepted.  And then it was a decision 'cause I really liked Sid, I liked the people at Cornell.  And I remember a fellow from Cornell who was from this alumni group around called me up and said, "What other schools are you looking at?"  And I said, "Well I've been accepted to Wharton."  And it was funny because he paused and he said, he said, "My undergraduate degree is from Cornell, my graduate degree, from Cornell, my Ph.D. is from Cornell."  He said, "With your background, accounting and what you've done, you would be better off going to Wharton," and so I went to Wharton.  That's where I went.  So it was not a thing of you grow up all your life thinking you're going to go to Wharton and all that other stuff and it was--no, it was a, it was a--you know I've been very blessed with, with my career and my life.  And I've, I've come across people that really cared about me, and, and you know my development.  And I went to Wharton and had a wonderful experience there.
Story_ID: 631355
Speaker 1: Who were some of the--did you have an advisor for your M.B.A., or is that how they do it?
Speaker 2: Well yeah we, we had advisors.  We were all each other's advisors (laughter).  I was actually with a fellow who was the director of admissions, Charlie Grantham, Charles Grantham.  Charle- Charlie was the director of admissions when I went there and actually Charlie later on went on to be the head of the NBA Players Association [National Basketball Players Association] and, and--which is how, one of the ways I got involved in sports.  He wanted to get more African Americans in front of some of the young ball players and talking about financial things.  And so by that time I was already a partner and a CPA [certified public accountant] and a Wharton grad [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so he thought it would be good to get me in some--in front of some of the kids.  But Charlie used to always introduce me as his biggest admissions mistake.  It was a joke between the two of us and he and I were laughing about that Saturday when I was in New York [New York].  But Charlie was somebody who I think is--has you know advised all of us as we came through.  But back in those days the, the advising was very informal.  It wasn't as structured because a lot of the people who had come through before us would come back to campus.  You know the guys from the class of '74 [1974], when we came you know there in '74 [1974], guys from the class of '74 [1974], '73 [1973], '72 [1972] would come back and participate.  And, and the guys in the class of '74 [1974], Milton Irving and Leroy Cody [H. Leroy Cody, Jr.] and some of those guys started the Whitney Young lecture series [Whitney M. Young, Jr. Memorial Conference] at Wharton which is still going on right now and it was in honor of Whitney Young who as you know back during the civil rights days when he head, headed the Urban League [National Urban League], his approach to civil rights and, and black advancement was, was through economic empowerment.  And so we named that series for Whitney Young.  And so that was something that you know each of us carried on.  I mean I was the president of the Black MBA Association [National Black MBA Association] when I was at Wharton.  Back in those days the president of the Black MBA Association was also the chairman of the Whitney Young weekend.  Now, they've gotten it broken down that they have a staff for each one of them.  It's grown, it's, it's a huge financial maker for the, the African American community in which all of us take an interest in, in how it's run and how the funds are use.  Years ago we actually raised money and we endowed a chair at, at Wharton in the name of Whitney Young, the Whitney Young chair.  And it's currently, fellow by the name of Americus Reed who's in the marketing department heads the chair, doing an outstanding job with it.  And then after that when the school went on to build the new building, the Huntsman, Jon Huntsman building [Jon M. Huntsman Hall] where Jon Huntsman was very gracious and provided the bulk of the money for that.  We raised some more money and we actually--there actually is a classroom, the Whitney Young classroom at Wharton.  So that was our way of making sure that there was a minority permanence at Wharton and several of us on the various boards up there and have you know--at the table when types of things are discussed and have an input on what happens to the minority students as they come through.
Speaker 1: Now did you--or was the Whitney M. Young lecture series established after he passed?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, 'cause you know he had drowned but my year--
Speaker 1: I know he drowned off the coast of Liberia [sic. Lagos, Nigeria].
Speaker 2: Off--yeah. And my, my year, the year that I was president was actually the third conference and it was the first year that, that Mrs. Young [Margaret Buckner Young] had come and she actually came and was her very first year.  And you know she--there was a foundation in which she--they, they closed down and part of the money that they had left she gave it to us to help towards endowing the chair which was a big help.  And so with the alums and from this Whitney Young series and our own contributions, we raised the money and actually it's been very, very well received.  Americus is just an outstanding person that, that holds that chair.  He and Ken Shropshire [Kenneth L. Shropshire] who already had a chair there who runs the sports initiative at Wharton, you know, two guys that we kind of rely on to, to help us you know stay connected to what's going on at the school.
Story_ID: 631356
Speaker 1: What was the toughest part of going to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  Is there anything about it that was tough at all?
Speaker 2: Well I mean you know when you look at how selective Wharton is or who they let get in there, everybody there is smart.  And I think one of the biggest adjustments you make is you're not the smartest person in class anymore, you know, of any race or ethnicity.  You're not the smartest--there's a bunch of very smart people there.  And in certain classes where I may have struggled, you know the, the accounting and financial classes I was you know very good at because that was my background and so we helped each other.  We helped each other through it.  And it was, it was trying but it was, it was a great experience, a great two years.  And I think you don't realize that it's not, it's just not what you learn in the classroom, it's the way you learn to deal with people and working in groups.  They're much more into the groups as, as opposed to when I was there.  We didn't have the--they now have what they call a cohort group where they put you in groups and it's modeled somewhat after the Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] model where you work more in groups.  We didn't work as formally in groups.  We did.  I mean there were study groups, I helped a lot of people with accounting.  Other people helped people with statistics.  Other people helped them with the other operations, research classes and so it was, it was not as formal as it is now, but we still, we, we worked--we learned to work together and I think that's one of the most important things you learn when you come out in, in the real world is how to work with people.
Story_ID: 631357
Speaker 1: You're like a generation of--this is still a pioneering generation going off into the white corporate world.  Did you--did the black business students discuss you know that, cause there had been some people already out there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did they discuss like how to negotiate that environment (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh we always did and it's ongoing, you know.  It's ongoing and, and not only to come into the corporate world okay but how do you progress within it?  I look back at my career when I came in.  You know I was a finance major at Wharton but because I already had my CPA [certified public accountant] license when I graduated I, I--and I still liked tax.  I wanted to do something in tax and I wasn't really enamored with going to New York [New York] and working on Wall Street.  I came to work in one of the public accounting firms.  I mean I was offered positions in--about all of them saw my resume.  You know you can imagine this was--interviewing season was in, in the fall of 1975 and you come to the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you see a black person that's already a licensed CPA.  You know there were, I think there were three of us on campus at that particular time.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) when did you get your CPA license?
Speaker 2: It was really funny.  I had to tell somebody this, March 6, 1975 is the date of my license.  I passed the November '74 [1974] exam.  So you know I've had it for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you got it while you were at Wharton?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well I passed the last part.  I had taken the first part--I had taken and passed several parts before I left the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] and then I got accepted to Wharton and I decided to go.  So I took, really funny, I--we had midterms Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of a week in November and I took the CPA exam on Friday.  Fortunately we didn't have classes on Friday and I was proctored in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] so I took the last part of the CPA exam while I was at school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I passed it and, and like I said there were, there were three of us that were there that were African Americans who had, had our CPA licenses when we left school.
Speaker 1: Who were--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Who were they?  Oh--
Speaker 1: Yes, right, that was the question.  Who--
Speaker 2: Gregory Govan--
Speaker 1: --were some of your--?
Speaker 2: --and, and George Johnson.
Speaker 1: Gregory--?
Speaker 2: Govan.
Speaker 1: Govan, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And George Johnson.  George had worked for Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP], and Greg had worked for Del- Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] at that time.
Story_ID: 631358
Speaker 1: You got your M.B.A. in '76 [1976].  Is there any, any special honors or anything that you received for your (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Not back in those days Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was on pass, fail, no credit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they started distinguish our last (unclear) there were really no honors back in--now they've gone back to grades.  But you know--
Speaker 1: Well Wharton is certainly, I mean when you tell somebody you went to Wharton it carries a (unclear) in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you know what I tell young people, I graduated from Wharton thirty-six years ago.  No one wants to know where I went to school.  They want to know what I have done in the last thirty-six years, that's what carries you.  That, that degree gets you your first job.  After that it's, it's what you've done okay, because there's, there's a bunch of people coming out of there every year with that degree and it just--it's recycling.  So it's a great education.  It's a, it's a process that you know that, that there's a very select group of people that go there.  There's, there--and as I tell people there's a select group of people who even apply so it's a very select group of people.  But after that it's, it's what have you done in the last thirty-six years?  That's what people want to know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--shortly after you came out you started working for KMPG [sic.].
Speaker 2: KPMG.  At that time it was Peat, Marwick, Mitchell [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell], Peat--
Speaker 1: It was Peat, Marwick, Mitchell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, back in those days, yeah, Peat, Marwick, Mitchell.  There were, there was the big eight.  There were eight accounting firms back in those days as opposed to four now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were the eight then?  You can tell us.
Speaker 2: Oh boy, you're really going to test me.
Speaker 1: If you remember, yeah, tell us.
Speaker 2: Okay, there was Peat Marwick, there was Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP], there was Arthur Young [Arthur Young and Company; Ernst and Young LLP], there was Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], there was Deloitte [Deloitte and Touche; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], Haskins and Sells [Deloitte Haskins and Sells; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], there was Ernst and Ernst [Ernst and Whinney; Ernst and Young LLP].  How many is that?
Speaker 1: We're getting close (unclear).
Speaker 2: Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers], how can I forget that one and Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers].  How can I forget those?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Those are two--one that I merged from and I retired from, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There was--they--I'm surprised I know, I remembered all eight of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I remember the demise of Arthur Andersen (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was a great--Arthur Andersen was a great firm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was surprising.
Speaker 2: It was a surprise, and Arthur Andersen was a great firm.  I mean when we used to compete against them they were a great firm, very disciplined firm, yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, anyway so that was the lay of the land then, and--
Story_ID: 631359
Speaker 1: So you came back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Came back to D.C., came home.
Speaker 1: --for Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell then, is what it was?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now what, what position did you start out?
Speaker 2: I started off as--I was actually hired that I would go into the tax department but they wanted me to spend some time on the audit staff which everybody did.  So I was an assistant accountant on the audit staff, the lowest person on the totem pole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you retired, when you left there you were--
Speaker 2: I was a partner.
Speaker 1: --a partner.
Speaker 2: I left in 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the journey, you know there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was a journey.  I mean, when I came with the firm I spent the first six months on the audit staff and you know very few people you know you would--you just didn't go directly to the tax department but I--only reason I came was I came to, to specialize in tax.  And after being there for six months I guess I was doing quite well, they tried to keep me on the audit staff and I said, "No, I didn't come here to be an auditor, I came here to be tax."  So I went into the tax department, it was an interesting journey.  I was the first African American that was, you know worked in the tax department ever and as matter of fact when I made partner in 1984, I was the first African American tax partner in the history of KPMG.  It was a great experience.  I mean we--the, the group was small back in those days but it was just, times just exploded.  I got a lot of great experience.  I got to work on some great clients, individuals.  I told you about Admiral Anderson [George W. Anderson, Jr.], worked on his tax return the very first year I was there.  Some just great people that, individuals.  At that time KPMG or Peat Marwick at that time was known as the firm that audited the majority of the demand deposits so we had most of the banks and the S and Ls [savings and loan].  So I did a lot of bank tax work, S and L tax work and real estate and as a result of some of the real estate stuff I did, I got involved with a lot of international tax transactions because a lot of the real estate was owned through either offshore corporations or through foreign individuals.  So it was great experience.  I worked a lot, I mean around the clock.  And having grown up here my friends that I still knew here had no idea, you know, why do you work on the weekends all the time, you know.  And it was just I was learning so much and, and it was just a very, very good experience. I worked for some great, great people.  I had some mentors there and one of the things I tell young African Americans now that your mentors don't necessarily have to look like you because in the firm there our managing partner, Steve Harland was someone who took an interest in my career. The partner that I worked directly for, Jerry Hunter, was very, very close to me and gave me some opportunities that were just unbelievable to, to really you know do things that maybe some people may not have thought I was ready for.  And Bob Davis [Robert A. Davis] who later on was the partner in charge of our tax department was just a guy who gave me a lot of leeway to get some things done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any--so were you the only black employee there when you were--?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't the only black employee, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the only in the tax department originally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but then you know I kind of helped recruit some more blacks into the tax department and, and you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said that Steve Harland--
Speaker 2: He was our managing partner of the Washington office yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  He sort of looked out for--?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I mean he--you know it was, it was a thing of Bob, he was very visible in the community here in Washington as a--he was the guy that kind of made all of us in the firm believe that we had to be part of the community in which we worked.  And so therefore I got involved in a lot of things.  I was very involved in the board of trade [Greater Washington Board of Trade] here in Washington, D.C., which back in those days was really the, the, the business organization that was the most powerful in, in the city.  I was very involved with, with that at a very early age in my career.  It was primarily through Steve pushing us to get involved in those things.
Story_ID: 631360
Speaker 1: You've been involved in a lot of, of volunteer efforts.  So did, did you--when did you start for instance with Africare [Washington, D.C.]?  You started in those days?
Speaker 2: Well Africare was very late in my career.  A fellow by the name of Donald McHenry who was a former ambassador to the United Nations--
Speaker 1: Well let's just kind of wait on that one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to know like what you were involved in--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in those days--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I guess leading up to 1991.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, I was involved with an organization called the Black Student Fund which is an organization where we help match up kids from parts of the city that typically wouldn't go to the top schools in, in Washington [D.C.] like the Sidwell Friends [Sidwell Friends School] and St. Albans [St. Albans School] and you know the Madeiras [The Madeira School, McLean, Virginia] and you know schools like this, take, take--get kids that are in environments or parents that financially can't afford them and help the schools you know match these kids up.  The schools provided the bulk of the financing.  I mean the financing that we provided was very little but the school was really provided the bulk of the financing.  But we, what we provided was that support system for the parents in how to get into these schools, the testing for the children.  And, and we've had some kids that have gone through these schools and have become very, very successful.  We--I was on that board for about twenty-two years and it was very, very rewarding.
Speaker 1: Who founded that organization?
Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Bishop John Walker [John T. Walker] who was a very, very prominent person here in the Washington, D.C. community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you mentioned some--so the Black Student Fund and what else did--?
Speaker 2: I've always been involved in the National Association of Black Accountants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually was the president of the D.C. chapter and headed our convention that we had here in 1988.  It was an organization I joined before I went to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was--
Speaker 1: Now were you part of the establishing of that organization or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, the--NABA was actually founded in, in New York City [New York, New York] and the person Frank Ross [HistoryMaker Frank K. Ross] who was also a, a person who was a mentor of mine here, Frank was originally in the New York office of Peat, Marwick [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KPMG] and transferred down here.  He was the first African American partner in the firm.  He made partner in 1977.  But Frank founded NABA in, in New York and then it moved--chapters started being established all around the country and now it's, it's a big organization in many, many cities around the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not that old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, but a lot of the professional organizations were started late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  So--
Speaker 2: Yes, this--NABA was started back in the late '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean the black organizations, the Black (Unclear) Association--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the national alliance black school teachers [National Alliance of Black School Educators]--
Speaker 2: NABA was started back in the late '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: --educators and I mean all those things you know started between 1969--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --into the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I don't--okay.  So now, now did you get married [to Loleta Thomas Bailey] during this period of time (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I was a partner when I got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I got married in January of 1985.  I made partner July 1, 1984.
Story_ID: 631361
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us the steps that led to you becoming a partner [at Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KPMG]?
Speaker 2: Well, being a partner is composed of, of a lot of things.  I mean some people will say at the end of the day it's whether they like you or not.  But it's a lot more goes into it than that.  I mean they do have to like you and want you to be part of something they call a partnership but it's a part of working and improving your technical abilities, your people abilities and your ability to manage a practice and grow one to bring business in.  I've always had the ability to grow a practice, to go out and you know, I was always speaking at different organizations or you know I'd--back in the early days I was always getting tapped to be on CNN during tax season and then going on the radio and people know you.  You know you're out and about and people find out what you're doing and you know it's, it's a lot easier when you're with a big firm like a Peat, Marwick or one of the other big firms.  At that time I was with Peat, Marwick.  But you know when you're with one of those major firms it gives you some automatic legitimacy you know walking in the door.  So you know those were the things that go into it and it's a process that you know I made partner in eight years which was kind of fast back in those days.  I guess it is still pretty fast.  But you know the way I looked at it was I had two years of IRS [Internal Revenue Service] experience already and you know I had gone to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so I had been out of school twelve years.  So it wasn't like I just came out of undergrad school in eight years, ran straight through it.  But it was a process that you--you know that's one of the reasons I hadn't gotten married.  You don't have much of a social life when you're working like that.  But my wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] and I dated for a while and she bought into the whole thing and the whole process and so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the first black partner?
Speaker 2: Tax partner, tax partner.
Speaker 1: Tax partner for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Frank Ross [HistoryMaker Frank K. Ross] was the first partner at--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --black partner and he made partner in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Jerry Hunter, who--the partner that I worked for when Frank--when the partner list came out, he came into my office and told me the firm had its first black partner and told me about Frank.
Story_ID: 631362
Speaker 1: And then later on I was actually, put together a panel for the National Student Business League, which has been gone, about careers and accounting and, and I called Frank [HistoryMaker Frank K. Ross] and I asked him would he come down and speak.  And he asked me for the details and to be on the panel and he came down and it was really funny because I, you know I had quite a panel together that year.  I mean people were--Frank Ross was you know partner at KPMG.  I had Marion Holmes who at that time was the head of the tax department at Cummins Engine Company [Cummins Inc.] which was rare for a black to have that position.  Don Haley [Donald C. Haley] who headed up the tax practice at Sohio [Standard Oil Company of Ohio], and Joe Kramer [ph.] who at that time was--I think Joe was, he was on the--either on the faculty at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] or at Southern Cal [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] which was like unheard of for you know back in those days.  And I had--these guys were all people that I just picked up the phone and called them.  You know, I knew their names and they all came.  I mean Don Haley I had met when I was at the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] because when I--before I left to go to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Don had tried to get me to come to work on the pipeline in Alaska for Sohio you know because his background was tax.  He'd been with the IRS also.  And--but I had kept in touch with him when I was at Wharton and, and so I called all these guys and you know I was a young--I wasn't even a manager at the time and I called them and said would you guys come and of course there was no budget.  They, they, you know paid their own way.  Their firms, their companies paid their own way and they came and all participated in my panel.  It was great, great exposure for young kids at that time.
Speaker 2: Where was this panel held?
Speaker 1: Right here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, The National Business League, I don't know if it's still around but I don't know if you remember the name Berkeley Burrell?  Berkeley Burrell formed the National Business League.  It was around for years and then there was a fellow that ran--was very involved with the National Student Business League, his name was Dave Rice [David Rice] who got me involved and asked me to put this panel together.
Speaker 2: So where was it held here?  Was it in--?
Speaker 1: It was at a hotel.  I can't remember exactly where the hotel was but it was at a hotel somewhere here in Washington.  And it was a part of the whole National Student Business League conference.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the National Business League, these are black (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Black organizations, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and the National Student Business--
Speaker 1: Was a part of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was the student part of that.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay, all right, so when was that held, what, what, what year?
Speaker 1: That was either '77 [1977] or '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Can't remember exactly right what year it was, but it was held every year, I mean and--
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay annual, all right.
Story_ID: 631363
Speaker 1: You weren't surprised that you became a par- a partner [at Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KPMG].  I mean it was--you were on track to do it, and?
Speaker 2: You know, yeah everybody said I was always on track to do it.  But it's not what I--I didn't do what I did to become a partner.  I mean I was growing professionally and growing as a career.  And I used to tell young people that came behind me that were infatuated, they wanted to be a partner whether they were white or black, I said, you know, "You shouldn't have that as your end goal to become a partner.  It's about, all about your career because if you don't become a partner at the end of the day, has your career been a failure? No."  So I mean there some guys I look out, out there right now women and men who've been very successful in the financial world and left public accounting at a very early stage in their careers and they didn't become partners.  But that doesn't mean that they weren't successful at what they wanted to do.  You know you--I always tell people they--about you know when they would come and they said you know, "What kind of job do you have?"  You know, "I have a career," you know.  I have a career that's, that's been you know composed of several jobs but I think I've tried to build a career over the years.  And even you know after I left public accounting ten years ago I think that part of my career where I have grown as a businessperson has, the growth has been exponential because I think I've learned more about being a businessman and how to run a business than I ever did in all the twenty-six years I was in public accounting because it's a different mindset you know, totally different mindset.  And just the depth of the things that I think I'm aware of particularly from a global perspective.  I haven't made the money that I thought I was going to make but you know it'll come I, I hope.  If not, the, the personal satisfaction, the personal growth, the professional growth has been well worth it.
Story_ID: 631364
Speaker 1: You were with Pear, Warwick until--
Speaker 2: Peat, Marwick [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KPMG].
Speaker 1: Peat, Marwick until--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: --nineteen ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what happened?  Well how--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the, the, the firm was going through some changes at the time in terms of, I think in terms of looking at what each partner wanted to do, all of the partners.  And the firm came to me and you know I wanted to do something different than what they had me doing.  Once I made partner I started you know being--I was involved in a small business practice which is a different type of practice in a major firm.  You have clients that you have to chase a lot harder you know.  You don't, they're not as easy to bill and they're definitely not as easy to collect from.  The small businessmen, no they're not the big corporate clients that you just bill and they send you a check because when you're billing a small business you're billing that individual.  And so I wanted to do something different and couldn't work it out with the firm and I decided to leave.  And then I went into--I, I joined Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] at that time and I was direct entry partner.  And while I originally was in the consulting practice they eventually lured me back over into the tax practice.
Speaker 1: Okay, and well tell us about the experience with Coopers and Lybrand.  You were there for nine years?
Speaker 2: Ten year--eleven years.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I was there eleven years, yeah.  Eleven years with Coopers and Pricewaterhouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a situation of, you know I was in the--I had a tax practice that are doing some things.  I was really a relationship manager on some very large, one very large engagement for the firm where I had the personal relationship, and was able to bring business into the firm from all service lines which has always been something I was able to go across.  I was a tax guy but you know I would do stuff for the audit department.  I would stuff for the consulting part of the business.  I was involved in the firm's diversity committee on a national level.  I was heavily involved with recruiting so I was doing quite a few things.  And in 1994, I decided to go to Africa because I thought Africa was going to be the next place that we needed to go to.  And I don't know, I didn't tell you this but between my two summers at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,, Pennsylvania] I worked at a bank, Philadelphia National Bank in their international division with a young vice president to help--we established a project finance group which--and that was my first exposure to Africa cause I worked on a project for Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Did you go to Nigeria?
Speaker 2: No, not then.  I, I--summer student, I didn't get a chance to travel.  But you know, I thought Africa was going to be the next frontier.  And I went to Africa in 1994, primarily to visit a friend of mine who had gone to Wharton with me, Muguazi Muchafi [ph.].  And Muguazi was running the IFC [International Finance Corporation] for all of Southern Africa and while there I met the people at Coopers and Lybrand and I went to South Africa and met the people in our South African practice in Johannesburg, and met a young fellow who was one of the few black chartered accountants in all of South Africa.  I think in 1994, there were fifty-four or fifty-five black chartered accountants in all of South Africa.  Only a few of them were South Africans.  Most of them were from Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda some other countries because the South Africans you know had not gone on to acquire the certificate.  And I met this young fellow and I actually brought him to the United States to work for me on a (unclear) to integrate him into the business world.  And then I--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Reggie Muzariri [Reginald Muzariri].  Want me to spell that for you? (Laughter) Muzariri, M-U-Z-Z-A-R-I-R-I [sic.].  Reggie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Muzariri.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Reggie Muzariri.
Speaker 1: Now he's from--?
Speaker 2: He's from Zimbabwe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 631365
Speaker 1: And then I went up to, to Senegal where I had met the fellow who was running the Senegalese practice for the firm [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers], Aziz Dieye, A-Z-I-Z, D-I-E-Y [sic.].  And I met Aziz.  Just to show you how ignorant I was, he sent me a telex back then.  You know, there wasn't email and any of that stuff.  When I told him I had met him when he came to the United States and I told him I was coming to the continent, I was going to be in South Africa, he said, "Why don't you stop in Senegal?"  I thought it was like going from maybe California to Denver [Colorado] or something.  I had no idea how big that continent was, really was.  Back then the Aerofreight [ph.] was still flying and so I flew from Johannesburg [South Africa] to Dakar, Senegal on Aerofreight.  The plane made four stops on the way, two of which I only saw on my ticket.  But it was quite an experience and so I, I spent some time in Senegal in his office with him.  I actually went to Goree Island [Dakar, Senegal] which is you know where the slave ships were--came in.  And--
Speaker 2: What was that experience like?  Now that--
Speaker 1: It was, it was an experience that I, that I share with many of my black friends who've gone over there and they've all had the same experience that when you go down into those tunnels and you go through the passage of no return, my knees buckled.  It was like it all came home.  And I actually didn't finish the tour.  I came back upstairs.  I've told several of my friends that story.  They said they have had the same experience.  I mean when you see that path, that hallway and that little round window opens up where they forced you into the ships and you just realize that what was happening with our ancestors and you just like--my knees buckled.  And I've been back many, many times.  I've never been back.  And when I've to Ghana, I've never gone to the castles.  I just, I just don't want to see that, just very, very hard to deal with. And it was, it was quite, it was quite a, quite an experience.
Story_ID: 631366
Speaker 1: But I came back home and then later on the firm, the firm decided they wanted to have a country desk arrangement where certain partners in the U.S. firm manned the desk for certain countries to help you know facilitate our offices in the U.S. as they were doing business for clients that were operating in different countries.  And the vice chairman of the firm of international at that time Jim Clark [James W. Clark, Jr.] said he hadn't decided whether he wanted to have an Africa desk, whether we needed one but if they did, would I man it?  And I said, "Well Jim, Africa is not a country, it's a continent."  But we--it's a good start.  At that time Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] I think had more offices than any firm on the continent.  For instance they had twenty-seven offices in South Africa alone.  And so we formed--they set up the Africa, the desk and I became the partner, a partner on the Africa desk for the U.S. firm, which wasn't a big responsibility, although it was.  I had a very small budget.  I think my budget was twenty-five thousand dollars which I used to buy a table out of the Africare dinner [Washington, D.C.].  I paid my dues for the Corporate Council on Africa which I was one of the first people on the board of directors that founded that and then I would have to go to the continent twice a year for partners meetings in South Africa and then one would be in West Africa.  And I was actually talking to someone the other day and I noticed an accent.  And I said, "Where are you from?" And the lady said, "I'm from South Africa."  I said, "Oh I've been there many times." And of course the first thing people say is, "You've been to--have you been to Johannesburg [South Africa] or have you been to Cape Town [South Africa]?" The typical places.  And I said, "Yeah I've been to both of those places but I've also been to George [South Africa] which is down in the south," and I said, "I've been to Bloemfontein [South Africa]."  She looked at me, she said, "You've been to Bloem- Bloemfontein was an Afrikaan stronghold."  We had a partners meeting one year in Bloemfontein.  That was an experience.
Speaker 2: That's B-L-E-U [sic.], something like that (unclear).
Speaker 1: B-L-E-U, I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: --or something like that.  I don't know but it was an interesting experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, but no I mean and, and now the firm has committed you know millions of dollars to building out their African networks.  So one of the partners sent me an email and said, "Once again, you were ahead of your time," (laughter).
Story_ID: 631367
Speaker 1: In those days were, were they surprised to see you come representing Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I think the guys, the guys from Africa, the, the, the blacks were very happy to see me.  The guys, the whites in South Africa were very happy to see me because they had a--this young one fellow who was up and coming and they thought that me being there bringing him in did great things for them in terms of you know him and his progression.
Speaker 1: Now this is the post-apartheid time?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yeah, well--yeah, well '94 [1994], the election had not happened yet.  I mean for instance my friend was running the IFC [International Finance Corporation] out of Harari [Harari Region, Ethiopia] because the World Bank was not in South Africa because of apartheid.  And so it was before everything had changed.  President Mandela [Nelson Mandela] had not been elected yet.  All the countries had not come in because I remember going over to (Unclear) and they had not come in yet.  So no, it wasn't all behind you at that point in time.  I remember staying in the Carlton Hotel [Johannesburg, South Africa] because the--our office was on Pritchard Street downtown at the time and now most of the offices have moved out to Rosebank [South Africa] and places in the suburbs, so times were different.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you--did Coopers train any you know of the South Af- I mean the black South Africans?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we, when, when--they worked for the firm over there but it was just a matter of bringing them over here to be exposed to the U.S. and U.S. practices.
Story_ID: 631368
Speaker 1: I guess it's time now to talk about Africare [Washington, D.C.] I guess.  We didn't talk about that.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We kind of mentioned it.  So, so you got involved with Africare in the nine-in the '90s [1990s].  You said '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: I got involved with Africare--no.  I got in Afri- I got involved with Africare back in about 19--about 2001, sometime around there, 2001, I think it was when I got involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand and one [2001].  I got involved with the Corporate Council on Africa back in the '90s [1990s] when it first formed.
Speaker 1: Corporate Council--
Speaker 2: On Africa.
Speaker 1: --on Africa, okay.  Now what do they do?
Speaker 2: (Raises eyebrows).
Speaker 1: What do they do?  What--?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Corporate Council on Africa is about two hundred U.S. based organizations that feel that the development of Africa is going to come through economic development as opposed to aid.  And its corporations that exists that you know, that currently have business in Africa and entities that are looking to go into the continent.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Africare--just kind of describe what Africare--
Speaker 2: Africare is an organization that was formed you know, years ago by a couple, some former Peace Corps volunteers, I mean most notably [HistoryMaker] C. Payne Lucas and Dr. Joe Kennedy [Joseph C. Kennedy], who are still around.  And it was--they had been in Africa on U.S. aid missions and they started going to the U.S. Agency for International Development for the most part and coming up with funding to do programs in Africa for food, agriculture type of things, clean water in Senegal, primarily malaria prevention.  So each country is a little bit different in what they do.  Primarily the funding has been from the USAID over the years but now they're, as you're seeing all that stuff being cut, you're seeing the decision to reach out and do more public, private type things.  Actually a couple of years ago at our dinner we honored the former president of Brazil and Valley [ph.] was our corporate, head, corporate donor and received a very large donation from them because Valley is in Africa as you know, in Guinea and Mozambique and some of the other places as they look for iron ore.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were the chairman of that board, right?
Speaker 2: No, I was vice chairman.
Speaker 1: Oh, vice chairman.
Speaker 2: Frank Fountain [HistoryMaker W. Frank Fountain] who--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --actually Frank and I worked very closely together on several boards.  Frank was chairman of the Corporate Council on Africa board when I was the treasurer and head of the audit committee.  Frank is on the board of the Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Frank was very involved and instrumental in helping raise the money for the Whitney Young chair as well as the classroom.  Frank and I are very close friends and have been involved in many, many non-profit organizations.  Before Frank retired from Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], he was the senior vice president for government relations but also was the president of the Chrysler Foundation [FCA Foundation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he currently is also the chairman of the board of Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's involved in a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Frank always has been.  He's given a lot of his time and his personal money.
Story_ID: 631369
Speaker 1: Coopers, now you were at Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand] until 2002?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002].  I retired July 1, but Coopers in 1998, merged with Price Waterhouse.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right, so it's PricewaterhouseCoopers?
Speaker 2: Waterhouse, PricewaterhouseCoopers and--
Speaker 1: Lybrand got, got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah got kind of you know, yeah that was an interesting merger.  It was--a lot of people thought all the firms were going that route because the concept there was to merge the firms globally.  I mean Coopers and Lybrand and Price Waterhouse were probably two of the smaller two firms.  But combined they were--had a great client list and they--the theory was not just to combine them in the U.S. but to combine them globally.  One global firm where you had you know, not the U.S. firm insurance revenues and not the British firm but one global firm with one profit pool.  And one of the people that was very, very instrumental in pulling that whole thing off was a fellow by the name of Woody Brittain [Willard W. "Woody" Brittain, Jr.], who is an African American, grew right up here in Arlington, Virginia.  He's a very dear friend of mine who when, back in the day when I first came out of graduate school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Woody and I met, different--he was with Price Waterhouse.  I was with Peat, Marwick [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KPMG].  I'll never forget we met at board of trade meeting and a friend of his family is a lady who from a very prominent family out in Virginia.  Her husband had passed away and Woody knew that I knew a little bit about tax and he asked me would I come and meet with her because it was a very difficult time for her.  And I helped her through her estate and everything and got it done and Woody said what, at the end of the day--'cause we did this at night and said you know, "What do you want to charge her?"  And I said, "You know for an elderly black woman, for what her family meant, all I did was give you some advice."  I mean there's no way I would ever take money from somebody like that.  And so Woody was, he--you know he, he is a person that truly if you want to talk about a history maker, it's Woody.  I mean he, he was just recently honored by Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], given their highest award.  He went to Yale undergrad, Harvard M.B.A. [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and you know he was the managing partner of the Washington [D.C.] office of Price Waterhouse.  He went on to be the deputy chairman of Price Waterhouse and he was a deputy chairman of the global firm after it merged.  And you know truly a pioneer.  I mean no other African American has risen to the ranks that he has in public accounting, and just was someone who was respected all throughout the firm, not only in the United States but in the whole globe.  Unfortunately Woody is suffering from ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis] right now and I just think that when you tell a story about people that have been real pioneers, I mean he's done much more so than I could ever have.  If you were sitting here and asking Woody about what he has done and--I mean I never flew on the Concorde [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde].  It was back and forth for him when he was putting this whole merger together.  I mean you think about what he did, I mean truly a visionary.  I mean we were very good friends and we'd ski together.  Our wives are very close.  As a matter of fact his wife [Deborah Carpenter Brittain] was the coordinator for our wedding.  And I'll never forget Woody coming up to me at our reception and I had just made partner and I told my wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] that you know that I'll pay for the wedding and reception. You know, "Your father's [Samuel Thomas, Sr.] got kids still to go to college."  And he came up to me in the line, he says, "Man, this is the happiest day of my life." And I said, "Why is that?"  He said, "I'm watching my wife spend somebody's money. It's not mine," (laughter).  But he's--he was the guy that whenever I wanted to sit down and just talk to somebody about you know where I thought things were going and somebody that I truly had a lot of respect for, even now you know he--communicating with him is not as easy but when we sit, it's like we've been with each other for all the long, you know.  You just start laughing and talking about old times.  And you know he was the guy that pulled that whole merger together or one of the key people.
Speaker 1: Okay, somebody so--it's a shame we can't interview him right now, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's a shame that you couldn't interview him.  And it's--I mean he's, he was just--his, his, his professional life is truly in terms of you look at where he walks and the circles he was in to pull that merger together.  And you know he was just traveling all over the world at one point in time.  I said, "Where are you?"  "I'm in India."  "Where are you?"  He was all over the place and at the end of the day he couldn't tell me although we were close friends what was happening because I was with Coopers and Lybrand.  He couldn't tell me anyway.  And I realized that that's what he was doing was globally structuring everything to pull a global merger together.
Story_ID: 631370
Speaker 1: Why--we didn't mention I think it's 1987, you founded LDB Consulting [LDB Consulting, Inc., Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002], when I retired.
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], you founded?  Okay.
Speaker 2: When I retired, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so and well let's see.  Well you do have some celebrity clients, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, all my clients are celebrities (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They're all celebrities.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I didn't--you don't have to name anybody but I--but you, there are some pretty famous--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --people in sports--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sports figures.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) entertainers.
Speaker 2: I've had some political figures also.  So--but I do have some sports clients.  And, and I always tell people--people say, "How do you get into this sports business?"  I said, "I'm probably the only person that's in it that didn't ask to be in it."  It's not what I was trying to do.  As I said, when I became a partner [at Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KMPG] I was asked to build a small business practice and so when you do that, when you're talking to small business people you don't separate the business from the individual, they're one in the same.  And so I became--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was saying that when I was made partner I was asked to develop a small business practice you know and I was--got started dealing with a lot of small business people.  The individual and the business you don't separate so they're one in the--while you may have a corporate entity which is separate from the individual, they're the same when you look at them from a financial perspective.  And so I developed the expertise of the financial planning, tax and financial planning 'cause my background is tax.  And you know I got involved with a couple of ball players when they you know came into the league and one of them is still a client in the hall of fame.  And we've just been together ever since.  And you know, then years ago I met a fellow by the name of Keven Davis and I was giving a speech in 1991.  As I mentioned, Charlie Grantham [Charles Grantham] was head of the players association [National Basketball Players Association] and he had me, got me involved one year to do the rookie orientation where the NBA [National Basketball Association] rookies come before, a couple of weeks before they go to training camp.  And one year turned into twenty-five years of spending three days with the rookies down there.  Well Charlie also had me come talk to the agents, the people that represented ball players twice a year, once on the East Coast, once on the West Coast and give them an update on tax and financial matters and there was a fellow in the audience by the name of Keven Davis.  Keven again is--was a very dear friend, like a brother.  Unfortunately, Keven passed away in December of last year.  But I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in 1991, and Keven came up to me afterwards and said he just picked up a client, these two little--well a little tennis player and wanted to know if I would go to Compton, California the next day to meet with the family because he was going to be advising them and said that, you know, "There's no money in it right now but I think this young lady's going to be a great tennis player." And that was Venus Williams.  And I met the family that day, and then after I watched Venus play a match, Richard [Richard Williams] said to me, "You want to see my other little girl?"  And that's when I met Serena [Serena Williams].  I looked at him and I said, "That's a player right there."
Story_ID: 631371
Speaker 1: And so I think she was nine and Venus [Venus Williams] was sh- several weeks short of her tenth birthday.
Speaker 2: And there is a photo that shows Serena was ve- very short.  She wasn't--
Speaker 1: She was nine years old.  She could barely see over the net.  I thinks that's the photo that--I have that photo at home I think but I think the one that you're referring to was the one that Bill Rhoden [William C. Rhoden] did when Keven [Keven Davis] died.  There was a story he did in The New York Times right after Christmas last year.  And was when the two of us were together with them when they were little girls.  And so I've still been in, you know involved but you know while I'm their financial advisor I'm as part of the family.  I mean I've watched them grow up.  As I tell people, I'm more proud of the two fine young ladies that they have become as just opposed to their tennis I mean academically and what they're trying to do with their careers off the court.  And Keven and I were very, very involved within their early days before they got their management companies.  And you know it was really funny that I think someone in The New York Times did a story once and said that their father [Richard Williams] wasn't as crazy as people thought he was.  He went out and hired a CPA [certified public accountant] and a partner in the largest accounting firm in the world at that time.  And Keven was bar review at Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] and a partner in one of the largest law firms in Seattle [Washington] at that time.  And so we were there and did a lot of their early deals before they got their management companies involved and you know he was a great friend and he was a great mentor to the girls.  And as a matter of fact when Serena [Serena Williams] won the U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] just last week I--she--went up and gave her the biggest hug and I said, "This was for Keven."  And she said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Bailey], I miss him so much."  And he was a, just a great guy.  Great guy.
Story_ID: 631372
Speaker 1: So do you w- want to talk about any of these, any of the other clients?  I know you--I'll just throw it out there, Donovan McNabb is one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Donovan's been a client of mine since he came to the league [National Football League], a client and a friend too, you know.  And he's a great guy.  You know comes from a great family, his mom, his dad, his wife [Raquel Nurse McNabb].  His wife's quite a story.  I mean she was on the women's basketball team at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  But they're, they're just a great, very close family and he's--Donovan's just a wonderful guy, great quarterback, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He maintains a strong image too still.
Speaker 2: Oh he does.  But a lot of think it's, it's the family.  I mean his mother and father are you know, it's a very close family and his brother Sean [Sean McNabb] right there with him.  So yeah, they're a very, very close knit family.  I mean most of my clients are like that.  They're--Bruce Smith has, has been a client of mine from the day he came in the league and we're very close.  I mean sometimes Bruce and I will talk every day and not about business but just about life.  And he's got a young son now that's down in Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].  Now you know when you're getting old when these guys' kids are coming up and going away to college.  Bruce's son is a freshman at Virginia Tech.
Speaker 1: Now you have a, you have kind of a guarded attitude about those--these kind of clients.  You really guard--it's a real strict business attitude.
Speaker 2: Well yeah it is be--I've known these people for a long time you got to remember.  I mean you know of the names that I just mentioned, Donovan is the newest client I have in that group and that's thirteen, twelve, thirteen years.  And so, and that's one of the reasons that I don't, right now I don't take on any new clients.  I will help somebody out on a limited basis, but you know I, when I retired, I retired to do some things that I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 631373
Speaker 1: You know, particularly I really wanted to do some things in Africa and, and, and overseas in general because I think that's where the world is right now; it's a global world.  And you know that's, I think I--that's where you have to play next, okay?  And you know whether I will get a chance to benefit from the groundwork that I've laid financially it's, it's--that's where you have to be, I think.  And, and I think all the firms, the corporations are looking there.  It's not just China, it's--the, the Far East I think is growing faster than, than--not, not just China.  I was in Indonesia recently and just got exposed to that part of the world.  I had never been that far down there.  And you look around and you just see, I mean I was--one of our professors from Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was doing a seminar and I thought one of the graphs he put up there was very interesting about the ratio of retiree--retired workers to the non-retired workers and how this ratio in the Western world was very soon going to be where the number of retired people to the working class was greater than one.  So you would have more people retired than working, would--which affects your productivity and a lot of other things.  But if you looked in the emerging markets, particularly places like Asia, that number was like .4 [percent].  It was less than .5.  So you have a lot of upswing there.  And Africa you know, and five years ago no one even put Africa on their graphs.  Africa was on there, .2.  The population in Africa is so young it's unbelievable, okay.  So I think as you look at these things and see where the world is shifting and things are happening at a much faster pace than they did here and it's because of the cell phone.  It's because of technology.  You know it doesn't take years for things to develop like it used to.  You go to Africa now and even in some of the most rural areas, you have cell phones.  And, and people are doing everything on their cell phone.  I remember a young fellow I know here several years ago told me, he says, "In the next three or four years, your whole life is going to be on your cell phone."  I looked at him like he was crazy.  He's right now.  Everything, you're doing everything on your cell phone.  So I think when you are able to integrate technology with, with life experiences, business experiences and best use technology to, to bring you know business and products and services to these areas, I think you're just going to have exponential growth.  You know still some of it's going to be in the United States 'cause I still think we have a lot of growth left in the United States.  I think we need to pause and retrofit some things, particularly our labor force.  I was listening to Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] the other night on his speech and when he said there are 3 million jobs out there right now that we don't have people qualified with the skillset to take those jobs, that's a very interesting thought.  And so I think that's one of the things you're going to have to see here.  We take a pause, what do we really need?  Where, where are the jobs?  Where, where's the growth in our markets and fit them up as opposed to people just going and saying, I'm going to get a degree doing this, I'm going to do that.  Well that, that, that particular sector may be saturated and it may be a mature market, okay.  You just don't go and, and get trained in that market if there's nothing for you to do there, okay?  But there are other markets where you need to train your people to be able to go in and do these things and so we've got to make that, people aware of that and make those, those markets interesting.  You know back when you and I were coming up, people went to vocational schools, they learned skills.  Very few people have skills now that are just marketable skills that you can go out and, and do things with your hands and other things.  Everything is technology based now, computer based.  So I think there's a happy marriage in there or somewhere we got to find it and that's, that's what I think we need to have.
Story_ID: 631374
Speaker 1: Now in, in terms of your practice [LDB Consulting, Inc., Washington, D.C.] just--I, I was reflecting on the celebrity thing.  I know there was a time and you would often hear people say that if they, they wanted a lawyer, they wanted to make sure they got a Jewish lawyer, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: If they had something really at stake and that sort of thing.  Then you have--now you have the examples of [HistoryMaker] Billy Martin and of course others, you know and yourself as an accountant you know.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And I think we always had good professional people and there are stories in our archive about--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the lawyers of, you know and other you know professionals that are competent.  So is there a--I don't even know what the question would be, but is there--is the attitude changing or is it, is--?
Speaker 2: Well you know and, and I could be honest with you and say that yeah I, I know that is out there but because of the organizations I came up in, I mean I was at Peat, Marwick [Peat, Marwick, and Mitchell; KMPG] and at that time it was the largest accounting firm in the world at that time, okay?  And then you know the changes, they've all switched--but I was at Peat, Marwick.  I was a partner, a tax partner at Peat, Marwick.  Also, I was an M.B.A. from the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So you had instant credibility okay?  And when you go to a Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers], you have, you have instant credibility as a result of that, all right?  And so that's one of the things that you know that I haven't just dealt with because I've had you know white clients, black clients.  I mean you know I told you the story of Admiral Anderson [George W. Anderson, Jr.].  I have some clients right now that, that seek my advice, don't look at what color I am.  They may notice it you know because physically I guess you can but that's not what they look at.  So I mean I'm sure that there's some of it out there and I guess when I came along maybe I was just you know blinded by working so hard that while I know it was out there--and you know when I made partner there were certain things, I mean I didn't just get all the big clients that I had in working with managers.  I got into another group and then maybe some of that was a reflection of people's thought processes and where you could be accepted as a partner.  I have a friend of mine who was at that time at, at, at Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] who made partner at the same time I did in the audit side and he left the firm because he got pushed into that, that middle market practice I like to call it.  And when you are in an accounting firm you know we get measured on you know your revenue growth, how well you manage your prac- and it's a lot harder than somebody who works on, on the big clients.  Not that the other guys are any smarter than we are, it's just who gets to sit on those, be on those clients.  And he left because he, it was frustrating.  It was one of the things that frustrated me.  I mean and I thought that I was ready to assume other roles, but I tell young people all the time you know you don't look at all of it as, as race, okay.  It's a tough profession and there's only a couple of jobs at the top.  Everybody can't be up at the top.  I mean I know some guys that came along in the firm with me that were not African American--they didn't make partner, okay?  Everybody can't do it.  There's only so many slots.  And so you, you can't get hung up on that.  I--
Story_ID: 631375
Speaker 1: I'm, pride myself on the way that I think I have developed some young people that have worked for me over the years.  I have two people that have worked for me over the years that are now heading up tax departments of Fortune 500 companies.  I have a young fellow that I taught who is now heading up a major division in one of the accounting firms.  Another young fellow that I taught is, is a big real estate developer and player right here in this down.  So you, you take your satisfaction that the experiences that I had good and bad, I was able to help these, these individuals and teach them you know some disciplines and get the skills that they needed to have to go on and do what they--they're the next generation.  I always tell the next generation do not fight the battles that we fought.  If you do you're wasting your time and you're around the wrong people cause if somebody is still thinking in that mindset, you're around the wrong people.  They're not going anywhere, okay?  What you--when I came along you know taking the CPA [certified public accountant] exam, there used to be a party when somebody passed practice which was the hardest part. Now these young kids come out, they knock that exam out, everything first time, they move on.  Now it's not a big deal just to get into a firm.  It's not a big deal to become a partner.  We're looking for you know the, the people to step up and to follow Woody's [Willard W. "Woody" Brittain, Jr.] example and be leaders in these firms, okay, not only in these firms but in major Corporate America.  I, I know a young man that's running a major, major group within one of the big industrial Fortune 500, one of the largest ones in the world.  He reminds me--and I met him when he was still in college.  So--but you know when you see that stuff happening then, then you know you don't think about some of that stuff, you know.  My generation, the generation ahead of me I think experienced more of that of what you're talking about.  I mean because there weren't that many black CPAs you know.  You know I mean I, I may have been in the first five hundred.  I mean I know I wasn't in the first hundred.  I'm not that old, but you know I know some guys who were in that first hundred.  But I'm sure I was in the first five hundred in the country and I'm positive I was in the first thousand.  But I didn't think about it back then when I, when I passed the exam and, and I tried to think about those things now.  You know you try to, you try to encourage the young, young people now to just think forward and I think those are the kind of legacies we can leave, leave for the next generations.  And I'm watching some guys have great careers and I'm happy for 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm happy for 'em (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 631376
Speaker 1: On the consumer side of it, if I was, even today if I came into a lot of money, or especially if I was an athlete--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who came out of the west side of Dayton [Ohio] or Southeast D.C. [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or whatever and didn't have a lot of background--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in terms of finance or who can handle--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --my money and I wanted to--and I, I would--many of our people idealize having somebody from our race--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to handle their money.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know?  Is there a network or a way of channeling the aspirations of somebody like that into the right direction?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I, I get those calls all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: From lottery winners to athletes.  But you know it's--I, I'm not at a stage in my career that's what I want to do right now.  I mean I'm, I'm trying to do some things that I want to do on a much, a broader picture, a more, broader plane.  But I can refer them to people.  I have at times have given them a, a roadmap and run some numbers for them, say, "Here it is, take it," you know.  You know these--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's all I'm really talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If, if--say someone contacted you is there a network where you could (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  But my network is not all African Americans.  I mean you know some of them are, are--I mean I, I--my network is of people who I think are going to be the best job.  Now there--a lot of them are African Americans and I may tell you that that may be the first place I'll look for certain things, okay?  But I've got people that have worked for me over the years or that I've done business with that I, I don't have any qualms about referring business to them and it's regardless of their race.  I mean-and,and people will often say to me, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Bailey] well, you know, what can we do for you? Or, do you want to be involved?"  And I said, "Just take care of my clients.  Just take care of my friends.  Just do a good job because if I refer these people to you, that's a reflection on me, okay?"  And I just say, "Just take care of them and do a good job.  That's all I want.  And if you ever get a chance to help somebody you do the same thing."  I, I do that all the time.  I do it all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you understand that people who are looking for that kind of help, unashamedly are looking for somebody black to do it?
Speaker 2: Oh there's no question and, and I'm not the only one out there.  I tell them I, I know where they are but there are certain things--I mean there are certain people that have certain skills, okay?  I know certain people that are going to be more hands on and, and you know some people need that. I know people that are not as hands on but will do a technical good job for you.  I, I--you know the beauty of what I do now in my consulting practice [LDB Consulting, Inc., Washington, D.C.] is I kind of know what the lawyers do on the estate planning side because I've been there, okay?  I know what the tax people do because I've been there.  I know what the bankers are supposed to do because I've been there.  I know what the insurance guys are supposed to do and they all hate me.  I know what some of the other people are supposed to do.  I know what all the service providers are supposed to do and I can coordinate it but I do that for the people that I've had as clients for, for years and it takes a lot of, of giving of your personal self which is the reason I don't expand what I'm doing because it's--you know you--people say, "Why don't you get a few young people to bring under you and really grow it?"  Well when somebody comes to you, they want to see me.  They want to see me and, and I think it's, it's--other people are out there doing it and step up to the plate and they do, they can do a great job.  I'm not the only person that can do this.
Story_ID: 631377
Speaker 1: Now when, when you look back over your career and, and, and everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Well I think, I think probably I would have left Washington.  I would requested a transfer out of D.C. to maybe go to New York [New York] to be at the executive office for a while or, or transfer overseas for a while and I think I would have gotten away from the practice that I was kind of like bogged down in.  But you know I, I feel so much affinity to my clients, you know.  It's hard to do that.  It's hard to walk out of a person's life or people's lives that really depend on you.  For me it is.  It's very, very difficult.  And I mean I'm, I, you know that's one of my flaws I guess.  I don't, I'm not selfish and, and I'm, I'm always thinking about other people.  But I think if I had it to do all over again that's what I would do.  I probably would definitely have made a switch because my entire career since I left graduate school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] has been right here in Washington, D.C.  And I think while I've traveled and I've been out of here for a lot I think that, I think that in order to, to grow professionally you need to get out of one environment.  If you look at most major companies now, when you look around and you know they, they're looking for their next leader, they want someone who is--you know come from different skillsets, someone who has lived in different areas, run different parts of their businesses because that allows you to look at the whole thing from a macro standpoint.  And, and I think that you know if I look back on it, that's the one regret that I have, yeah.
Story_ID: 631378
Speaker 1: You look back down the line once again, and look at the things you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That which I just told you earlier about the young people I've developed that's come up behind me.  Yeah I've, I've--yeah, because I--there, like I said there were people that, that took an interest in my development and my career and I hope they feel good about you know how I've turned out.  But I've got some people that, that have just done outstanding jobs and they've, they're reached, they've reached some, some really great heights in their respective organizations.  But the one thing I pound all of them on and if it was one thing I could get on them all about, you got to give back, you know.  You got to give back.  You've got to give, you got to continue to be involved in the National Association of Black Accountants, you got to be, continue to be involved in, in these organizations.  And I had this conversation with one of my Jewish friends.  We made partner together and he was telling me about how hard it is for them to get the young Jewish people to be involved in, in the organizations that they've had on over the years.  And I said, "We're having the same problem in the African American community."  And I said, "Now part of that is we need to make sure these organizations are relevant to these young, to these kids now a days," and that's the challenge that I think all of these organizations have to have.  You can't be dealing with the same problems you dealt with in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] you know.  NABA can't be dealing with getting blacks into accounting or making black students just aware of accounting opportunities I mean because they are aware.  They're getting into the profession so what's next?  And in order to make yourself relevant, that's what you got to do, and, and that's across the board.  And so he and I had that conversation just last year.  I said, "You're not by yourself."
Story_ID: 631379
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes are that we can go back into some of the cities, not just you know when I look at things professionally.  But when I walk around and, and look at some of our neighborhoods and I see the language that some of the people use and the disrespect for adults, that's a breakdown in a foundation there and you can't have anything without a strong foundation so that, that troubles me.  It really troubles me.  And I, I, I don't know how we fix that, oaky, because we--and people in general.  I mean your measurement of your success a lot of times is how far you get away from where you came from, which is not good.  That's not necessarily good.  So I, that was--that would be one of the things if I could figure out a way to, to, to, to make the young kids understand that there are some people that really paid some dues to make opportunities available for them much--the opportunities that are available to them are much more than what they were for us.  And to make them understand, I mean I, I told you how I didn't know about Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I mean this generation--you can't afford not to be informed.  I mean I, I, I got away with it, okay?  I mean I got away with it.  I guess I did.  But you can't afford that right now.  The world is moving too fast.  If you're starting out behind like I maybe started out behind from being exposed to--you're going to fall further behind because it's going at a warp speed right now.  Everything is just moving fast.  And so you know you, you got to get people to understand you know--and, and we may have been that way when we were coming along.  We just didn't understand how what you do today has an impact on what, where you are tomorrow or ten, fifteen years from now.  And I, and I just hope that--we at least had some fundamentals that we were able to build on.  I'm concerned that the young people today are not going to have that foundation of which we had to build off of.  Just like I can sit here and almost name every teacher I've had, those people meant something to me.  They had an impact on my life, every one of them, college, undergrad school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], graduate school, my professional life, you know.  And if you have that foundation which all started with my mother [Inez Kendrick Bailey] and father [Richard Bailey], okay, all started with them.  I mean they may not have had the education that I had but I mean they sh- they--like I said there were--I don't ever remember a time in my life there was something I need that I didn't have.  Nothing that I needed I didn't have.
Story_ID: 631380
Speaker 1: On that same note, tell us about your family.  Now, now your, your parents are--your, your--
Speaker 2: My mom [Inez Kendrick Bailey] and dad [Richard Bailey] are still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, still alive.
Speaker 2: My wife's mom [Laura Hubbard Thomas] and dad [Samuel Thomas, Sr.] are still alive.  My wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] and I never had any children.  It's just the two of us.  We've been married now for twenty-eight and a half-twenty-seven and a half years and we dated for a few before that so she counts all of them.  We've been together thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: So you got married in 1985?
Speaker 2: Nine--we got married in January 19--January 5th, 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: We met here in Washington, D.C.  I, my--a girlfriend of hers was someplace and she was there, and my cousin and my best friend were there and we kind of met and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 631381
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you or touched upon that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, you know, the importance of family I mean you know it's, it's--you know, you know we talked about my wife [Loleta Thomas Bailey] and you know my wife is--my wife has a saying, "The one thing you do in life is you never stop growing."  And, and even you know as you, as you--in marriage you may--you have your off--difficulties but you learn from marriage, which means you grow.  And, and you know every morning when I get up and pray, the first thing I ask God is to let me grow just a little bit more today.  And that's what life is all about, it's about growth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else we need to--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well the last question is very similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as somebody who always thought of others before himself.  But in, in, in thinking of others first, I, I thought about myself because if I think about others in the world as better for everyone else it's going to be better for me.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 631382
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, my sister and, and myself at our apartment when we lived in Southeast Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, can you name everybody?
Speaker 1: Yes, my mother Inez Bailey [Inez Kendrick Bailey], my sister Brenda [Brenda Bailey Carpenter] in the middle and me on the end.  This was about 1957 or '58 [1958] I guess.
Speaker 2: This is me in a snow suit.  I think this was actually taken in Richmond, Virginia.  I think I may have been about three or four years old there.
Speaker 1: It's a picture of my dad and my sister and I, Richard Bailey in the middle and me on the, on the right and my sister Brenda in the middle, again that was in our apartment in Southeast Washington I think.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my sister Brenda and I.  My father was stationed at Quonset Point [Naval Air Station Quonset Point, Rhode Island], Rhode Island naval base at the time.  We stayed in Washington, D.C.  We came up to visit him on the weekend and as you can see I had a broken arm.  Not listening to my mother I fell off a fence, walking a fence.
Speaker 1: This is my ninth grade picture.  I think I was fourteen years old so I think that's my ninth grade picture.
Speaker 2: This is a picture when I graduated from the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in May of 1976 with my M.B.A.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my dad, Richard Bailey, and myself and my mother in front of the arena at SIU, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] when I graduated in 1972.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me.  I was the keynote speaker at my great-grandmother's [Mary Lou Singletary Kendrick (ph.)] 100th birthday.  She lived four years after that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wow.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of one of my favorite guys.  This is my father-in-law, Pastor Samuel Thomas [Samuel Thomas, Sr.].  He married my wife and I.  This was at our wedding.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of my friend Woody Brittain [Willard W. "Woody" Brittain, Jr.] and me.  Woody was the deputy chairman of PricewaterhouseCoopers and a very dear friend of mine.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife and I.  I think we were in Los Angeles [California] at a black tie function.  I can't remember, I think that's where it was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Loleta, I'm sorry.  My wife's name is Loleta Thomas Bailey.
Speaker 1: This is my wife and I at our wedding, at the wedding reception.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife and, and, and me again.  I think it was--this was my fortieth birthday party.
Speaker 1: Again, this is a picture of my wife and me on a cruise in the Mediterranean.  We went on a cruise for about seven or eight days.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father and me.  I think this was his seventy-fifth birthday party.  He'd never had a birthday party and my mother gave him one for his seventy-fifth birthday.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at the ceremony, the final day ceremony in church for my friend Theodore Ejangue, now Chief Theodore Ejangue when I went to Cameroon for his ceremony when he was crowned as chief.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the couple of days before the final day.  The chief--one of the traditions in there is someone makes a boat, carves out a boat for the chief and we were inspecting the boat.
Speaker 1: This is another one of the nights of the chief--this is the night I think they had a choir there.  There's a big ceremony there and I was like sitting up there.  I was his honored guest for the whole week.
Speaker 2: This is Chief Ejangue coming into the church.  As you can see I was his honored guest of many, many years.  His wife is behind us but that's Chief Ejangue, Theodore Ejangue who is now the chairman of the stock exchange in Cameroon [Douala Stock Exchange, Douala, Cameroon].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So his portrait's printed on all the outfits on--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his picture is on the--all of our outfits, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I still have that.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) position yeah (unclear) the politicians.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is my graduation picture in 1968 from Central High School [Capitol Heights, Maryland].
Speaker 2: And just to show you there's a, a simple side of me, this is a picture of me when I was at Southern Illinois University.  I think I was either nineteen or twenty years old when I shaved my head.
Speaker 1: This is a brochure of all the partners that had made partner that year at KPMG.  As you can see I'm up on the left hand corner there.  This is--this was all the partners in the country, front and back of this that made partner.
