Story_ID: 91399
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I am the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and give your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Howard Brown, Jr., Howard B. Brown, Jr., H-O-W-A-R-D, B.--
Speaker 1: You have to give the full name.
Speaker 2: I have to give the full name?  Sure.  Howard Barley Brown, Jr. H-O-W-A-R-D, B-A-R-L-E-Y, B-R-O-W-N, no "e" and Junior of course.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 4, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: I believe it's August 13th or 14th?
Speaker 1: Thirteen.
Speaker 2: I'm here to relax and vacation, not to keep up with today's date. But--
Speaker 1: August 13, 2003.
Speaker 2: Of 19--of 2003. Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 2: We're in Oak Bluffs on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a banker, presently.
Speaker 1: Okay, lawyer-banker?
Speaker 2: Lawyer-banker several things.
Story_ID: 91400
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to--I ask five questions of everyone, they're--it's they're a little "People-Magazine-ish", just bear with me.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Short answers. I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I'm somewhat eclectic.  I like seafood, I like--oh, I like lobster.  I'm thinking of lobster because I'm on an island now.  I have several favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably the fall, late summer early fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue comes to mind.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard, of course.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: What you see is what you get.
Story_ID: 91401
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you first about your mother, and if you could give her name and what you know about her background and her growing up.
Speaker 2: Bertha Means, M-E-A-N-S that was her maiden name--Banks.  My mother was married twice.  My father [Howard Barley Brown, Sr.] of course, Brown, which the marriage lasted about 14-15 years.  My mother subsequently remarried and this was in Atlanta, Georgia.  She then came to Hartford, Connecticut with her new husband.  She taught school, but going back historically my mother had a very profound influence on me.  My mother believed in education, so did my father.  She was very proud of her history which included being traced to Choctaw Indians--black.  Her parents and her grandparents believed in education.  They benefitted from schooling throughout.  There were various schools devoted to blacks following the Civil War [1861-1865] and as a consequence some of those were fortunate enough to become educated as my grandparents and great grandparents were.  So I come from that, that lineage and my mother represents that to me.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her growing up at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you share some of--?
Speaker 2: Well she grew up with four sisters and one brother.  She was the--I'm sorry, three other sisters.  It was four girls and one boy.  She was next to the baby--in sibling--as a child.  She enjoyed going to visit her grandparents and going through the plum trees, the orchards.  She could tell about various plants that they grew--the farm that they maintained, the migrant workers who came through and worked for her grandfather, and it was a very pleasant time for her.  This was in Eutaw, Alabama.  It was a very pleasant time for her.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Eutaw too?
Speaker 2: Yes, it has an Indian origin.  It's E-U-T-A-W.
Speaker 1: And what kind of--how would your mother?  What kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: She was a very giving, somewhat of a take-charge person, but, but she wouldn't beat you over the head with it. She had a very clear direction on what she wanted out of life, what she wanted for her children.  She was protective.  Those are the images that come to mind.
Story_ID: 91402
Speaker 1: And your father, can you give his name and what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's name was Howard Barley Brown, Sr.  My father was gifted in, in math--in mathematics.  He dealt well with abstracts.  As a matter of fact, when he was a senior in high school which was in Greene County, Alabama he taught math.  He then went on to--he was only one of five brothers and one sister, but he was the one of five brothers to go into World War II [1939-1945] and fight.  He saw time in Italy and he came out of the Service, he brought property, he became a cattle farmer.  He got into real estate.  Then he gravitated into the heavy equipment business and the family owned several bulldozers at one time, and I use to drive bulldozers during summer breaks from, from college, and my father was a formidable man, he believed in hard work.  He had an opportunity to go to college coming out of the Second World War as a veteran, and at the time because of his influence in looking around what he saw in Alabama, he indicated that he preferred going into business and being his own, being his own master so to speak, and that's what he did all of his life.
Speaker 1: And did he share any stories about growing up too?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were lots of stories.  Of course, this was the segregate South and there were stories I suppose to build up our sense of worth.  For instance, my father use to tell the story of one of his brothers who had brought a brand new truck and his brother was hauling goods and a policeman pulled him over and asked him you know, you know, "Boy, where you taking those goods" or whatever, and my uncle responded that he was driving Mr. Banks' truck and taking Mr. Banks' goods where he was directed, and of course, Banks in this little town owned all of the hardware stores, the department stores, the drug stores, you name it, he was--the family was prominent.  So the patrolman immediately let my uncle go and gave him full vent to pass.  So we tell stories like that--they told stories like that in instances where they had used their guile and whit to save the day and it was things like that--that we grew up understanding that we had to be smart enough to get ahead to make life worthwhile.
Speaker 1: Now where was he--his family from?  Was it also Eutaw?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Eutaw, Alabama.  At first they had settled in Birmingham, Alabama.  My grandfather ran a, ran a coal mill business and ice business.  As his boys began to get older and become teenagers, he felt that it was time to get them out of the city.  So they moved from Birmingham approximately 90 miles south of Birmingham, Alabama to Eutaw, Alabama, and they bought property there.
Story_ID: 91403
Speaker 1: Did you ever--have you been to Eutaw [Alabama] yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was born in Eutaw.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay that's right. And, can you tell us about what type of town it is?
Speaker 2: Eutaw is the county seat of Greene County, Alabama, a county that is approximately 60 percent black.  So it, it was very interesting in viewing it through the Civil Rights Era, as quite a few prominent civil rights fighters--[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and others--would come through town to instill a sense of civic pride in voting and trying to get out the vote and trying to generate interest in having folks run for office.  That effort resulted in [Reverend] William Branch becoming a probate judge in Greene County.  It was a prominent story back in the 1960s.  So there was the, there was the segregated town, the county, the whole era of segregation was there and it was prominent, however, and this is something that I've studied subsequent to experiencing it.  Black kids growing up, if their parents had the wherewithal to isolate them from that life, didn't get exposed to it.  Like we were sent either to Atlanta [Georgia] to be with relatives and friends, or we went to Detroit [Michigan] or we went in other places where we could enjoy being with other kids our ages and just live what we, what we thought was a good life at the time.  We didn't see that heavy cloak of segregation that our parents shielded us from.  So it was a real revelation to get out from under it and then look back and see the tremendous sacrifices that they had to go through and endure.  For instance, I've never drank water from a colored foundation, because my mother would have a fit if I did, and we always went to the bathroom before we went to town.  So it was those little things that they did to protect us and to keep that stark reality of segregation and discrimination out of our lives, so that's what I think of when I think of Eutaw.
Speaker 1: Now, you have your siblings--you have one sister [Dannette Lureatas Brown Daniels], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and she's five years younger than you? She's--
Speaker 2: No, she's three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: Two - three years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and so you were the--you were clearly the, you know oldest son.  Were you the--did you have--wear that mantle in the family, the first job and the--?
Speaker 2: Pretty much so.  Yes, early on by the time we were--my sister and I were around, I was twelve or thirteen--we were sent to Atlanta, Georgia to attend school.  It might have been a little than that, maybe fourteen or fifteen, but we were sent to Atlanta to attend school, because the schools in Greene County, in Eutaw, were segregated. And not only segregated, but there was no sense of equality because the books as they were being discarded from the white schools would end up at the so-called "colored" schools, and my parents would buy my sister and me books.  We would go into Tuscaloosa, Alabama by the University of Alabama where you could order books and we had new textbooks, of course, but after a while it was clear that we weren't getting the education that--that our parents thought we should.  So they made an arrangement with an uncle and aunt who were in Atlanta, Georgia that we would transfer and go to [Henry McNeal] Turner High School in Atlanta, and that was back in the--I guess that was the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91404
Speaker 1: Now I, I wanna take you back to your earliest memory of growing up, you know, or one of your earliest memories.  Do you have one? And do you know what age you were?
Speaker 2: One of my earliest--a lot of, a lot of things come to mind.  One is when I was pre-school I recall going to school with my cousins.  I must have been around four or five and as the teacher was writing on, on the chalk board I took a pencil and started writing what she was writing and she was so amazed at that.  She never said anything in class, but later she told my mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] how surprised she was that I was able to do that, but what the teacher apparently did not know is that my mother was bringing my sister [Dannette Lureatas Brown Daniels] and me along and we were being taught things at three and four years old that a lot of kids did not get until later.  Some did get it obviously, but this was a--this was something that I didn't think much of at the time, but I guess it was really something for a four or five year-old kid to sit there and do second grade work--second, third-grade work.
Story_ID: 91405
Speaker 1: Now, let's take you back to Eutaw and I would like to have you describe what sights, smells and/or sounds remind you of growing up there?
Speaker 2: Traveling with my father to pick up grain to feed the cattle that smell is there.  The recently mixed sorghum sugarcane with the grain that's ground and it's funneled into sacks and then the sacks are thrown onto the bed of the pick-up truck.  Those were fond memories, smells; sights, oh, the five and ten cent store.  As I was a little boy I would want to go to and pick up toys, with my ever watchful mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] there to pay for them, to make sure that I came to no harm in my enthusiasm to run through the store and grab toys--sights, sounds--Sunday afternoons, laughter when we would visit with my grandparents or an aunt or an uncle. Holidays, the huge feasts that the families would come together and partake of. Having a puppy that my father didn't want me to have, having a puppy maybe disappear, then I'd find another one.  Strange, there's a whole mixture of things there.
Speaker 1: And, so, it was a happy childhood?
Speaker 2: It was a very happy childhood.
Story_ID: 91406
Speaker 1: And, now what about other just, you know--what was the address you lived at in Eutaw?
Speaker 2: We lived initially at, oh it was on Kirksey Avenue--I can't think of it, but then we moved to a street that my father [Howard Barley Brown, Sr.] had cut and sold building lots off of which was 301 Brown Avenue.  That's where we lived.  It's a home that my mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] and father built and my father in the 1950s named the street after the family.
Speaker 1: I was wondering the Browns living on Brown Avenue--okay (Laughter)!
Speaker 2: We thought that was remarkable and my father got a big kick out of telling people how he went Downtown and gave the engineers the name of the Street (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what other things in terms of family life or your neighbors or, you know, on the street?
Speaker 2: Well, the--playing ball with the kids comes to mind after school.  We would shoot basketball at the high school.  We would go over to the courts and play ball until dark.  I guess that's pretty much it.
Speaker 1: How about family times and events or on holidays or you know even just sort of--sort of normal everyday life in the family?
Speaker 2: Holidays were big events starting with--oh, we use to do the--I'm thinking, I'm wondering where to begin here.  I'll start with the summer since this is summer.  We always had a big Fourth of July picnic in either--it would be around a lake, either my father's lake or one of the uncles' lakes and we'd invite the family, and they would invite special friends and it was always a big thing to be invited to a Brown picnic.  Usually the minister of the church would be invited and that was a big thing, you know, because ministers held prominent positions in little rural towns. And so there was the Fourth of July and we'd do something around the water.  Labor Day wasn't such a big event.  Thanksgiving was the next major event.  We always had the turkey and the ham and the cousins would visit each other, and of course Christmas was always big--Christmas was big, because then kids who had been away to college or whatever would, would come back home and we would--the younger kids including myself at the time before I had gone off to Atlanta would, you know, marvel at what they had done, they'd been off to school and we would, you know seek to emulate their mannerisms and how they dressed, and we were just very impressed with these older kids who would come home from college or come home from other schools--private schools a lot of times as well, that black folks--where black folks had sent their kids, and these would --these kids would come home and we'd have good times.
Story_ID: 91407
Speaker 1: And what would you say you were like as a young boy, what was Howard Brown like?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very inquisitive sometimes to a fault.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, if there were five of us playing and something got broken, most times the older of, you know, the adults would assume that I had something to do with it, or if there was a piece of machinery and all of a sudden it--someone had taken it apart I would be the first person they would ask about it so--so, I was--I was outgoing, inquisitive, but sensitive and shy at the same time.
Speaker 1: So, sensitive and shy, did that mean you lived some in your own head or you were easily, you know comments to you--you took seriously or?
Speaker 2: Pretty much both--pretty much both.  Comments I took seriously if it came from someone whom I admired or cared about, and if they were not well thought out and just thrown at me it--it would leave a mark for a while.  I was very sensitive to my parent's [Bertha Means Brown Banks and Howard Barley Brown, Sr.] divorce.  I think that--that had a profound effect on me growing up and going through adolescence and it made me withdraw somewhat more into myself.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--let's talk about--wait, could I ask you did you have a nick name, were you junior or were you --?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't stand junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I--just growing up I would--one nickname I had was "head" cause I had a large head, and kids are cruel that way, you know, they will single something out. And I guess that's about--that's about the only one that really comes to mind.
Story_ID: 91408
Speaker 1: Now, elementary school, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I was in Eutaw [Alabama] during the early years.  I didn't get in that--we transferred to Atlanta [Georgia].  My sister [Dannette Lureatas Brown Daniels], I think ended up--my sister came in the eighth or ninth grade and I think I came into [Henry McNeal] Turner High in the tenth grade, I believe.
Speaker 1: But elementary, where did you go?
Speaker 2: Eutaw Elementary.
Speaker 1: Eutaw, oh so it was Eutaw--was that the name of the school?
Speaker 2: That was the school, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And was that--that also was Junior High--was it all combined?
Speaker 2: It was a large school all blended into one.  I mean you would start at one grade, you had different buildings but it was all the same school.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or things that influenced you, at--you know in Eutaw?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes there were.  Now, my mother taught school and she taught at the school where I attended.  So when I would reach you know, let's say the fourth grade, she and another lady who taught the fourth grade would make sure that their kids did not come to them that their kids went to other teachers.  So there was Mrs. Beasley who was the wife of a principal.  There was the music teacher.  There was the Coach--Coach Parker, short man but very formidable, made a presence.  There was the agricultural teacher, Mr. Underwood.  Mr. Underwood had a way of initiating the boys when you would come into various clubs that he was mentoring, and then I had teachers who influenced me when I got to Atlanta in very profound ways.
Speaker 1: What about his introduction?  What do you mean he had a way of introducing?
Speaker 2: Well, he was--he was apparently he was enamored with fraternity life when he was in college.  So, he believed in the paddle and he just had different--a different mindset as to how young men, young African American men should grow up, and it was a good discipline when you look at what happens now.  I'm not recommending a paddle, but the discipline was there for sure, and it was clear that, you know, you didn't lounge in the hallway, you didn't--I mean you had to look presentable in his classes.  He may send you out and give you a comb to comb your hair--various things that--that carried over to how you presented yourself.
Speaker 1: And, you--were there other people in the community that influenced you, you know, your father [Howard Barley Brown, Sr.] was and their family was definitely an influence.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The family on both sides, both the Means on my mother's side and the Browns--was mostly family.  There were some outside people, who were making their own way through the system, but we stayed pretty much--we were pretty much family oriented.
Story_ID: 91409
Speaker 1: Now, with--so what--I just want to get clarification.  Were your--your family was pretty established there in Eutaw [Alabama] it seems like.  Your--you know the both the Means and the Browns.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know how your parents [Howard Barley Brown Sr. and Bertha Means Brown Banks] met?
Speaker 2: Oh, no really.  I had always assumed because it was a fairly small setting and the two or three prominent Black families there that they probably grew up knowing each other, but I have never--that's interesting.  I've never asked my mother that--never did ask either one of them that question.
Speaker 1: Now, when you went--when it was decided that you were gonna go away that was--was that around the same time that your parents divorced?
Speaker 2: That was--they were in--we know now that they were in the process of divorcing, but no it wasn't at the time.  We were sent away for a good year, maybe a year and half, two years and then, then they divorced.
Speaker 1: And so tell me what--I know you said that, you know we--our parents even growing up would send us to Detroit [Michigan] and Atlanta [Georgia], you know and other places, and so this--was this your first time really--this was your first time living there but you had experienced Atlanta?  Had you experienced--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yes, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so who--what--what family were you staying with?
Speaker 2: We were staying with Robert and Willie Allen.  Aunt Willie, I refer to her as--was my mother's youngest sister and she was in education.  She was a teacher and my Uncle--Uncle Bob we referred to him as--became prominent in education.  He studied and acquired a Ph.D., and he was very proud of that and he became a Deacon of the Church there at Friendship Baptist Church where--where my sister and I went to Sunday school.  So, we grew up there, went to [Henry McNeal] Turner High [School].  They lived on Ezra Church Road at the time.  They've now moved further out, but we go back and visit.  I have fond memories of Turner.
Story_ID: 91410
Speaker 1: Now what --what was that--was the Atlanta [Georgia] a change for you in many ways living there and how did it differ from Eutaw [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Atlanta was a real eye opener for my sister [Dannette Lureatas Brown Daniels] and me in several respects.  One was I was free to catch the bus and to go downtown by myself which was never allowed in Eutaw to go anywhere by yourself.  We were exposed to the black colleges, black football games at [Alonzo] Herndon Stadium which is, which is right--which was right by Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].  The rivalry between the black high schools: [David T.] Howard [High School], [Booker T.] Washington High [School], [Henry McNeal] Turner [High School] and it was just, just an amazing thing to see the, the pride and--the-just, just the social life, just the hustle and bustle that black folks were doing and the properties that were being expanded at that point.  There was Collier Heights where black folks were building their own homes, and not so much that they were moving into areas that whites were abandoning, they were building their own communities and I thought that was such a marvelous thing to see.  It sort of reminded me of what my father had done with Brown Avenue [in Eutaw, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And, so a new world really opened up for you is what you are saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that affect you and--you know sort of the relationship to your environment around you?
Speaker 2: Well, it gave me the sense that I too could extend into this world and begin to carve out a way for myself.  It wasn't so much that it was family and you were representing a Brown or whomever, but you were representing yourself and you had to rely on your own initiative in a very competitive--very competitive environment, and that's what Atlanta was.
Story_ID: 91411
Speaker 1: Now, what was Atlanta of your youth?  What was it like and who were the prominent people and who were--were you aware of that, you know as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes!   You were very aware of it.  There was Sam Williams, Reverend [Samuel Woodrow] Williams, who was a Pastor of Friendship Baptist Church.  There was Wheat Street Baptist Church with Reverend [William Holmes] Borders who drew folks there.  There was Ebenezer [Baptist Church], was the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] family.  There was Oloja Haji (ph) which was an establishment put together by black investors which was a combination hotel-barbershop--all of these things.  As far as the prominence of folks making waves, there was Maynard Jackson, there was Julian Bond working with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  There was Benjamin E. Mays, over at Morehouse [College] and these folks were writing, they were speaking, they were being interviewed in the black newspapers. It was a very--very prolific, very exciting time.  A lot was going on.  There was the--the--I guess it had to, I guess you have to describe it as a clash.  There was, there was one perception that students in college should be about getting their education.  There was another that, "Yeah we should get our education but we should also be out here in the streets pursuing our dignity and making sure that segregation is you know forever, you know, that it meets its death" and there were student sit-ins.  There were administration buildings being locked up and administrators being locked out.  There were--this was a time of a great clash of ideas and so you had to be aware of what was going on in the late 1950s, early 1960s, mostly early 1960s.
Speaker 1: So there were a lot of discussion going on also around this--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes!
Speaker 1: You heard--you heard a lot of things?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 91412
Speaker 1: And did you--[Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia]--let's--was that a better high school?  Did you feel that there was much difference?  Did you feel that you were prepared there?
Speaker 2: We were prepared because of the continuing after school, the tutoring that our mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] insisted that we continue to pursue even after school coming from Eutaw, Alabama.  The school itself was somewhat of an experimental school.  It had textbooks that were, I guess fairly novel in dealing with--dealing with new concepts, certainly in math and in the algebra area.  It was a cut above, and the academic--the academics--the academic subjects were really stressed, and it was a challenge initially because of the amount of time that it required to be prepared for your classes and, of course, we played in the band.  Our parents had bought us instruments and I was also in the marching band, but I was also in the symphonic orchestra which was--which it greatly expanded my musical repertoire.
Story_ID: 91014
Speaker 1: Okay, you were saying that you played both in the band and the--you know the symphonic orchestra?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I am wondering what instrument did you play?
Speaker 2: I played the alto saxophone initially then I gravitated to the baritone saxophone.
Speaker 1: And what--what exposure does--in the symphony you played also the saxophone?
Speaker 2: I played the baritone saxophone?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Was your--was the band at [Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia], was it a, you know, did you compete and was it a winning--?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a definite--definitely a first-rate band and it was well known throughout the region, mostly for symphonic music but also as a marching band.  We prided ourselves on being able to try to do the high steps and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, who was your--who were the key participants and things like that?  Were they--were they the high school marching bands or were they, you know, other, you know the college?
Speaker 2: They were high school marching bands and of course we took inspiration from the college bands and attempted to emulate their steps and routines.
Speaker 1: So which of the college bands were you emulating?  Which ones?
Speaker 2: Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]; Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] had a very good band.  We had exposure to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and FAMU, Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  These were all outstanding college bands.
Story_ID: 91015
Speaker 1: Now what--you know you had mentioned that there were a lot of things happening that you were aware of [in Atlanta, Georgia], you know, whether it was Maynard Jackson, or you know Julian Bond with SNCC, and I am just wondering in that high school period, is there, you know the Civil Rights Movement was sort of embloomed there a lot of things happening, but this is 19--is this early 1960s you were--or 1960?
Speaker 2: This is you could say "1960ish" right along there, right.
Speaker 1: Is there any single event that stands out most in your mind?
Speaker 2: I guess it would have to be the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] parties.  They were basically recruiting parties where non-violent philosophy was discussed.  Mahatma Gandhi and other prominent national leaders in their time and there were great debates that use to go on at the SNCC parties and there was a great time of socialization.  So I would say that whole era of being more aware of who you are and what demands you were making on society as a young black person who is being exposed to college life, who's learning and who's finding out that people--peoples all over the world have had similar struggles and have had to go through certain transitions to gain respect.  So it was--it was, it was just a time and an era that was just flushed with those kinds of issues.
Speaker 1: Now where the parties held and how often would, you know, young people like high school students go to the party?
Speaker 2: Well, high school students really didn't get to the parties unless they snuck in with some older friends.  The parties were held in several places.  Mostly it could be in the--in someone's home, it could be in a basement, it could be in a facility that SNCC was renting out perhaps.  I haven't really focused on where the parties were held but they were always--it was some social event usually on weekends where you would gravitate to.
Story_ID: 91016
Speaker 1: And, is there any person that you were wanting to emulate or be during that time, and I'm talking about high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a difficult question.  There were role models certainly but I'd never--never had the--never thought that in my wildest imagination I could, you know, achieve on a par with certain people whom I admired, but there were the role models for sure.  There was Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays, there was Sam Williams [Reverend Samuel Woodward Williams] who was instrumental downtown in helping with the desegregation and assuring that Atlanta [Georgia] would be a city too busy to hate, working with Mayor [William B.] Hartsfield at the time.  There were all of these influences that--that I was exposed to.  There were--oh, Stokley Carmichael [now Kwame Toure] would come into town and go to a college campus.  H. Rap Brown [now Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] would come over and come in and he may slug somebody who didn't agree with his philosophy, and all of this excitement was in the air, so it's difficult to pull out any particular person.
Speaker 1: Now you--in high school was there--were you active in besides, you know, the band, you know, in playing your instrument--were you active in other events, I mean or other organizations?
Speaker 2: Sure, I--well yes, not that many activities though.  There was a young men's club that I joined.  There was a band, there was a football team my last year of school.  I thought I should do that as a part of the coming into young manhood, I suppose.  I wanted to play football so I left the band for all of about three hot weeks then I figured the band was a much easier type of endeavor plus you were closer to the cheerleaders.  Football was just kind of a rough sport for me.  Then there were, oh, there were foreign language clubs.  I never really got involved.  I got involved in the Latin Club I think for a while, but mostly I was involved with the band.  I enjoyed the band.
Story_ID: 91017
Speaker 1: Okay, now you went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how was the decision that you go to Morehouse or did you look at a variety of other places?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: I only looked at two schools really.  I looked at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Morehouse College, and at the time my father [Howard Barley Brown, Sr.] attempted to influence me to go to Morehouse.  I only found out later why he was really influencing me to go to Morehouse, that's because he wanted me to stay close to the bulldozer business.  My mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] wanted me to get away from the bulldozer business, but I was also influenced by people who had attended Morehouse and had gone on and staked out their claim to various professions in life, and I was very much influenced by Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays and others who had attended--who were involved with Morehouse and also those who had attended.  So I, so I ultimately chose Morehouse.
Speaker 1: And that was 19--is it 1963?
Speaker 2: That's 1962.
Speaker 1: Oh, two, okay. And so you go there--have you--you've had some exposure already to the campus at the, by the-- by the time--
Speaker 2: Oh yes. --because you're there.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, tell me what your experience was like those, you know, four years, and you know and what you majored in?
Speaker 1: Well the experience was like opening up, you know, a very, very colorful book that has almost everything imaginable to explore in it.  You go through the index and you--you might end up studying philosophy, religion, political science, the languages--there was the music world, there was just everything imaginable that you would think a college campus would bring to you, and it was just--it was just a wonderful experience to be able to meet young men of like minds who--I think and we came from all over really, but to be able to pursue excellence without any concept of limitation, and that was Dr. Mays' way of approaching education that the sky is the limit and those persons whom he recruited for positions thought similarly and it was this--this not having to apologize for wanting to be the absolute best to achieve the best that you could possibly be and--and to state that openly and go out and try to do it.  I mean that was--that was very inspiring.
Story_ID: 91018
Speaker 1: Did you--do you--tell me how predominant was Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays when you were there?  How--how predominant an influence and --?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Mays was Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  If Dr. Mays spoke at chapel, you were there to listen.  If you saw Dr. Mays walking across campus or if you didn't see him you might hear his voice and it might be "Hello young man.  How are you today?" and he would make his eye contact with you and he would want you to answer and you had to give him an answer.  It wasn't some casual, you know, remark and running off.  If he wanted to engage you in conversation and he frequently did, then you had to respond and you had to bring out those attributes which you thought a Morehouse man would bring out in discussing whatever topic Dr. Mays wanted to discuss.  It was a very inspiring type of experience.  It was everything you read--everything you read about him, I mean that was the stature of the man, and that was--that was the image that most impressed me about the school.
Speaker 1: Were you--with chapel, do you remember any one of his talks specifically?
Speaker 2: No, not so much, not so much his talks.  More his intensity and I remember more so the talks the deans--the dean of the college would have with us as young Morehouse men, you know, he would go--this is Dean [Dr. Brailsford Reese] Brazil at the time.  Dean Brazil would speak to us about the image of a Morehouse man, and sometimes we would snicker because he would--he would encourage us to be gentlemen with the young ladies and hold doors and we thought some of that was just a little getting to border on the picayune, but getting back to Dr. Mays, Dr. Mays was a man of substance.  When he spoke on issues, it was a learning experience.
Story_ID: 91019
Speaker 1: Now, with you--what--how--where did you live on campus and you know--were you living on campus?
Speaker 2: I was on campus for a while.  I was in Quarles Court which has since become Fraternity Row, and after a while I moved off campus.  I moved out on Raymond Street with several other young Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] men.
Speaker 1: And what--what--just tell me what--how you developed, you know, what were the things that were important during your college experience?  Whether--or you can give me anecdotes about your time at Morehouse.
Speaker 2: Well, there are--the experience was vast; I mean, it covered the gamut basically.  The--well it just represented another world entirely--had coming from--having come from a fairly sheltered life and then being able to make choices on your own, and I'm sure I did everything that young men going to college their first year do.  You know we would have a beer--beer parties on Friday nights and drink too much beer and we would go over to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and try to talk to the young ladies or go to Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and try to talk to the young ladies.  It was just-the, you know, the world is yours, so sort of. But then later you began to take on more serious--you take--you take--you begin to take a more serious focus.  You have to have figure out and think in terms of your major, what you plan to do later with your life.  Mine initially was medicine but after seeing my sister [Dannette Lureatas Brown Daniels] cut her finger to the bone and I almost fainted, I knew I would not go into medicine.  Then I gravitated to psychology and political science.  Ultimately, I chose political science because I wanted to become a lawyer.
Story_ID: 91020
Speaker 1: What--what made you decide that you wanted to be a lawyer?  Where did that come about?
Speaker 2: I'm really not sure to tell you the truth.  I think I was looking at careers of black men who impressed me.  I was looking at things that they were doing in the Civil Rights Movement.  Arthur Shores--Attorney Shores in Birmingham [Alabama] was doing marvelous things working locally.  I mean to say Birmingham, Alabama where the bombings and all of this was going on and the image that he carried and the dignity with which he got involved in doing what he could to alleviate the situation.  There was Vernon Jordan, there were--there were several black lawyers who--and there was attorney [Orzell] Billingsley, but there were several black attorneys who I was beginning to take notice of and seeing how they--they were able to conduct their affairs and to help people and I saw that as a--as something worthy of pursuit.
Speaker 1: Now, so you--you decide that you are going immediately afterwards, and what--what's your process of decision?
Speaker 2: No, my process was very round-about and convoluted.  I ended up after two years of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and after my parents [Howard Barley Brown, Sr. and Bertha Means Brown Banks] divorced, I just wanted to get away from everything, and so I ended up going into the military. I went to Morehouse initially with an academic scholarship. I lost that scholarship because I just wasn't focused.  So I said, "Well, you know, I went in at an early age maybe it's time that I see the world."  So, I joined the [United States] Air Force and I volunteered to go as far away as possible and that choice was Japan.  So I ended up in Japan for two years, and it was--it was an educational--more than an educational experience because I was maturing, becoming more of a young man with all of a sudden less choices, because here I am I've gone from the world being, you know my oyster so to speak to now I'm in the world, I'm in a different culture but I'm narrowly confined to a military existence.  So it was--sort of turning my world over, but I knew that I had to get through it. So I got through it, but I took evening courses from universities.  I studied the language and--so after the two years I came back to the United States.  I was stationed in Florida at a strategic air command base.  I stayed there for a number of months.  I got bored, then I put in to go to Southeast Asia.  I figured I could get there with the, the type of training that I was--the type of training that I had gone through.  I would most likely avoid combat and I did avoid combat.  I ended up in Thailand for one year working with a communications wing which, which required a high level of security clearance, and I enjoyed that for about a year, then I came back, I wrote to the school told them I think I've gone through my maturation process and I want to get back in.  So they said "come on back, Howard".  So I went back and finished in two years and went on to law school.
Story_ID: 91021
Speaker 1: And it was at that time--you also--did you meet your wife [Elizabeth Brown] and ---?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met my wife on the--my second two years at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I met her and you could say I was smitten.  I don't know.  I don't think I was smitten, I don't know, whatever, but anyway we fell in love and the next you knew we were getting married (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you decide--so what--the process for law school, where do you decide you want to go?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I initially wanted to go to Emory [University] Law School because I was there in Atlanta [Georgia] and I had gotten an evening job working with the Mason Dixon Trucking Line and I was typing out invoices and sending them out--sending the trucks out, you know, and I figured if I could just go to law school locally I could keep that job.  It shows you how limited sometimes your vision is.  My parents [Howard Barley Brown, Sr. and Bertha Means Brown Banks] at the time--my mother had remarried.  They had moved to Hartford, Connecticut.  My mother and stepfather told me that I could go to law school significantly cheaper, less expensive as a citizen of Connecticut, going to the University of Connecticut Law School [Hartford, Connecticut] than if I had gone to Emory and paid out a substantial amount of money for tuition.  So, one thing led to another and I ended up applying and getting accepted to the University Of Connecticut School Of Law.  I was told at time and it was so that UConn Law School rated within the top twenty--I'm sorry but I'm losing my voice--but rated within the top twenty schools, law schools in the country so that was my choice.
Story_ID: 91022
Speaker 1: So you move there [Hartford, Connecticut] and--but this--is this your first time up north--I mean up north, living up north. Besides the time that you had spent in other places when --?
Speaker 2: No, not really because when I came out of the [United States] Air Force in 1968, I came up obviously to visit my mother [Bertha Means Brown Banks] and her new husband and to get a summer job.  So I worked for the summer in Hartford before going back to Atlanta [Georgia] in the fall.  So I was familiar with Connecticut.
Speaker 1: So--so you get in law school.  You--how--what's your experience--I mean one, what are you wanting to do with a law degree, do you have an idea about that, and two, you know, well let's answer that question first.
Speaker 2: I had an idea.  I guess for like most first-year law students you know, you see yourself in this Perry Mason role and you are going out and just bowling people over with your logic and your persuasiveness of your arguments and all of this stuff so I wanted to be a criminal lawyer and wear black suits and have a certain distinguished image and do all of these things.  Well, I got involved in some work that involved dealing with litigants being involved in--I'm having a difficult time telling you what the name of this program--.
Speaker 1: Public defenders?
Speaker 2: Got involved with the public defenders right, and most of my effort was towards plea bargaining and there was very little really, really using the leverage of your case because most--what I saw of the legal system at time the effort was to process them, get them through judiciary system, either get a fine or do a slap on the wrist and deal with that.  So the criminal law system pretty much turned me off, and I then began to move toward business law and to--to look at areas within business law, corporate law that I thought I could--could make a difference.
Story_ID: 91023
Speaker 1: Were there any professors that you particularly liked or remembered there [University of Connecticut School of Law, Hartford, Connecticut] and --?
Speaker 2: Yes, Professor [Francis C.] Cady who taught contracts.  I certainly remember Professor Cady.  I got one of the better grades in the first semester, and I recall a lot of the kids-'cause we weren't, there weren't many African Americans or any other minority kids in that class so I got what I considered was a good grade with that first semester and I remember some of my non-black friends grumbling that it was probably due to some type of affirmative action program or something that I got, got the better grades.  Of course, I challenged that, and we had some fun debating that, but there was Professor Cady, there was Professor [Robert] Bard who taught international law and I really enjoyed international law.  He was good at engaging you in conversation about the law rather than being pedantic and just teaching it and laying it out.  So, I found him a very effective teacher. And there were some more eccentric professors along the way whose names I will not reveal, but it was--it was a great time in my life to be involved in law school.
Speaker 1: And you went in what year and graduated in what--you went in 19 --?
Speaker 2: I went in 1970 and graduated in 1973.
Speaker 1: Now--and when you graduate now--and this is a time that blacks are going into corporate America right in more numbers, things are opening up?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Had "Black Enterprise" been formed by then, the magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe it had.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so I'm just trying to sort of you know understand the time, you know try to put your time within context or have you put it with in context.  So can you just sort of take us to your first job, how you got it, what you were doing, you know how many African Americans were there?
Speaker 2: Okay, what I found to be effective at that time and it holds true today is that word of mouth and networking is at least as effective as anything that's done in a more formal vein as far as--as far as doing job research.  I had a friend who knew a person who worked within the personnel department of this insurance conglomerate, and there were several insurance conglomerates throughout the greater Hartford [Connecticut] area.  I was offered a position at two of them and at two law firms and one public law agency out of state.  Well, the one that I was initially focused on which is what I was referring to when I said if you know people who know other people who will pass word, is that I knew that there was no black lawyers-no, no lawyers of color, no lawyers of color at the Hartford Insurance Group at the time that I applied and other firms were hiring there first so to speak, and I felt that it would--I felt that the likelihood that I would be hired was pretty good based on what I had done in law school--my involvement, my grades and so I went and gave it the best shot that I could and I think they perceived that you know, I could handle the job, I could do the job.
Story_ID: 88540
Speaker 1: Years progressed, say by the fourth, fifth year, I found myself being not so much isolated, but I was specializing, yes, but I was gravitating in the areas that--that I felt would not advance me later in say for instance, into senior management of the company.  That was my perception at the time.  My perception may or may not have been correct, but it was my first job out law school --
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I was looking to move on.
Speaker 2: So, let's--but let's go back, so you are the first African American that they've hired in the legal department.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Who is general counsel at the time and [The] Hartford Insurance [Group], what you know size company in terms of revenue?
Speaker 1: At the time the general counsel was Richard Schmaltz.  Richard also ran the--he did the legal work; he headed the legal work for the property casualty side.  The Hartford Insurance Group like most companies back then were split.  There was a property casualty, then there was a life side.  The company was formidable.  It was rather conservatively run which over the years has obviously been very beneficial to the company and ultimately its stockholders.  It was bought by ITT [International Telephone & Telegraph] in the oh, back I think it was around 1980 [sic, 1970], so subsequent to that it was spun off and came into its own again.  Right now, the Hartford Financial Services Group is one of the largest property casualty life companies, I'd say in the world certainly one of the largest in the United States.
Story_ID: 88541
Speaker 1: Now what your experience as the first black in the legal department and you know, what is happening around the country with, you know, corporate legal departments?
Speaker 2: There were more and more of persons of color, women of color going into corporate law, going into the--going onto the legal staffs of major corporations throughout the country.  There was not a flood.  It was more of a trickle and each company--this may sound a bit--it's not morbid, that's not the word but it--it certainly was no flood of folks going into corporate America.  What I was tempted to say is that each company certainly wanted one and after it got its one, and of course, this is an impression that I and several of my friends had, that they would get the one or the two and move on, and we began to form organizations and to communicate amongst ourselves about common experiences in corporate America as--as an attorney.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the organizations you formed?
Speaker 2: Well, in law, in law school that was the--that was the Black American Law School Association (BALSA).  In the wider--the wider organizations included the--it was the National Bar Association, of course, that was there for us.  Within the state [Connecticut] locally, we formed the George W. Crawford Law Association in recognition of Attorney Crawford who practiced in New Haven, Connecticut and we engaged in speaking forums.  We would invite various people to come and speak before the organization and we looked after the new students coming along out of law school making sure that they were properly mentored and had a sounding board to bring their issues to--things that we didn't have coming along being first however.  It was that kind of thing that reaching back to help those coming along that I thought was significant.
Speaker 1: And you--you do well at Hartford though, right? Besides--I mean the--you do well within the corporate --?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The corporation, so--?
Speaker 2: I thought so (laughter).
Story_ID: 88542
Speaker 1: And so can you talk about your, you know, what happened there and your growth there and why you ended up leaving?
Speaker 2: My initial involvement had to do with dealing with the life side.  I later gravitated to what was considered the bread and butter of the company which was property casualty.  I did well in drafting language.  So I was involved in drafting manuscript policies, specialty lines, coverage, writing coverage parts and exclusions which took away a lot of what the other part gave--just being a bit facetious here.   So I did, I did that and I was involved with agency matters where there--you may have to call in counsel for litigation depending upon the issues involved.  However, I was being more and more directed into writing policy language and scrutinizing legalese to convert it into simplified language, language which was more easily understood by policy holders.  I viewed that as a narrowing of areas that I could grow in.  I was looking to be elevated into middle and senior management because ultimately I wanted to get out of the law department and go into senior corporate management and it was my perception that a lot of my peers were gravitating out, moving out of legal into management--senior management and I was you know being congratulated on doing a great job, you know, where I was.  So I figured at some point I would look around and see what else would be available.  I--one of, one of my shortcomings, one of my admitted shortcomings is that after a certain number of years I would probably want to look across and see if the grass is really greener on the other side, see if there are other things out in corporate America that I could enjoy doing.
Story_ID: 88543
Speaker 1: And so, so you said you were trying to sort of spread your wings some.  How did the job come about with--with O'Sullivan Fuels [O'Sullivan Fuel Oil, Inc.]?  Was that part of that in terms of spreading your wings some, or was it --?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was personally recruited by the owner of the company [Kenneth C. Barboza].  The company at the time was the largest minority-owned firm in New England and it was getting great press and at this time there were what was called "Section 8A Contracts" from the government to assist in buying fuel oil.  We were bidding on utility company contracts to supply oil.  We were bidding on Groton Military Base [Naval Submarine Base New London, Groton, Connecticut] to provide jet fuel.  I mean we were doing all these sexy things.  The company was doing all these sexy things and I was offered to come in and be the number two man in running the company and also in helping the company to acquire a tank farm, and that was the ultimate aim of the board and of the management of the company at the time.  So it was--they hit all the right notes with me.  It was a challenge.  That was the glamour of being out doing things.  They offered me significantly more than I was making at The Hartford [Financial] Group, there was a vehicle and at the time they told me I'd have a telephone in my car.  I thought that was a big thing (laughter) and I'm really dating myself for sure, and so after talking to some people, half counseled me against doing it, half said go for it and I decided to go for it and that's when I severed ties with the Hartford Group on a very amicable basis however.
Speaker 1: So you, so this was an opportunity that you had just spoken of to you know sort of "spread your wings" so to speak and also to you know that you felt that you were getting a little pigeonholed or there was no growth in the you know writing of the contracts, the language of --.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And so on property--it's on property and casualty, okay?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 88544
Speaker 1: Okay. So you--this was, this was an opportunity to look. One, who owned the company [O'Sullivan Fuel Oil, Inc.] and how had you met that person and you know, though you said you were recruited in, and also then--I just want you to sort of tell the story of your experience there.  You were there three years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so that's--that's all I wanna ---.
Speaker 2: The company was--the majority stockholder was a person by the name of Kenneth Barboza.  The other owners of the company were primarily family members.  I was offered an equity position in the company if I, if I could--if I were able to get the company into the black--company had been going through somewhat of a transition--it was looking for growth.  It was looking to acquire a tank farm.  It was looking to do all these things.  I was able to get the company into the black.  I brought in a sales person who had very significant sales experience who was able to get out and we were able to generate significant sales for that company.  I was also able to negotiate acquisition of a tank farm with Texaco with joint financing from--at the time it was the Connecticut National Bank and the SBA, Small Business Administration.  I put together a package of financing and O'Sullivan's was able to acquire a tank farm in Cromwell [Connecticut].  We acquired it from Texaco.  I had done everything that I thought would entitle me to my equity in the company.  However, owners--and I learned a valuable lesson.  Owners of a small closely-held corporation will resist any outer force.  And I don't care how, how significant it is or what you promise. There is something about kinship and family that you do not easily penetrate, especially if you are perceived as somebody who can take them to a level that they're--where they may or may not be comfortable.  I'm not saying that was necessarily the case here but, it was my perception that I was pushing to get this company into an area of commerce that most of the board members and the family members were resisting.  So at that point I knew it was time for me to say goodbye.
Speaker 1: And--but what did you learn from that experience besides that, you know, the fact of you know, family-owned businesses?  You had, you know, you came in with the opportunity to help run things and did you find that you got that experience?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I found that it's one of the most difficult things another area there is managing people as number two there.  The difficult personnel issues had to be resolved by me.  It takes a certain skill to manage people.  People are not managed as easily as legal concepts, because oftentimes they can be very irrational, but if you are perceptive enough they'll send you the right signals for you to read.  If you don't read them, (laughter) then you can find yourself in trouble very quickly.  The other thing I learned is that if you have a good idea it doesn't matter whether you are coming from a small closely-held corporation or whether you are, you know much larger and much more sophisticated that the idea ultimately, if it has value, you can find a market for it.  It may be difficult to do, but ultimately it is the idea and that--that's one of the things that continued to motivate me to look to be creative in dealing with that company and with others.
Story_ID: 88545
Speaker 1: Now what--are you at this time that you're involved with [Kenneth C.] Barboza, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you getting more integrated within the Hartford [Connecticut] community and are you involved politically or are you mainly sort of on a path of you know first corporate the more entrepreneurship?
Speaker 2: Well that was my fear.  I saw myself getting going more and more into entrepreneurship, and I say that--I say it sort of with a dual meaning.  In one sense I wanted the entrepreneurship.  In another, I didn't really want to lose my connection to the corporate and the political scenes that were going on in Hartford.  So, in one sense I'm on somewhat of a rocky boat on the entrepreneur at that point in time and I figured a safe harbor for me would have been to move back into either corporate or something on the periphery of a political appointment.
Speaker 1: Now who are the powers that be in Hartford?  Who are they at that point?
Speaker 2: At that point, oh, they obvious--well, there's certainly the City Council of Hartford.  Hartford had a weak mayoral form of government.  So, city council pretty much ran Hartford.  There were what was referred to as "the Bishops" which were the CEOs of the major corporations.  There was also the Governor's Office.  At the time the Governor was Governor [William A.] O'Neill, Bill O'Neill and being a democrat, the approach was to make sure that the black community was in some sense nurtured and kept within the democratic, Democratic Party framework.  There was also Gerald Lamb who was the first state treasurer, first black state treasurer of Connecticut.  Let's see, I'm sure I'm leaving out a whole host of folks.  There was Ella Cromwell, Trudy Merrill (ph.)--these are African American women who were very influential in the black community in Hartford.  There was also a Connecticut Black Democratic Club that helped screen prospective appointees for positions and they helped you make contact, political contact, and they made sure that you went through that screening process and that you possessed the wherewithal to have them endorse you for a position.
Story_ID: 88546
Speaker 1: Now, so that's what I--so that's--this is sort of the mill here.  Now how large is Hartford [Connecticut]'s African American community who are sort of the--I need you to, you know, in your responses, if you could be specifics about you know, people and you know just so I get a sense of who the players are, what the tone--you know?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well going back a few years--we are going back a few years here and I'll do my best.  One thing--there's one crucial thing to remember about Hartford and it's this peculiarity.  Maybe it's not such a peculiarity, but it's--certainly something that has hindered Hartford's development and that is the core city of Hartford is surrounded by about 32 separately incorporated towns and cities, and whereas other towns have grown by annexation and bringing additional territory into the township, Hartford has not been able to do that.  As a consequence the core city of Hartford is made up of a significant, a very, very substantial number of blue collar workers who carry disproportionately--the tax burden of the city of Hartford.  The residents of the outer suburbia who drive in daily, take advantage of the police force in Hartford, the fire department in Hartford--all of the services and conveniences that Hartford provides, but then their tax base is not in Hartford, they go back to the suburbia and as a consequence of that Hartford has found itself to be somewhat of a poor city.  However, if you took in the outer suburbia, Hartford would be a town--a city in excess of one million people and it would have a significant tax base in which to handle its cost of running the city.  Now, having said that, and I'm not certain of my numbers but I would say that Hartford probably--Hartford proper has around 230,000 people, maybe more [sic, 121,578 according to the 2000 census].  Of that number I am also tempted to say about maybe 40 percent would be African American, maybe somewhat less.  There is a growing, a fast moving growing Latino population in Hartford.  The present Mayor is Latino, Mayor Eddie Perez [Eduardo Alberto Perez], he's the first Latino Mayor of a major city--I believe in the country [sic, in New England].  So Hartford is not, it's your typical city.  It has certain soft spots that you have to be aware of in dealing with the--where the power really lies in Hartford.
Story_ID: 88547
Speaker 1: Okay, so now what--with that said--in 19--you know what I wasn't understanding was between 1981 and 1982 what you did and then how you came to be--become deputy banking commissioner [of the Connecticut Department of Banking] and then you know how did that happen?  I want to understand--you know--what I-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --okay because your career starts out in your--ensconced within you know the corporate community and then you go and then you do an entrepreneurial thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what I don't understand is where you also --getting involved politically you know with the time or how this opportunity came about, you know?
Speaker 2: Okay, after I decided to leave O'Sullivans [Fuel Oil, Inc.] it was just a matter of saying, "Look, I've had it.  I gotta get outta here."  I then made some calls, talked with people about positions that may be open, both in government and in corporate America.  There was the position of deputy banking commissioner.  At the time it was vacant, and so while that's going on I'm obviously doing other things to keep myself occupied and put bread on the table.  I'm doing some consulting.  I'm helping Black businesses organize--I'm doing some of that.  I'm working with the community, working with local, local community organizations.  I'm attending political party organizations that look to screen potential candidates for jobs.  I'm interviewing through the Connecticut Democratic--Black Democratic Clubs, I'm visiting them and I was the--I was selected, you know, as the person to be proposed for the job of deputy banking commissioner.  Following that initial few months, there was--I'm trying to recall, there was a calamity either the--either the--I think the Governor had a heart attack.  Something occurred; I'm trying to recall but it slowed down the process.  I know that the former banking commissioner died of a heart attack, David Neiditz.  That set the process back.  Following David Neiditz there then--it's coming back now.  The banking commissioner had a heart attack and died, so the focus switched from filling the deputy banking position which I would have taken to filling the banking commissioner position, an executive assistant to David Neiditz, the then banking commissioner was appointed banking commissioner, which then cleared the way for me to come in as deputy.  A major proponent of my getting that job was Gerald Lamb, who had been the first state treasurer, black state treasurer of the state of Connecticut and he had also held a job of banking commissioner for about a year.  Looking back historically this was several years before I came on the scene, but Gerald Lamb was instrumental and his voice carried a lot of weight as far as being a proponent for my coming in.
Story_ID: 88548
Speaker 1: So this opens up a whole new world to you in some respects, right,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being [deputy] banking commissioner?  Okay, and can you talk about well, we have to change--but can you talk about some of the major initiatives that happened, you know, under-under, under this?
Speaker 2: Well --.
Speaker 1: First of all you were head of the legal staff there too right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The first thing, the first thing that occurred is the then new banking commissioner, Brian Woolf was coming into a new--to a position as well as I coming in as deputy banking commissioner.  Woolf had been there a little bit longer than I had.  He was gracious enough to say, "Howard look, let's split--let's split the disciplines here".  He said, "With your background you should head legal," and I thought that was very gracious of him so I did head legal.  I also focused mostly on banking.  He focused mostly on securities and what one of us did not know, the other knew and at the end of the day, literally at the end of the day usually around 6:00 in the evening we would get together and compare notes and see what issues were still looming out there that we had to deal with.  So it was a learning experience but it was also a--it was a great time to be involved in government.  A lot of--more specifically to be involved in banking in government, because a lot of initiatives were becoming out of Washington [D.C.] regarding deregulation and allowing savings banks to get more involved in commercial--.
Story_ID: 90397
Speaker 1: [And isolated from banking.]  Insurance had continued to be regulated by the states and not by the federal government --that has historic origins.  So then here comes say 1980 or thereabouts.  There's the Community Reinvestment Act passed in 1978 [sic, 1977].  The states after passage didn't have to, but after passage various states began enacting their own CRA [Community Reinvestment Act] legislation.  Connecticut enacted its version.  So, so you have this great impetus from the Federal government and now from the state governments to provide banking resources and sources of credit into areas where banks have their offices and of course we know where the banks' offices were located, they were located in downtown, but who lived downtown?  Well, there are -- there were a few folks who lived in the high rises but mostly it was blue collar workers, it was the black folks; it was other ethnic groups who had very limited banking.  So that's where the CRA came in, and getting back to the deregulation thing that was very big.  You had financial services companies or financial holding companies wanting to get involved in insurance.  Several of them wanted to do securities work.  There were various legal schemes devised to allow bank holding companies to create security subsidiaries called "Subsection 20 Subsidiaries" which was expressly allowed by the Bank Holding Company Act. So there were a lot of unique mechanizations being proposed to tear down the barriers that separated banking, securities and insurance.  So heading up legal you had to really be you know on top of your game to make sure you knew what you were approving and what you were getting involved in.
Speaker 2: Now were you -- this -- first of all, this is a time of a lot of change happening, you know and sort of creative approaches and where also -- isn't this the time of junk bonds or Mike Milken [Michael Robert Milken] and junk bonds or this is a little --?
Speaker 1: They are coming up and around about that time.  The mid-1980s saw a lot of what I now refer to as "innovative and creative" investment opportunities.  Course junk bonds now are the mainstay of the corporations that don't have investment grade debt.  So inherently there was nothing really -- I shouldn't use absolutes, but I will say inherently junk bonds proved to be a very effective way of funding corporations that did not have investment grade ratings from the rating agencies.  The problem with the Milken dilemma and those that followed it or were involved in it, is that there were also sprinkled amongst the junk bonds, there was some insider trading claims and other issues that questioned -- that brought into question securities law violations.
Story_ID: 90398
Speaker 1: Now you, you served as deputy banking commissioner; are there things -- and then you become banking commissioner -- but are there things that are happening while you're a Deputy, you know that were newsworthy, noteworthy, you know, problematic -- I mean, I'm not --?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure there were.  I was really up to my earlobes in just trying to make sure that the department was run in a way that complied with new laws that were being enacted all over the place.  We were dealing not just with banking per se, we were dealing with the savings and loan associations, we were dealing with credit unions, we were dealing with consumer credit issues of disclosure, small loan licensees, we were also dealing with the Securities Laws as they pertained to broker-dealer -- broker-dealer registrations and there were -- as we talk these issues out more things come to mind.  There were some securities problems whereby certain inside traders were attempting to make markets in bank stock which required that I call in the SEC and deal with the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] as well as the NASD, the National Association of Securities Dealers, so oftentimes we jointly pursued investigations, so that's certainly one prominent area.  Another area had to do a cashing of government checks -- welfare checks.  This was part of the issue of the CRA [Community Reinvestment Act].  If banks are going to be required to bring full banking services to the inner-city residents and if a significant portion of them are presenting government checks to be cashed, whether they be welfare checks or other types of government checks.  I took the position that it would be somewhat confiscatory to require these people to open up a banking account and pay banking fees in order to be able to cash a welfare check.  So we introduced legislation at the state level that basically stated that as long as a welfare recipient presents -- I think it was two forms of ID, one with a picture, that that should suffice and that the opening of a bank account would not be required at that institution.  Connecticut was the first state to pass that legislation and other states then signed on and did the same thing.  So there were several areas within the CRA and consumer credit areas that I operated in.
Story_ID: 90399
Speaker 1: Now how does Banking Commissioner -- how does that develop?  Is it just -- how -- how are you leading one into the other?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --cause totally you almost were there ten years.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it proved to be something that I probably should have gotten out of earlier, in hindsight.  The way that the banking commissioner position developed for me was that having been a very active deputy banking commissioner and having taken a legal staff of no more than two people at the time that I came in, and I grew it to a seven-person force.  I hired the first black lawyers on the legal staff that they'd ever had there. I -- so I had that as an accomplishment, growing a staff and growing a staff that was well respected through the banking industry which was very important.  So when the banking position became available due to the resignation of the former banking commissioner [Brian J. Woolf] I threw my hat in the ring, obviously to be considered. And I was appointed acting banking commissioner for about, oh six months and did everything that a banking commissioner would do except as acting banking commissioner so we had some discussions about that with the Governor's staff, and that you now either you know they would move on this and I would become banking commissioner or you know, let's clean this up one way or the other.  So the decision was made to make me full -- give me the full authority and title as banking commissioner.  I went on from there to be appointed a second time by the Governor [William A. O'Neill] so I received two appointments of banking commissioner by the Governor having come in as deputy banking commissioner.
Speaker 1: And what -- so this was historic though in -
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Connecticut?
Speaker 2: It was historic.  It's the first time we've had a minority or a black go from deputy banking commissioner to commissioner.
Speaker 1: So what was the community -- I mean there was a lot of press, there was -- the lead time between you sort of -- did you have to do a lot of lobbying behind the scenes for it?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  No, I just let it be known that I wanted the position, and the banking department had a very high profile at the time because of the federal legislation regarding deregulation and the CRA [Community Reinvestment Act] and all of these different things were going on.  So I had a, I had a high profile.  I was running a legal staff.  I was going to the General Assembly testifying on various proposed legislation that we at the Department of Banking wanted.  So the profile was there, so once it became clear that I was a candidate for the job, it eased along rather, relatively smoothly I thought.
Story_ID: 90400
Speaker 1: So what were the things that you did -- you think you did very right during that time?
Speaker 2: Most--mostly, you are, your day is filled with just trying to deal with ordinary issues that come up.  The high profile of things that you do are far and few in between, you will have opportunities to put your own personal stamp on certain things such as legislation.  I was effective with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors.  I was appointed the head of the Federal Legislation Committee.  And that was in recognition of what I had done in banking, and so I headed this delegation involving the fifty state banking commissioners, banking superintendents -- I testified before Congress on the problem of -- several problems, but one that comes to mind was this proliferation of check cashers who came into the black neighborhoods and would charge exorbitant rates just to cash a check.  I testified before the Congress about this problem and how it should be regulated and made uniform and not allow the arbitrary treatment that the inner-city community was suffering through so we did that and we did a lot of work on the Community Reinvestment Act.  We did work on the interstate banking issues.  Interstate banking took up a lot of our time because the political scene at the time -- the political not scene, but the political climate at the time was that Connecticut and Massachusetts should not allow full interstate banking, that we weren't quite ready for it but that we should experiment within the New England states and that proved to be a very stifling factor in the subsequent growth of New England and we are still suffering from that.
Story_ID: 90401
Speaker 1: You know that is interesting cause that was gonna be -- my question was what was Connecticut's take on banking, you know what was its position where did it fit, you know in terms of its approach --?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: On nationwide?  So you're saying that it was resistant to interstate banking? Did it have branch -- it had branch banking though, right?
Speaker 2: It had state branching, they had statewide branching.  There was also federal legislation that impacted even the branching as I am attempting to recall, I think it was -- it was under the McFadden Act I believe that there was a limitation of 30 miles you could move up a bank headquarters.  Within a 30-mile radius and we had some -- we had to deal with schemes from certain banks that would place a headquarters within or close to a border within one state and then attempt to move its headquarters 30 miles to go into another state.  We had to deal with all kinds of crazy schemes in dealing with interstate banking.  I came out as a proponent of full interstate banking early on.  I correctly perceived that the major reluctance to do interstate banking -- full interstate banking was tied to maybe the influence of some political operatives and, most likely, was tied to a major Connecticut banking institution that didn't wish to be involved in the full onslaught of the competitiveness that full-interstate banking would have brought.
Speaker 1: And so I mean you concluded that but I'm just saying did you -- were you able to make any headway into that and who was -- who was the controlling influence?
Speaker 2: Well there were -- there were a number of controlling influences.  If you are going to deal with interstate banking, first of all you gotta find a state that's going to partner with you to allow you to cross its borders.  So the political operatives in Connecticut were dealing primarily with Massachusetts.  If Massachusetts banks were not ready for it; then Connecticut wasn't going to have a partner to team up.  Secondly, you had to deal with the political landscape of Connecticut.  The Connecticut General Assembly would have had to initiate it and the Connecticut General Assembly did not for whatever reasons -- did not become a strong -- did not become a proponent of interstate banking until basically the horse was out of the barn and other regions had grown up and had crossed state lines -- the New York banks who initially wanted to come into Connecticut and Massachusetts decided to go to Georgia and Florida and Illinois and they were flourishing while Connecticut obviously suffered under the political influence of folks who really had a strangle hold on the issue.
Speaker 1: And who are some of those folks?  Oh, you don't want us -- okay, that's fine -- I got it (laughter).  I was wondering but I got it.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you.
Story_ID: 90402
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me ask about one -- one organization that I know you were -- I think I read the founding member and that was the -- National Association of Security --?
Speaker 2: Securities Dealers.
Speaker 1: Right, dealers and professionals.  That -- that --I'd like you to talk about how that organization came into being and who were the key people who, you know, were part of the founding and what the reason was?
Speaker 2: NASD [National Association of Securities Dealers, succeeded by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority] came about from the perceived need of women and people of color to have an organization as a proponent of their involvement in the securities industry.  There were several firms on Wall Street that got behind the effort and provided sources of capital to help the organization flourish.  A former state treasurer of Connecticut, Hank Parker [Henry E. Parker], was one of those proponents, one of those early proponents, and there were several folks who got involved.  I was asked to get involved with the organization of a Connecticut chapter, and we brought that about.  Kathy Lamar was involved in that as well, who's now Counsel with the state treasurer's office, I believe State Treasurer Denise Nappier.  I was instrumental in that also.  I haven't really been that much involved with the local effort since helping to get it off of the ground.
Speaker 1: Do you know when it got -- when did this Connecticut Chapter -- when was that established?
Speaker 2: I don't recall the year but it would have been most likely the mid-1990s.
Speaker 1: The people that were involved though -- okay -- but in the founding there were people like Maynard Jackson and --
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And Travers Bell and --.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, that was the original
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the group of guys.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 90403
Speaker 1: Well, basically the, to set the scene for you, major banks in Connecticut and Massachusetts were basically under federal supervision if not outright being shut down.  Fleet [FleetBoston Financial, now merged with Bank of America] was brought in as a savior of the Bank of New England.  The Bank of New England had prior to that acquired Connecticut Bank and Trust, but really it was Connecticut Bank and Trust that acquired Bank of New England because the surviving stock holders, the majority of them were from Connecticut Bank and Trust.  So we had a lot of banking turmoil going on at the time.  Governor [William A.] O'Neill decides at the last moment that he's not going to run for re-election [1990] so that throws all his commissioners into a tizzy.  So having been involved in banking all these years I wasn't prepared to leave the state.  There was not going to be a banking home for me, it didn't appear to be, because there were a lot of bankers looking for jobs.  I was called up.  I got a call from a person involved in the securities industry who was working with Kidder Peabody [Kidder, Peabody & Co.], a major -- a senior person within Kidder Peabody.  I was asked whether or not I was interested in getting involved in securities since after all as state banking commissioner.  I had also supervised very -- certain securities activities.  I said well, you know what are you really offering?  He said, well what we can do is send you down to Wall Street, get you involved in an executive training program and you just live down there for a few months and get acclimated and since you have experience in public finance you can help us in Connecticut and maybe some other areas as well.  So that seemed to be a good thing for me to do at the time.  I got involved with Kidder Peabody.  That lasted for about a couple of years or so and then shortly right around that time there was the bond fiasco with Joe Jett [Orlando Joseph Jett] [1994].  Kidder Peabody was a subsidiary of GE [General Electric Corporation].  Jack Welch [John Francis Welch, Jr.] determined that rather than deal with this bond fiasco and the problems with Kidder Peabody that he would sell the major assets of Kidder.  My arrangement was sold to Paine Webber [and Company] which became UBS Webber [now UBS Wealth Management USA].
Story_ID: 90404
Speaker 1: So at this point, this is around 1994 -'95 [1995] I'm saying to myself "Howard you've done enough, you've been kind of exposed enough to be able to go out and maybe create an asset management company and do some of this yourself."  I then approached the Phoenix Home Life Insurance Company and its CEO at the time, [Robert W.] Bob Fiondella. Bob had a very active interest in entrepreneurship in assisting focused asset management companies - entrepreneurial, basically get involved in the business.  So to make a long story short, after having gone through the process, the Phoenix through its asset management subsidiary, a company by the name of -- the company was Duff and Phelps [Investment Management Company], but it wasn't the rating agency it was a different Duff and Phelps -- went on to become Phoenix Investment Partners [now Virtus Investment Partners] -- acquired a third interest in the company which was Grey Stone.  I brought in another person who held an interest who was to be involved in the day-to-day management of the firm.  We came up with an idea that had to do with achieving value from pooled mortgaged -- inner-city mortgage assets.  It was somewhat novel because none of the banks really wanted to deal with inner-city mortgages, certainly not a pool of them.  They didn't understand how they worked.  When I say worked I mean once you achieve a pool of mortgages, various characteristics become evident, such as a longer life of the entire pool.  Well, with a longer life of the pool in a declining interest rate environment, that pool takes on value that other investors have to pay for to not have their investments called.  For instance call protection, when the rates drop. Well, if you have an inherent quality in the mortgage pool that's giving you call protection because the inner-city residents who are actually the mortgage holders don't like going into the bank to refinance every time rates dropped half a point or a point.  Well, an astute investor would latch onto that and say this has value.  What if I multiply this by a hundred million?  Say multiply this by a billion but we had banks that did just that.  So that was a concept that my company came up with and after coming up with the concept, needless to say it just created all kinds of havoc that is still being sorted out now.  We signed confidentiality agreements and all that and I can't really get into -- get into it much further but there was value that we came up with which is still there which is being used right now by a lot of major players in the markets.  Presently, I am working with the Community's Bank, which is the only minority-owned bank in the state of Connecticut.  I have been doing this for several months, helping with business development and working with affinity groups, working with towns and working with major employers, major corporations that are looking to use the services of the bank which are full and no different from those provided by any other bank.  So I'm having fun doing that and it's a good process right now.
Story_ID: 91413
Speaker 1: Can you talk about where you are focusing your efforts now with your career and where you see market opportunities?
Speaker 2: My focus presently is dealing with banking and banking--not only banking but looking at what we initially discovered in pooled mortgage assets and dealing with affordable housing mortgages.  Dealing with hidden value that once properly described and quantified can be a valuable tool to the capital markets.  That takes a tremendous amount of energy and resources not necessarily resources in terms of capital, but resources in terms of dealing with people who are knowledgeable in the capital market areas, and so that's where I'm putting a lot of time and energy into right now, and the most immediate issue is dealing with banking issues per se.  I'm having a lot of fun with this minority-owned bank, the Community's Bank.  That's the immediate focus but long term I see the housing market being such a humongous industry that it's not really paying back to its minority mortgage market.  It is not.  CIA is a mere drop in the bucket compared to the industries that are run as a result or as being ancillary to the housing market.  The housing market for the past two years has carried this economy.  The refinancing has put money, put disposable income into people's pockets.  Not enough is really understood about the tremendous influence that the housing market brings to bear to this economy and one avenue to get there through is to look at the affordable housing market.  Look at the affordable housing industry and see what's being done there, and I think there's a--there's a--there are fertile grounds to be explored in that area.
Story_ID: 91414
Speaker 1: Now, with that, let's look at, you know, because you talk about affordable housing and affordable housing is not completely, but a lot of focus is focused on the inner city, I mean it' not, you know exclusively that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I would--I'd like to have you address issues around what needs, what the banking industry has or has not done or you know, in terms of the inner-city community, I mean the--you know we are looking a progression of things, you know redlining, you know, has always been and still appears to still be an issue.  There is a lot of focus on the Community Reinvestment Act.  Some people felt that that hasn't really been actualized and--so I guess what I'm asking is from a banking perspective, you know what things do you see that maybe that, you know, could be done creatively that have not been done?
Speaker 2: Oh, a couple of things come to mind.  Banking as you know has been traditionally thought of as an industry that provides services for the "well-heeled".  One of the common expressions I hear from folks who are really looking for loans who may not have the wherewithal --- when I say wherewithal--I'm sorry I should be more specific.  Let's say folks who need individualized help in order to fund a payroll where they may have a great idea, they may have perfected the widget.  They may have all kinds of products that would do well on the market.  They can't fund a payroll and they can't--they can't make the turn--I don't see banks really doing anything to really help those people, and banks have a good argument in that they have to assure the safety and soundness of the system. So they really can't put bank capital in jeopardy, and I fully understand that as a bank regulator, however, I think that if a banker can be creative at the higher level of the feeding chain, it can be just as creative in dealing with a small business lender, for instance. And there are lots of programs.  Towns provide stop-gap loss provisions.  That's on the political side.  There's the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] guaranteed loans that make sure that banks don't get in but so deep.  There are a lot of safeguards that I think would answer the argument that a bank is really jeopardizing its safety and soundness to deal with the smaller businessmen.  That's one area.  The other area is in the CRA [Community Reinvestment Act].  CRA started out as great, you know, as a banking initiative to basically eliminate redlining or to avoid the criticisms that the insurance industry had become subject to in its redlining.  Well, the CRA came along in the [James Earl] Carter Administration to make sure that banks made credit available and didn't, didn't suffer the criticisms of the insurance industry. However, with deregulation now there is no reason that the CRA initiatives should be limited to banks.  CRA can apply to a securities firm that is working in the downtown area.  It can apply to an insurance industry and it should take a broader approach to commercial endeavors and not be limited to just banking, and there's no reason why CRA is limited to banking other than historically that's where it came from.
Speaker 1: So you're saying really we've just looked at the tip of the iceberg.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 91415
Speaker 1: And so--the--in terms of the banking industry, what are some of the issues you think, you know, need to be looked or systems that need to be overhauled that may be, you know--do you have a feeling about that in terms of antiquated, or do you--or what about this trend now towards you know mergers and you know just sort of the big guys out here?
Speaker 2: Well, you're always going to have the big fish are going to feed and eat the little fish, you know, that's a process that you really don't want to interfere with too much because it assures properly regulated--it assures the health of the system.  What you want to avoid is the--the ignoring of markets which are non-traditional, whether they be new ethnic markets coming into a given geographical area.  You want to make that the banking service is ample and available.  You want to make sure that cultural distinctions don't stymie the availability of banking tools and banking access.  I say we've come a long ways in recognizing the aggressiveness, the utility, the market acumen if you will of other ethnic groups.  We've seen it demonstrated from the Vietnamese to Koreans to whomever.  So, why can't we really recognize what's right here under--you know, right here in our own backyards.  Let's deal with the black businesses, let's recognize the various organizations in all of the major cities that attempt to propel black businesses into greater and more viable business enterprises.  All of this is right there under our noses, and it's just a wide open area.  And it's--I guess it's one of the, one of the intrinsic difficulties with regulation is that you shoot for certain norms and those that don't get within the periphery of enjoying the regulation, enjoying the regulatory scheme are sort of left out.  So it's within those areas that I believe--I believe there are huge opportunities for a bank to explore.  We've seen it, we've seen certain banks to do that and I hope we'll continue to see it.
Story_ID: 91416
Speaker 1: And do you think the opportunities for blacks in the, in the banking industry that they're gonna be those--you know that's if you were advising a young person now would you tell them to enter the industry?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely I'd tell them enter.  Certainly in this era of the financial services, holding company conglomerate.  They should be able to get in there and get within that industry and be as creative and go just as far as their talents will take them.  It's no such thing now as being marginalized or, or put into an area that cannot ultimately expand into new, more creative types of job opportunities.
Story_ID: 91417
Speaker 1: And, you know, I think about the fact that you were--you know, had decided that you wanted to go to law school, and yet you describe yourself not as a lawyer but a banker, as someone who sort of transitioned over and I'm wondering, you know, do you think you will ever go back to your, you know, to the lawyer side of you or are you really committed at this juncture to sort of morphing into a focus on this you know this affordable house or creative ways to use your banking knowledge, not to say you're legal background doesn't come into play?
Speaker 2: Well I, I have this utopian dream where I see that once I really, you know, slayed all the dragons and made lots of money then I'll go back and just become a country town lawyer with a little hundred acre farm and a big garden in back and just deal with local legal problems and, you know, sit by the road be a friendly man I guess.
Speaker 1: That's nice see that's--in Eutaw, Alabama! (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Not necessarily! (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Not necessarily, okay! (Laughter)
Story_ID: 91418
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I haven't really thought about that.  I think I'm too young to start thinking about my legacy.  I'm still making it.  I'm still creating it.  I'm too close to it.
Story_ID: 91419
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about Howard Brown, Jr. though?
Speaker 2: Well, that he tried to deal forthrightly with issues and with people. That he enjoys being creative and he's willing to work hard to make things happen.  I think if I could get any part of that recognized as being who Howard Brown is, I'd be very grateful.
