Story_ID: 375901
Speaker 1: --This morning's interview will be with Dr. Juliet D. Blackburn-Beamon.  The videographer will be Matthew Hickey and the interviewer will be Paul Brock.  I'm going to start, Dr. Blackburn-Beamon, with the location of where we are this morning.
Speaker 2: All right.  I think this is 476 Auburn Avenue, one of the historic houses across from the King home, in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right, and today's date?
Speaker 2: One [1], August, 2005.
Story_ID: 375902
Speaker 1: And we're going to start with some questions, People Magazine-like questions but meant to stimulate the brain cells.  So, if you will bear with me, I'm going to ask you for your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food of all categories?
Speaker 1: Any category you like.
Speaker 2: If I could think of it that actually is.  My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Or one of your favorites.
Speaker 2: One of my favorites.  Chocolates is usually it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Chocolate cake that my mother used to make for my birthday.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, and your favorite color?
Speaker 2: The yellows, gold, oranges--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --even to the greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in the Fall and everybody loves the Spring, I suppose.  I'm more influenced, I think, by the temperature itself and sunshine.  I like moderate temperatures.  I guess in the Fall and Spring would be my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay, good enough.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Umm, that I've been to or that I want to go to?
Speaker 1: Either one.
Speaker 2: Well, the Bahamas is high on my list.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nassau in particular.  Vacation, I think that might be--
Speaker 1: That might be it.
Speaker 2: --it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to date.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, finally, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I actually have more than one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true.  As it must follow the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man."
Speaker 1: All right, [William] Shakespeare would like one (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, 'Hamlet.' Polonious' advice to his son, in 'Hamlet.'  And, there's another one that, George Gordon, Lord Byron, "Oh, for the gift it gives to see ourselves as others see us."
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Which this will cater to (laughter).
Story_ID: 375903
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to begin with your history.  I'm going to ask your place of birth.
Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, Atlanta, Georgia, at the corner of Auburn and Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Just a little ways from where we are?
Speaker 2: Immediately across the street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from that fire station, on the site of what is now the King Chapel.
Speaker 1: So, you were actually home here today.
Speaker 2: I feel the vibes, yes.  There was the first black woman, ob-gyn, who had her father's clinic there and they were not letting black babies be born in the hospital in Jackson, Mississippi, which is where my parents were living, that's my father's home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother brought the show to her home--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --I was the first.  My father took his vacation and came over for the appointed hour and a few days later, I guess, they took the little baldheaded black baby back to Mississippi (laughter).
Speaker 1: But your place of birth is Atlanta, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Is Atlanta, Georgia, yes.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: October 3rd, 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940], my brother was the first black baby born in the hospital in Jackson.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Three years later.
Speaker 1: And I'm going to ask you about your--the number of siblings.
Speaker 2: I have just the one brother.
Speaker 1: The one brother, okay.
Speaker 2: Not quite three years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 375904
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you a little bit about your mother and then about your father and then your earliest memories.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Let me begin with your mother and what was her full name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Willie Dobbs--Willie Juliet Dobbs Blackburn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she is now 95 and a half years old, living here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I was going to ask you to spell that full name?
Speaker 2: Okay, W-I-L-L-I-E, J-U-L-I-E-T, D-O-B-B-S, B-L-A-C-K-B-U-R-N.
Speaker 1: B-L--let me get that.
Speaker 2: Blackburn--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --B-L-A-C-K-B-U-R-N.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, all right.  And the date of her birth?
Speaker 2: January 12th, 1910.
Speaker 1: And place of birth for your mother?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just up the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 375905
Speaker 1: Are there--is there some history that you remember your mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] talking to you about on her side of the family?
Speaker 2: In terms of her childhood or--
Speaker 1: In terms of her childhood or your grandfather or great grandfather.  How far back can you trace your ancestry on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as the family knows, and traditionally has known, we go back to my great grandmother, her father's mother.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Of course there is a book [Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn: A Saga of Race and Family] from 1991, I believe, by [Gary] Pomerantz, about Atlanta [Georgia] that traces the history through two families, and our family was the black family and he did a lot of research and believes that he proved that there is a Dr. McAfee, a white Dr. McAfee, who would have been her father.  She never talked of him.  She did not have his name.  Her name was Minnie Millie Minerva Hendricks--
Speaker 1: Okay, Minnie--
Speaker 2: --Dobbs.  Minnie Millie--
Speaker 1: Millie--
Speaker 2: Minerva, M-I-N-E-R-V-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hendricks, H-E-N-D-R-I-C-K-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Dobbs, as she married, Dobbs.  So her husband, Will Dobbs, was my great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great great--
Speaker 1: Great great.
Speaker 2: --wait a minute, my grandfather, my--his father, no, great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Right, well actually your great grandma.
Speaker 2: We don't know great great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Will Dobbs, they were of Kennesaw, Georgia, which is where my mother's father was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, Kennesaw, Georgia, all right.
Speaker 2: And are there any stories that you can remember that your mother telling you about them being in Kennesaw or the family--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --or the great--
Speaker 1: --they used to go up there in the summer times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a big trip for them, at the time.  They would take the train.  People drive everyday now but back in those days it was going to the country and my grandfather's grandmother kept him and his sister from--about seven years for seven years of his life, so they would visit her.  They remember her idiosyncrasies and her name was Grandma Judy and--
Speaker 2: The--let's establish the time that they got married.
Speaker 1: That would have been--
Speaker 2: Approximately, time.
Speaker 1: --that my great grandmother got married?
Speaker 2: Yes, to your great grandfather?
Speaker 1: Well, that probably would have been in the middle 1800s.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As I recall, maybe 1860 or '70 [1870].
Speaker 2: Okay, now were either of them slaves?
Speaker 1: My grandfather was born in 1881 so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'd say 20 years before that perhaps.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe less, maybe never.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're talking about the great grandparents here?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And were they slaves, ever slaves?
Speaker 1: Yes, they had been slaves.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, good enough.
Speaker 1: And they're buried in Kennesaw.  Their graves are there.
Speaker 2: They're buried there now?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was their son, Will, that Minnie Millie Minerva married and my grandfather was their first child.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He also had a sister.
Speaker 2: Okay, the--any particular stories that we can get into with your great grandparents?
Speaker 1: Well my mother remembers that Grandma Judy liked mayonnaise.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my mother's mother, my grandmother, Irene, would make it for her.  That was before the days of Hellmann's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the jars.  She would make it.  I remember even making it myself in high school as part of our Home Ec course.  You'd beat eggs and all that but she loved it and I think she probably ate it almost like ice cream.  And she was an octoroon lady and very white and the impression I've been given over these years is that she was very stately and not very active, not running around a lot.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 375906
Speaker 1: Um, but good solid people and my grandfather was happy there for the first seven years of his life until his mother, their daughter-in-law, did come back to get him--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --and his sister.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: She moved, I don't want to jump ahead of your story.
Speaker 2: No, no, that's okay.
Speaker 1: She moved shortly after Will disappeared, his father disappeared, she moved to Savannah [Georgia] and became a seamstress and I've read in some of my research later on for other things, that during that time, a lot of mulatto women found work as seamstresses in the Port cities, like New Orleans [Louisiana], Mobile [Alabama], that sort of thing, so Savannah  was a likely place for her.  And she did well there and I'd say it was probably about five years and she would visit them in-between but she did finally come back and take the two of them with her to Savannah so that is how my grandfather went to elementary school, in Savannah--
Speaker 2: Okay, before we get too far ahead--
Speaker 1: --before they moved back to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: --your great grandfather, back to him.
Speaker 1: I don't know anything about the great grandfather--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --whose name was Will.  I believe they say he was a very quiet fellow.  I'm sure he was a farmer.  They lived on a farm.  They were sharecroppers and that was the farm he was on.  It was near the railroad 'cause later in years when he worked on the railroad, they would throw the paper off of 'em so the farmers--very near Butlers Farm, as I recall, was the name of it.  And he had a brother, no an uncle, who lived near.  But Will, we don't know very much about, at least I don't know much about Will except that he is buried there.
Speaker 2: Except that he was a farmer--
Speaker 1: He was an ex-slave.
Speaker 2: --and he later worked on the railroad.
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry, this was my grandfather--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who later worked on the railway, would throw off the paper for them.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your great grandfather, though, remained a farmer most of his life?
Speaker 1: That's as far as I know, yes.
Speaker 2: Right, and now are we talking about your great grandmother who--
Speaker 1: He was Judy's husband.
Speaker 2: Judy's, okay.
Speaker 1: Judy and Will are my grandfather's grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The--so I knew, there was a Judy, who went to--
Speaker 1: No, my grandfather's mother.
Speaker 2: Your grandfather's mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.  You see their son, Will, married Minnie.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he ran off.  I mean he disappeared, looking for work really.  I won't say ran off, he just disappeared.  They didn't maintain contact which was something he obviously didn't want to do.
Speaker 2: Okay, but your great grandmother, Judy, remained on the farm there in Kennesaw?
Speaker 1: She and Will, yes.
Speaker 2: She and Will for most of their life?
Speaker 1: Yes, for the rest of their lives, and they are buried there--
Speaker 2: And they are buried there, okay.
Speaker 1: --in the Noonday Baptist Church--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --cemetery.
Speaker 2: All right, and do you--there are no other stories you remember about your--
Speaker 1: Other than the mayonnaise?
Speaker 2: --Great Grandmother Judy?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so at this time.
Speaker 2: And the mayonnaise, okay.
Speaker 1: Not that great grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then just a smidge about my other great grandmother.  Oh, I'm sorry--oh, on my grandfather's mother's side--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll cover--
Speaker 1: --that was my grandfather's father's family, yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.  Now, let's go down to your grand--grandparents and the--your great grandmother and grandfather had one child, Will, oh--
Speaker 1: Oh, I think no, no--
Speaker 2: --the first child was named Will.
Speaker 1: --they had--they had 11 children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As I recall, Will was one of those.  He was near the--just after the middle--along in there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Around the middle.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your great grandparents had 11--
Speaker 1: They had 11, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 2: Okay, the one you were telling us about just a little while ago, what were their names?  Was that--that was Will, also?
Speaker 1: Will, my grandfather's father, was one of those 11.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your great grandfather and your great grandmother had a child who was named after the father?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was Will.  Do you have any idea when your grandfather--oh, the grandfather, Will, or I should say the grand--the son of Will and--
Speaker 1: My grandfather's grandfather.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My great grandfather.
Story_ID: 375907
Speaker 1: I was going to ask about your grandparents now and his name was Will?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather's John Wesley Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Will's son.
Speaker 1: Will's son, that's what I was trying to get to.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, John Wesley Dobbs, that's my mother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay, and John Wesley Dobbs, when was he--when was he born?
Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-one [1881].
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-one [1881], okay.  And he was born in Kennesaw [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and he was a direct descendant of Will, your great grandfather?  And then there were 10 other children?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's how it looks.
Speaker 1: Okay, any information that you may recall about the other 10 before we go to--
Speaker 2: Not offhand.  I have not done that research.  There is a young lady who has, one of the offspring of one of the others.  Albert was another name, that I recall.  There were a couple of girls, maybe three girls.  I should have reviewed that before I came but I'm sorry I didn't expect to get quite so far back.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  Okay, we're going to--
Speaker 2: I do have the information as part of my dissertation--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is on John Wesley Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother's father was John Wesley Dobbs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was born approximately 1881 and--
Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-two [1882].
Speaker 1: Is there any information on when John Wesley Dobbs was growing up that you may recall?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I said, I have a dissertation on his life.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, as I said, he was moved by his mother, eventually, age seven I think, to Savannah [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, when he was--
Speaker 2: He and his sister.
Speaker 1: --when he was seven and is--when he moved--they moved to Savannah, was trying to--so you could remember them telling you about that at seven.  What were some of the experiences that he may have experienced growing up?
Speaker 2: Well he attended--
Speaker 1: Either Kennesaw or Savannah.
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that's passed down in the family that is remembered about him in Kennesaw is that as a little boy he, of course, looked forward to having his mother visit back, that was before she actually came and moved them--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --while she was trying to get settled, I guess, in Savannah, get established.  That he would look for her and sometimes hide behind the door and there was a big chimney outside the house where they all liked to hide.  I guess he used to use that when he was a kid and then when my mother and her sisters visited, they liked to run out there and hide and that sort of thing.  But, other than that, there aren't any developed stories about his childhood before he moved to Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how about after he--he joined his mother in Savannah?
Speaker 2: Well, he attended the high--the elementary school there, which was a big opportunity because there were not that many elementary schools around for black kids and he went to one that is now really famous, it's called the Broad Street School.  Broad Street is now M.L. [Martin Luther] King Jr. Drive there but the building, which was a big house that a wealthy person had donated to the slaves and all that is still there, it's called Scar--Scarborough House.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--you're saying that was the--
Speaker 2: That was the school.
Speaker 1: Scarborough House, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and they're pictures of the school.  My mother and I did research in the library in Savannah on the curriculum because I was interested in things that they were teaching that would have helped and develop into his--his life's work.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which was oratory and that was my focus with my dissertation, the art--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --communicating--
Speaker 1: Do you have a record?
Speaker 2: --and the school did teach elocution and that sort of thing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had some very fine teachers.  And another unique thing was that they were black teachers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the most part in that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do I have a record of--
Speaker 1: I was going to ask if you can remember some of the subjects, either in elementary school or the--that was the secondary school--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --the Scarborough?
Speaker 2: Other than the basics of, you know, reading and writing and arithmetic.
Speaker 1: Yes, the basic.
Speaker 2: Elocution--
Speaker 1: Elocution.
Speaker 2: --and the art of speaking and using the language.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were oratory contests which also would have helped to condition his ability to speak before crowds and what have you.
Story_ID: 375908
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Are there any other remembrances that he [John Wesley Dobbs] may have mentioned to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a bigger boy, he worked to help his mother, of course, and I guess one of the biggest places for work was on the waterfront and he helped unload the ships and all and he used to tell us the stories of how he loved bananas and he would just let him--almost make himself sick with bananas.  But because they didn't have much and it was a while before they did have enough, he always enjoyed shopping coming out of this period, I think, of his life.  And when he would come visit his daughter's families, all six of them, he was well known among the grandchildren for shopping in the grocery store and he'd come home with so much food you wouldn't have a place to put it, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that I remember.  He used to visit us in Jackson, Mississippi, often.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--and he always ate the bananas but he--I think was given a view too of the fact that there was a world out there, having been on the waterfront and seeing these ships come in from foreign places.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he met business people and men who were doing important things, merchant marines, that sort of thing.  And then he--in later years, developed friends through the Masonic Order, which was--the lodge was headquartered in Savannah at that time and in the '30's [1930s], he became Grand Master of the Masonic--Prince Hall Masons of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to visit that.
Speaker 2: So I went back to his childhood.  But he worked on the waterfront and then when he moved to Atlanta, he threw papers.  They moved here for his high school education.  There was not a black high school in Savannah at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But the house where he lived and all the records of his mother in the town and the city directory are there.  I've researched all of that, you know, where they lived.  I've driven by the area and, as I say, the school is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's now a museum.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he finish high school here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes he did, Morehouse Seminary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morehouse had an elementary high school and college and seminary arrangement--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  They had moved here from Augusta [Georgia].  So he completed high school there and did two years college and at that point, the U.S. government opened up federal jobs for black men on the railroad so he left after the two year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --stint at Morehouse and became a railway mail clerk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--just to attend some of the schools that he attended--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --meant quite a few tax on the family income.  So did his mother move her business from Savannah [Georgia] so that he could come here and go to high school?  Or did he come--
Speaker 2: Yes, the whole family moved.
Speaker 1: The whole family moved--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --from Savannah?
Speaker 2: His sister--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --also, who was in Savannah and had been married and her baby came with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they lived right over here by the highway--
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: --on the edge of downtown, at that time was a rooming house.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I didn't ask you about his siblings.  How many siblings did your father have?
Speaker 2: My grandfather?
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, right.
Speaker 2: Just the one sister.
Speaker 1: Just the one sister, okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Whose name was Willie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for whom my mother was named.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, when he was ready for high school, the entire family moved from Savannah--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --to Atlanta so that he could attend Morehouse Seminary?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  For Academy, it may have been called at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did he do in his studies?  Did he have any sense of--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure he did very well.  I don't think I've actually looked up those records but he excelled in the oratory which is another thing that the school had an emphasis on, being a seminary, of course, preaching--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that sort of thing.  So that also became a part of what he--what his life's work was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he did very well but he wanted to take advantage of that government opportunity to relieve his mother at that point of work--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and help support the family.  I think the sister also worked.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay.
Story_ID: 375909
Speaker 1: And the--there's a part of this--the mother was doing very well in her business as a seamstress in Savannah [Georgia] so pulling out was quite a sacrifice, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: So she did, at least, well enough, as far as those occupations allowed.  So this would have been--this would have been 1898, around that time--
Speaker 1: Eighteen--okay.
Speaker 2: --that they moved to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's very, very interesting.
Speaker 2: I don't know the history--the exact history of the Singer Sewing Machine Company--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but I believe this is about the time that they started to--to do the home market where home sewing might have started to get more popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fabrics were more available or whatever but at that point, let's see, he would have been about 15 or 16 so she must have been in her late thirties.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  We're going to stop here.
Speaker 2: But as far as I know, she continued to work but they needed all of the help they could get so everybody in the household worked.
Speaker 1: Worked, okay.
Story_ID: 98908
Speaker 1: Now, it appears that we may have omitted a generation in there and your great great grandparents, and it's wonderful we're going back this far, were Will and--Will Dobbs and Judy.  And they had 11 children--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and one of those 11 children were your great grandparents--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, great grandfather.
Speaker 1: --great grandfather whose name was Wesley--
Speaker 2: Wes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Dobbs.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a little about Wesley Dobbs?  He was one of 11 children and--
Speaker 2: Married Minnie Millie Minerva.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Had two children--
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: --and left.
Speaker 1: --and left.  How much do you remember about Minnie Millie Minerva Dobbs?
Speaker 2: Well, she was quite a character.
Speaker 1: That would have been your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was born a slave.
Speaker 1: Born a slave approximately--
Speaker 2: Child of a house slave and the owner was her father.
Speaker 1: Her father was white--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --a plantation owner.
Speaker 2: And she remembers leaving the plantation at freedom, the time of freedom.
Speaker 1: Emancipation?
Speaker 2: She and her mother on a carriage and she remembers that she had a little pink outfit, pink coat and hat, and that's all we know about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was approximately--
Speaker 2: Mr. [Gary] Pomerantz says that the man was also a doctor, McAfee.  That name has never--she never talked of that name, ever.  Minnie Millie Minerva Hendricks Dobbs is all we ever knew.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was Kennesaw?  That was in Kennesaw?
Speaker 2: That was Woodstock.
Speaker 1: Woodstock.
Speaker 2: That was Woodstock and I don't know the story of how she came to--
Speaker 1: Woodstock, Georgia?
Speaker 2: --Kennesaw.  Yes, Woodstock, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But they're close--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in proximity and just North of Atlanta both of them and somehow she met Will and they got married and had these two kids, my grandfather and his younger sister.
Speaker 1: Now Will, you mean--
Speaker 2: That's John Wesley.
Speaker 1: --somehow she met Wesley?
Speaker 2: She met Wes.
Speaker 1: Right, Wes, and they--they married.  Now, Minnie Millie Minerva Dobbs, approximately your best guestimate, how old was she during this time of emancipation and she and her mother were leaving--
Speaker 2: Oh, she would have been probably three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that means she was born maybe around '62 [1862].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--
Speaker 2: At emancipation, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.
Story_ID: 98909
Speaker 1: Do we have any history or remembered history of that time between her [Minnie Millie Minerva Dobbs] leaving the plantation and her living in Woodstock [Georgia] with her mother and meeting, well, growing up in Wood--
Speaker 2: Well, the plantation was in Woodstock.
Speaker 1: The plantation was in Woodstock?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Whether they stayed in that area or moved to another area or even right to Kennesaw, what I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that story of the location, where they were, right after slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Between the time that she was a child and that she got married to Will.  I don't know that story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm sure she was in that area of Georgia and that must be how she met Will and--
Speaker 1: Wes--Wes.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Wes, yes, and--and they were there for at least two, three years.  It must have been three years because he and his sister were born and he was two when she left to go to Savannah [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  The--but Minnie Millie Minerva Dobbs--Minerva and Wes--
Speaker 2: Hendricks, Hendricks was her name.
Speaker 1: Hendricks, and--
Speaker 2: Minnie Millie Minerva Hendricks.
Speaker 1: And Wes Dobbs did eventually meet and for some reason, Wes Dobbs--
Speaker 2: Well he went off looking for work--
Speaker 1: Went out looking for work.
Speaker 2: --I guess after two years and two children, he--I believe that there are records of his--the plantation that his father was on and he would have been born in slavery also.  There's a record of him in, I don't know what county that is, but it's Kennesaw [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he worked, you know, the menial jobs at--in farming and whatever that most of those newly freed slaves did and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --he was obviously a grown man at that time, at least I guess 18, 19 years old, 20.  I'll need to go back and check his gravestone.  I don't remember the dates on that.  I mean, I'm sorry, it's his grandfather--his father who's buried up there, not him.  He moved to Alabama, Will did, my grandfather's father, Wes--Wes moved--Minnie Millie Minerva's husband--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --moved eventually to Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And had another family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He never did come back.
Speaker 1: He did not come back--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --going out looking for work?
Speaker 2: And my grandfather did not know him really growing up 'cause he was two when he left.
Speaker 1: Right, and which was not uncommon--
Speaker 2: Or maybe he had left before that.  Actually his mother left at two so he was probably younger than that when his father left.
Speaker 1: Okay, and his mother left to go to Savannah?  Okay, and that mother was Minnie--
Speaker 2: Millie Minerva Hendricks--
Speaker 1: --Millie Minerva Hendricks--
Speaker 2: --Dobbs. Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Dobbs, got it, got it.
Story_ID: 98910
Speaker 1: All right, now let's return to an area where we find your grandparents, John Wesley Dobbs, finishing school in Savannah [Georgia], helping his mother who's a seamstress in Savannah and time for him to attend, he's doing very well on elocution and all of his oratory contests there in Savannah--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --so the mother decides that to further his education, she will move the entire family to Atlanta, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, John Wesley Dobbs, will--will be attending Morehouse Academy or Seminary.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember any stories that your grandfather may have told you about him attending Morehouse Academy Seminary?
Speaker 2: There's a story about how he rode a bicycle to school but he also had a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember what he was doing?
Speaker 2: And he worked for Dr. McDougal, a pharmacist who had a drugstore.  I don't know that that was actually on this side of town, where we are now, or on the other side where the school's now are but I believe it was on this side of town and then he would leave and ride his bicycle to school and there was a going story at the time about how people would know at a certain hour that Dobbs was going to come over the hill and there's a hill going down to the schools from--on Fair Street--
Speaker 1: And now this is just a little--
Speaker 2: --and he would be late.  He would be rushing.
Speaker 1: This would be just a little before the turn of the century, right?  In the 1890s?
Speaker 2: Around that time, yeah, between--well that would have been six years at least, I guess, high school and two years of college that he would have been doing that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Traveling across town every day to go to school, yes, 'cause they did live on this side of town.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Right at what is now the connector, the highway that goes up the middle of everything.  But he rode this bicycle.  He was good at it and somewhere there's a picture of him in his bicycle, you know, jersey and cap and that kind of thing and he would sweep the drugstore and help open it, you know, stock the stock and all that sort of thing so that's how he got through school and until the time that he was able to take that federal job.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 98911
Speaker 1: Let's go ahead and talk a little about that.  He [John Wesley Dobbs] had been at Morehouse Seminary Academy there in Atlanta [Georgia] and then he went on to go two years of college at Morehouse and all of a sudden a door opens where he can take this job on the railroad.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, 1903.
Speaker 1: Nineteen oh three [1903]--
Speaker 2: MM-hm.
Speaker 1: --and because of the money it paid and the opportunity it offered, he decides to take this job, working for the railroad as a--
Speaker 2: Railway mail clerk.
Speaker 1: --railway mail clerk, which was very lucrative in those days.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that you can remember your grandfather telling you about those experiences as a railroad mail clerk?
Speaker 2: Well I remember my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --telling me of stories that he told them.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Or things that they actually watched him do, such as the fact that he was--he moved up to supervisor, which was very, very unusual, of course, for a black man at that time.  But when he was working to earn the promotion, they remember him setting up a mailbox with cubicles in their home to practice sorting the mail--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because how fast you could do it had a lot to do with you could move up into the next category.  And, of course, you know the government has those pre-determined and well-described steps that you can take.  So he did accomplish that and he became the supervisor and he wore two guns and there's also the story of how, I guess this is down the line as these years passed, he used to practice his speaking on the guys who were in his crew and I said, no wonder he had to wear two guns because they probably didn't appreciate being a captive audience but you know as a train is barreling on down, they didn't have any choices--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but to listen to what he had to say and he would practice his technique and his ideas and all that on them.  And then Maynard has told the story, Maynard Jackson, who was my first cousin, his oldest daughter's son, oldest son, at one time was speaking in East Point, Georgia, this is more recent history and some lady came up to him in the crowd afterwards and told him that her husband had worked with his grandfather on the railroad 'cause, you know, the railroad goes straight down through East Point College Park and what have you and he remembered working with Grandpa Dobbs.  Unfortunately, we haven't been able to capture any of that direct history but Maynard recounted it to us.  So he was on the railroad from '03 [1903] to '35 [1935]--1935 and he retired with a government pension at that time.  Then there's a later story, right before the time he retired, about how he had become a Prince Hall Mason, which was very common for the black railroad guys to have that unity and camaraderie and also a place to stay during the layovers 'cause there were no hotel accommodations available to the blacks and he also, during that time, helped form the Postal Clerks Alliance up in Chattanooga 'cause he was on the L and M Railroad running to Nashville [Tennessee] and they started that union at that time.  I guess that would have been more like in the teens and '20s [1920s], 1918, '20 [1920], around in there.
Story_ID: 98912
Speaker 1: Let's go back to him [John Wesley Dobbs] getting this job 'cause it took a few years, I'm sure.  Are there--in the meantime, he was a single man, working now as a railroad mail clerk and at what point did he meet your grandmother?  Do you remember that period?
Speaker 2: Well that would have been around 1904?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe '05 [1905], I don't know how long they courted before they actually got married.  They were married in 1906 and he tells that story of how he would--he was in the barbershop on Auburn Avenue, of course, his beloved Auburn Avenue, right here, and saw this lady passing on the street.  She had come here to help her sister who lived here, take care of her children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my grandmother, Irene Thompson Dobbs, was from Columbus, Mississippi and, you know, that's kind of like a straight shot across from Atlanta [Georgia].  Her father, Kelly Thompson, was a barber there in Columbus and there is some talk and food for later history to see whether or not he was originally from Georgia, himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was--
Speaker 1: We need to stop?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Himself a mulatto, as I remember he looked a lot like an Italian fellow.
Speaker 1: So, Irene--
Speaker 2: So Irene Thompson came here--
Speaker 1: Her father was a barber in Columbus, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: In Columbus, Mississippi and one of his sisters was one of the very earliest school teachers there with a certificate and that sort of thing.  Her certificate is in the archives--all his papers are in the archives at the Amistad in--at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've seen her certificate there.
Speaker 1: And that was Irene's--
Speaker 2: That would have been my grandmother's aunt--
Speaker 1: Oh, aunt, okay.
Speaker 2: Her father's sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was--what was her name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her name but it would have been Thompson unless she had gotten married but for me that's an important connection because my father is from Mississippi and, of course, I grew up in Jackson [Mississippi]  So it was always titillating to know that my mother's mother was also from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your mother, or grandmother, Irene Thompson--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --came to Atlanta and sometime around 1903, 1904--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --met your grandfather--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --John Wesley Dobbs.  They courted and--
Speaker 2: And he got somebody to introduce him to her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he was in the barbershop here in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --and did your grandmother come into the barbershop or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, she was passing outside.
Speaker 1: Passing outside.
Speaker 2: I guess they were shopping or whatever--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and he jumped up, the story goes, and, you know, said "Oh, my goodness, I've got to meet her and does anybody in here--can you introduce me," or whatever, so.  Her sister, and I don't know a lot about what her sister's husband was doing, or whatever, but they had a couple of children, I'm gathering at that time and she was here to help them with them.  So he got someone to introduce him to her and they got married in '06 [1906] and lived right here on Auburn Avenue for a year or two.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And Maynard's mother was born here, their first daughter was born on Auburn Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Maynard Jackson's mother--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --was one of those children--
Speaker 2: --was their first daughter--first child.
Speaker 1: First child.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many children--
Speaker 2: They had six daughters only.
Speaker 1: Six daughters, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, they had no sons.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And one of those daughters was your mother?
Speaker 2: The next daughter was my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Number two, Willie Juliet Dobbs.  The oldest daughter was named for her mother, Irene Caroline Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and the--now, again was--
Speaker 2: I think she was born in '08' [1908], 1908.
Speaker 1: She--Irene Caroline--
Speaker 2: Was born in '08' [1908].
Speaker 1: Oh eight [1908].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, about--my mother was born in '10 [1910], 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay, good enough, all right.
Speaker 2: And then they had four more.
Story_ID: 98913
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--what I wanted to ask you, what are some of the earliest stories that essentially we're still dealing with your mother's, I think somehow we got over to your--we have not got over that but what are some of the earlier stories you can remember about your grandmother telling you about her childhood and her father's people?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about that except the fact that her father was a barber.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Columbus [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: In Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember--I know she had this one sister, Caroline, for whom she named her first daughter, of course.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Between herself and her sister.  But I don't know how big that family was.  Oh, she had a brother, yeah she did have a brother that we heard about.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And there was somebody named "Nooks" (ph.) you know their nickname.  I don't remember whether that was her brother or whether they called one of her sisters "Nooks" but I know she had the one sister who lived here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And I believe she had a brother also.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the aunt of--her aunt, your grandmother's aunt, whose papers are at the Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the Amistad collection.
Speaker 2: I don't know her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.  I could look it up for you, though.
Speaker 1: But these are her--her diplomas?
Speaker 2: Her certificate assigning her as a certified teacher.
Speaker 1: Teacher, right.
Speaker 2: Elementary school teacher, which was unusual for a black woman in those days and that would have been, I guess--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the early--well, the mid-1860s, '70s [1870s], '80s [1880s], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But he kept--my grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] kept that certificate.  I don't know how--or maybe she had it.  It must have come through her.  I don't know how they got that certificate but he recognized that it was important because he was certainly convinced that education was the way.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, of course, he saw to it that all six of his daughters--he saw them through their master's degrees.  They all graduated Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--they had the largest number of siblings from any one family to graduate Spelman, still today, and Dr. Reid, who was the president when his baby daughter graduated, served him something she called the "Order of the Sixes".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's in the Spelman history that she decorated them for that accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the--so while he was on the railroad working and--so that was a pretty good job in those days--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --she was--your grandmother was raising the six daughters, one of whom was your mother.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: What--go ahead.
Speaker 2: You're into the point that my mother remembers, I guess as a young adult, going with the car that they finally got to pick him up off of the railroad to meet him down in what is now Underground Atlanta 'cause that is where the zero mile post is for this East West railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where all the trains came in.  You know the depot is also there.  The city uses it for entertainments.
Story_ID: 98914
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, now let's go back to some of the earliest memories, unless there are some other memories that you can remember about your grandmother Irene Thompson Dobbs].
Speaker 2: My grandmother?
Speaker 1: Your grandmother.
Speaker 2: Just as she was, you know, a strong lady and ran a really good house.  I remember visiting during the summer, my brother and I, on a couple of occasions at least, stayed here during the summer while my parents taught summer school back in Mississippi and--so there would be just my brother and myself in the house with my grandmother and grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] and she used to have a hard time getting us to eat certain foods and she told my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] the story that she couldn't get me to eat greens once and that I told her I didn't eat greens and she said, "Oh why don't you eat greens?" and I said, "because my doctor took me off of them."  I had heard my grandmother in Mississippi say that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My father's mother that the doctor had taken her off of greens.  He probably had taken her off of all of that grease that she used to, you know, to cook the greens in but she thought that was really cute and so she told my parents about it but she finally did get me to eat them, I suppose.  And I also did not like cream of wheat, which was one of her favorite things for breakfast.  But we got through those summers and she also was impressed with the fact that both my brother and I would rinse out our Coca Cola bottles after we finished, you know, to keep bugs from being attracted.  It was something my mother had drummed into us, so those are little things that I remember her--her telling us.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that she had very, very long hair.  She would brush it, you know, down like this.  She was a heavyset, very large lady, and very easygoing kind of thing, you know, and a good foil for his personality because he was extremely outgoing and preaching all the time.  People thought he was a preacher because of his style and that sort of thing.  But that's the most that I remember her except that she did come down with a heart condition, it must have been in the '50s [1950s], no, it might have--yeah, I guess in the early '50s [1950s] while I was still in high school and he installed a lift on the stairway, in their house, which is one of the very earliest ones that I ever remember hearing about so that she could go upstairs at night and then come downstairs for the day and not have to maneuver the steps.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Because in about 1940, he added a floor to the house, I remember that, because the daughters at that point had gotten married, had families and he loved to have these family reunions but you couldn't stay at the Holiday Inn when you came back to Atlanta [Georgia] because there wasn't any Holiday Inn, number one, and number two, if they had them, we wouldn't have been welcomed, so he put five extra bedrooms on top of the house and we would all stay either there or at neighbors.  I remember a summer staying two doors up the street at the home of the grandparents of Hamilton Holmes, who was the fellow who integrated the University of Georgia, but his grandparents were, well you know, everybody lived more or less in the same neighborhood back then because when blacks started buying homes in this area, this was the first area to open up.  And in 1908, my grandfather bought the house, that is still standing, on the street that is now named for him.  It was called, "Houston Street" at the time so (unclear) Houston Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my--a year and a half ago, my brother bought back that house.  It had become a rooming house and had been sold off early on after his death and I kept looking at it for years, I wanted to do something I thought with it and it had been spared because the great--great parkway clearing of houses here in Atlanta had taken the house next door to it and all the way down to the street at Boulevard here.  It's immediately north of here.  And--but that one was saved.  It is now the first house on the street when you turn in there.  And I was looking at it for about ten years wanting to do something historical.  I guess The King's Center development and all was inspiring me.  But I had done nothing until 2003.
Story_ID: 99178
Speaker 1: I wanted to start getting into your earliest memories of your mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn].  We know she was born in 1910, she was the second of six children and so as she was growing up, are there any stories that you can relate to us or share with us on what life was like here in Atlanta [Georgia] then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we have some pictures of them all dressed up in white.  There were stories about how sometimes, I think during the day, they wore black stockings over their underwear that came down long and if you got a hole in your black stocking, then the white thing showed through and they used to use shoe polish to keep 'em having to change or whatever.  But they went to the Houston Street School--the name of their street was Houston Street at the time and that would have been just up the street here.  This is Boulevard but another block or so over, one of the early schools for black children in Atlanta and one of her worst memories there is on the Atlanta fire in 1917 that swept through Auburn Avenue.  It leveled Auburn Avenue.  It's one of the historic fires of the time and was burning near to their school and it seems that the teachers all turned all the children out just to let them go home at the best that they could make it because it was getting so close and, of course, the parents couldn't come get them because you couldn't call and say come get 'em and they didn't have cars and all that.  So here these two little girls, Maynard's mother and my mother, two years apart, trying to get home and that thing has stayed with her until today.  When she hears a fire alarm as a, what do you call a 95-year old, it calls up those memories for her and it frightened her.  And we traced it back to that, that it must have been that, you know, that they were trying to find their way home and then it turns out that my grandmother [Irene Thompson Dobbs], her mother, was pregnant with one of the younger sisters at the time but had her mother living with her here for that period and her mother had--was making her way towards the school.  So they ran into her about halfway, their grandmother came to meet them but that was a story she's told us and it came back to me recently because we've just moved my mother from one place to another because she was unable to stay alone any more because she was--there were a lot of these sirens, or what have you, and her baby sister, who lives here also, reminded me of that connection.  But, you know, she grew up with a lot of sisters.  She remembered times when they would walk along Auburn here, my grandmother would take them to the movies and which was right down the street in the Odd Fellows building and coming back they would stop for hotdogs and how she would always take her hotdog out of the bun and eat the bun with all of the trimmings and save the hotdog for last and then this next sister to her would always wait for that and would prevail upon her to share it with her--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so she did.
Story_ID: 99179
Speaker 1: But that next sister, Millie, whose named for the Minnie Millie Minerva [Hendricks Dobbs] woman--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was very special to me because she was an Africanist, one of the early people interested in Africa and African jewelry and arts and I think I have taken that from her and there were the three of them first.  I mean, Irene, then two years Willie, and then two years Millie.  So that they had the three for about six or seven years before number four came along.  And I have the cutest picture of the three of them standing with these big bows on their heads.  But at any rate, that sister--
Speaker 2: Let me get to that part (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --and she always had a little bit "what to".
Speaker 2: Right, let me just get that straightened out.  The first was Irene, first child.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then your mother--
Speaker 1: Willie.
Speaker 2: Willie was the second child--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, Willie--
Speaker 2: --and Millie was the third child.
Speaker 1: And then Millie--the third.
Speaker 2: Three of--the third of six.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I just wanted to be sure.
Speaker 1: Now I might just mention that I believe that you all, at The HistoryMakers, do have all of this history.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: In its best form coming from Mattiwilda who was number five, whom you have interviewed in Washington?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, so they could be cross-referenced there.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon [HM], J-A-N-Z-O-N.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, okay.
Speaker 1: She became the first trained opera singer to sing with the Met.
Speaker 2: Right, okay, and that was number five.
Speaker 1: That she was number five.
Speaker 2: Okay, and who--do you remember who was number four?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Josephine--
Speaker 2: Aunt Josephine?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who was kind of there by herself because there was six years on one side of her and seven on the other and I don't remember which was which--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but she was really by herself.  And then Mattiwilda and June came at the end.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Josephine Dobbs married a Clement out of North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: And had six children--raised six children of her own.
Story_ID: 99180
Speaker 1: All right.  Well let's--let's go to your mom [Willie Dobbs Blackburn].  Are there any other stories?  The fire of 1917, and I can see where that would--a lasting impression.  How long did that fire, and how much damage did it do?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it went beyond a day--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was pretty much the most part of a day.
Speaker 1: But it was traumatic for your mother--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and there are pictures--
Speaker 1: And Irene?
Speaker 2: --of the devastation.  Oh, and I wanted to mention that luckily for some and not so luckily for others, the fire sweeping, I guess the air was--air currents were moving it, came down to Boulevard, right here at this corner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And turned up Boulevard and swept north and missed their house by a half a block.  So that--this newly turned black neighborhood that I'm telling you, hit most of the black professionals, were beginning to buy homes, were saved from that fire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99181
Speaker 1: Now you were born in 1937 and you--how many children did--
Speaker 2: I have the one sibling.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: A brother, Benjamin Allan--
Speaker 1: --A brother, okay.
Speaker 2: Not quite three years later.
Speaker 1: Right.  Let's--before we--we go into your story, let's go back and revisit your father's family.  How far back can we go on that?  First of all, let me get your father's name.
Speaker 2: Benjamin--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Allan, A-L-L-A-N, Blackburn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a Junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his father was William Webster Blackburn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his mother was Sally Jennings--I'm sorry Sarah--Sarah, my grandfather called her Sally for some reason, Sarah Jennings Blackburn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather was of Port Gibson, Mississippi and my father was also born there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Port Gibson.  They moved early in his life to Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: But he was born--
Speaker 2: He was born in Port Gibson.
Speaker 1: Port Gibson.
Speaker 2: And he was the second of three children that they had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The date of his birth?  Do you know that?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, July the 27th, 1906.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's go to your father.  His place of birth?
Speaker 2: Port Gibson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he and your grandfather were born in Port Gibson?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The very famous Port Gibson.
Speaker 2: I was going to say it's an interesting little town.
Speaker 1: Yes, it is.
Speaker 2: You're remembering its fame for--
Speaker 1: NAACP, that almost destroyed the NAACP.
Speaker 2: They almost--
Speaker 1: Destroyed the--
Speaker 2: Destroyed it there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  I don't know if I knew that story.
Speaker 1: Yup.  They sued them and the NAACP had to put up a certain amount of money to defend themselves in the suit and they didn't have the money and eventually Mohammad Ali and the AFL-CIO put up the money.
Speaker 2: So this was?
Speaker 1: This would have been 1967, '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Now that's my next job, is Mississippi.  I really want to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, your father's date of birth is?
Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh [27th] of July--July 27th, 1910.  You put it up.  I mean 1906.
Speaker 1: I had that for your grandfather.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I'm sorry, my grandfather--
Speaker 1: So July 27th, '06 [1906] is your father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, okay.  And if you don't know your--
Speaker 2: My grandfather would have been--
Speaker 1: If you don't know it, that's okay.
Speaker 2: I don't really know that.  I could look it up for you.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: I have his funeral program and all that.  I think it was eighteen something, obviously.  Was he older or younger?  He would have been older than Grandpa Dobbs.  Eighteen seventy [1870] something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He died in 1957 and he was in his eighties.  So how old would that make him?
Speaker 1: Right, that would make him 87.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then your father's mother?
Speaker 2: Sarah.
Speaker 1: Sarah Jennings Blackburn.
Speaker 2: I don't--she was in her nineties, like 92 when she died and that would have been--oh, no, that would have been in--yeah, that would have been in 1969--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would mean--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, 1955, maybe '53 [1953], four [1954], five [1955], right in there.  He would have died 1958.  What did I say earlier?
Speaker 1: Nineteen--let me find it, okay.
Speaker 2: I do remember he died right before my graduation and I was unable to go to his funeral.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that would have been in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he died in '57 [1957] and so she would have died in '50 [1950]--
Speaker 2: Four [1954], five [1955], something like that.
Speaker 1: Forty--
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954] or '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I think, I have to double-check those dates.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: But she was 90 so she was older than he, I gather.
Speaker 1: Right, and good enough.  Thirty-five, sixty-five, 1865 she would have been born.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, right around slavery, I mean emancipation.
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Speaker 2: She never told us any of those stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: Port Gibson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: She was Port Gibson, okay.
Speaker 2: And her name was Jennings.
Story_ID: 99182
Speaker 1: Now-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: -- I have a story there that I can't get out of my mind.  I'm going to have to do something about it and I never knew much of it, it was just a smidge, that she [Sarah Jennings Blackburn] talked about her mother--her mother visiting her in Jackson [Mississippi] after they had moved from Port Gibson [Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --riding a horse up to Jackson.  Her mother was a Creek Indian.
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: And I have this vision of this stately Indian lady, riding this horse.  It must be one of those, what kind of vision would that be, coming up from the genes?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Why can't I get it out of my head and I don't know her name or any of that but that's why I want very much to get into the Mississippi records one day, very soon.
Speaker 2: This is an ideal time to do it.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, uh-huh.  You're saying that because--
Speaker 2: Because of the people in charge.
Speaker 1: Of Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Of Mississippi.  It's us, now.
Speaker 1: Oh, you mean, us (laughter), yes.
Speaker 2: Rode--you said on a white horse?
Speaker 1: Oh, you turned it off, I'm sorry.  I don't know if it's a white horse, but it was a horse.
Speaker 2: A horse, okay.
Speaker 1: I'm kind of envisioning a brown one for some reason.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But when I paint the picture he might be white.
Speaker 2: So the two of them--the two of them are her mother and your grandmother on your father's side rode this horse to Jackson?
Speaker 1: No, my mother had moved to Jackson.  The family had moved to Jackson from Port Gibson.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Because of my grandfather's [William Webster Blackburn] work.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was with the State Board of Education.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was a college graduate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Of Natchez College [Natchez, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: So, his name was William--
Speaker 1: Webster, W.W. Blackburn.
Speaker 2: Webster.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.  My grandfather [John Wesley] Dobbs, always respected that that my mother's father-in-law was a college graduate.  I really have got to do that research but that would have been, I guess, around--
Speaker 2: Now he was a--
Speaker 1: --Eighteen seventies [1870s].
Speaker 2: --was a college graduate and a state official?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was in charge--he was, I've forgotten the exact job--titles where he was--I know for a while in charge of the Rosenwald Schools--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --in the state of Mississippi.  He was the agent there.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And then he worked with the state--well that was the state project, I assume, it came through the state.
Speaker 2: It came--
Speaker 1: They would have managed it--
Speaker 2: It came through the state but also it was private funding.
Speaker 1: I know the Rosenwald, Mr. Rosenwald was private, but they probably would have managed it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I don't know what job it was--other job if there was another one that kept him--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --traveling around the state a good bit.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: But there's stories of my grandfather--my father driving him in the later days when my father was, I guess, college or whatever.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he--but he was the secretary of the State Teachers Association, the black State Teachers Association during my childhood--secretary, and he published their journal--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --which I have always, lately, recognized to be part of my roots too that I'm going back to with the Dobbs Foundation.  I do want to publish information--educational information.
Speaker 2: The--I'm trying to--I think the secretary of the State Teachers Association and it wouldn't have been the NEA [National Education Association]--it could have been the--
Speaker 1: No, this is the black State Teachers Association--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And, okay.
Speaker 1: S-T-A.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were not unionized or anything like that, I don't think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--but I think they did have a national name and I can look that up.
Speaker 1: I guess it would have been part of the national, yes.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Any other outstanding stories on your grandfather before we go to your father?
Speaker 1: William Webster.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: He was a quiet little guy, smoked pipe and cigars but he was very well respected in the state.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--and so the elementary school, which was immediately across the street from the house that I grew up in is named W.W. Blackburn.
Speaker 2: Okay.  There's a school here in Atlanta named after--
Speaker 1: In Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: One of the big black, of course, elementary schools--no it's high school, sorry, high school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --is named for him.  There were two schools there, an elementary and a high, Sally Reynolds--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and it was named Jim Hill but they changed it to W.W. Blackburn in about the '60s [1960s], 1960s.
Speaker 2: Mm hm.
Speaker 1: This is posthumously.
Story_ID: 99183
Speaker 1: He [Her father, Benjamin Allan Blackburn] graduated Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1928.
Speaker 2: Let's--obviously he had a very extensive education, elementary school--
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: Yes, any--
Speaker 1: In Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: --in Jackson.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: In Jackson.  The--any stories that you remember--
Speaker 1: He eventually became a principal in one of those elementary schools.
Speaker 2: --on growing up that you remember?
Speaker 1: Oh, on his growing up?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: I have a picture of him standing in this cute little sailor suit that his mother had made with a cap.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Wearing his high-top shoes and he had an older sister and a younger brother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the story that I do recall him telling us was that his father, I don't know at what point it would have been, went to Danville, and I've recently come to know that it may be Danville, Kentucky and not Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And bought him a horse, which I've always thought was very unusual for that time.  I mean, he never told us any of the stories about where they kept this horse or him riding it but he remembers him bringing a horse for him.  It would have been a young horse, a pony.  I really have got to get into this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I really have.  Unfortunately, all of his siblings and everybody's gone but I always thought that was interesting.
Speaker 2: Any episodes by your father in elementary school or high school and so forth?
Speaker 1: Just that he sang a little song in church when he was a kid and he taught that to us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: "G-O-O-D, Good So Good," and also, I guess that was the song.  "I will try to be like Jesus, G-O-O-D, good, so good" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, the--do you remember in growing up what it was like, the whole family attending church, you know.  What church you attended?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, we grew up in the Friendship Baptist Church.  Not Friendship, it's this one here, Farish Street Baptist Church [Jackson, Mississippi].  My father and mother were staunch members.  They took us to Sunday School and we stayed for church and we would go back for the BYPU, in the afternoon.  I do remember that 'cause I was really anxious to get there, you know.  But we used to go religiously and, you know, 'cause we had those Easter programs and things.  I--my father--the most outstanding thing I remember about him during my childhood is that he called athletic games, he called football games for the high schools all around the state and basketball games.
Speaker 2: When you say "called," you mean refereed?
Speaker 1: He was a referee--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, and I remember sitting in the stands among kids who were not always pleased with his calls.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that followed me all the way through college--I mean through--no I'm sorry, not college but high school and he did call games up until the '60's [1960s].  I--oh, he was 65.  When would that have been, the '70's [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: That we finally pulled him off of the fields but he called basketball, football, even track and he even became the track coach at Jackson College while I was in college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he was just an athlete of all sorts.  He played tennis.  He was a quarterback for the football team at Morehouse.  He's a Morehouse graduate.  He knew of my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] 'cause they all knew of "The Dobbs daughters", of course, but he didn't meet her until she came to Mississippi to teach.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 99184
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little ways.  In high school, he obviously was an exceptional student.
Speaker 2: Good enough to get into Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, and he went to Morehouse.  Are any outstanding stories that we should know about while he was at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: They called him "Bear Blackburn", B-E-A-R.  I have his frat--what do they call those things?
Speaker 1: Paddle.
Speaker 2: Paddle.  He's a Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a life member, he became.
Speaker 1: Okay, his grades, I'm sure, were excellent, right?
Speaker 2: Well he graduated.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I'm sure he was a good student, good enough to get into the University of Ohio, [sic, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --graduate school, which he didn't finish but he was doing--
Speaker 1: He was an--
Speaker 2: --a master's--
Speaker 1: --athlete at Spelman?
Speaker 2: At Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Morehouse I mean.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was quarterback for the football team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he graduated in 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the beginning--well no, he would have been my second Morehouse person, you know, in that Dobbs actually had attended Morehouse College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dobbs did not graduate but I have Dobbs and then I have my father and my brother and my brother's son, so we have four generations at Morehouse also.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so while he graduated from Morehouse in 1928, he had played football.  He was quarterback on the football team.  Did he play any other sports or run track?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He may have dabbled in track but I don't know any stories about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's go on to then, he's graduated now from Morehouse and he's applying to Ohio State, right?
Speaker 2: And he attended at least a year.  I don't remember how long.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did he major in--
Speaker 2: I think he gave that up--
Speaker 1: --at Morehouse, by the way?
Speaker 2: --to come home and take a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was an English major.
Speaker 1: English, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he did pre-med at--at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: English and pre-med.  I don't know how he balanced that but--
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: --that's what I recall here.
Speaker 1: --he applied to Ohio State for graduate school?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  He did a year or two--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he did not complete his master's degree until quite some years later.
Speaker 1: What was he going for in his master's?
Speaker 2: I think he was supplementing the Morehouse training so that he could eventually go into medical school.
Speaker 1: Good enough, okay.
Speaker 2: So he would have been in the sciences, I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that he often encouraged me to be a doctor.  I should have taken his advice but I didn't (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99185
Speaker 1: Now you said while at Ohio State [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio] in pursuing his master's, he was offered a job back in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Back in Jackson.
Speaker 1: Back in, oh, back in Jackson.
Speaker 2: --Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, good enough.
Speaker 2: --Like that's where I grew up, that's home.
Speaker 1: And so he--he came back to Jackson to take that job?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: What job was that?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if this was the exact one then but when I was born, which would have been too many years later, I was born in '37 [1937], twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, we're talking maybe thirty-one, thirty-two, I guess.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: He was principal of an elementary school in Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Probably having got that job because his father was in state education and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and he was a college graduate which was unusual at that time, still.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And so when I was born, he was a principal at an elementary school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and then when you were born, he was still the principal there and that would have been 1937?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at some point he moved into, I remember, before he went back to school, he was teaching biology.   Would that have been his major?  Well, I guess from the medical preparation--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would have.
Speaker 2: --he had been doing, he was teaching biology at the big high school in Jackson, called Lanier--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--
Speaker 2: --High School and coaching the football team.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he may have--before he became principal at the elementary school, he may have taught biology a little before that?
Speaker 2: I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know that.  I don't know that, I never got that straight.  My brother might know but--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He may have been a teacher, yeah, and then moved into being a principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, good enough.
Speaker 2: That's probably how it went.
Story_ID: 98923
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you were born in 1937, very, very um, a momentous occasion and what did your mother say--
Speaker 2: And I was born in Atlanta [Georgia], by the way, that was a momentous occasion that he [her father, Benjamin Blackburn]--they both came over here for their first born.  So, I think his mother [Sarah Jennings Blackburn] actually rode over here with him, also, at the appointed hour.
Speaker 1: Oh, to--
Speaker 2: See, my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] came ahead--
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: --maybe a month or so, ahead of the time I was due and he was teaching school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was born October 3rd, so school would have been just starting but they knew when I was expected so he drove over here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his mother came with him.
Speaker 1: Now that was--was that because there were--the medical facilities were so much better?  Of course, both cities had segregated facilities but were their medical facilities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the medical service much better?
Speaker 2: Well, it was about segregation.  They had hospitals in Jackson, Mississippi but they were not letting black doctors practice there or black babies to be born there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they may have had a clinic or so.  I think most cities did have black clinics but she was aware of the one here because her two baby sisters had been born here--
Speaker 1: Here, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the Dwelle Clinic.  Georgia Dwelle was this black woman, ob-gyn, whose father had also been a doctor and they had this clinic right here on the corner, kind of two or three story house I think it would have been.  And, I guess, her father had passed on but she was still running the clinic and so mother came here also so that her mother could help her because her mother still had those two younger sisters as little children or they were like, not little but 12, 15, and so for her to pick up and come to Jackson to be with my mother for her first born wasn't the easiest thing for her to do.  So, because of those circumstances, it just worked out better for my mother to bring the whole show over here.  And--
Speaker 1: Right, and your grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] was here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So there was a huge house there.
Speaker 2: And they had the room and it's just up the street.  So, they even say that she was already in labor before my father actually arrived (laughter) but she wasn't budging until he got here.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So he drove in and I guess they all drove down here to this corner and boom, boom, boom, a little black baby, baldheaded baby, they took her back about two, three weeks later.
Speaker 1: Okay, back to Jackson--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: And then as I said, my brother was the black--first black baby born in the hospital in Jackson in 1940.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: So it wasn't--they didn't do it any time thereafter until another three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And that was the Baptist Hospital, too (laughs).
Story_ID: 98924
Speaker 1: What were some of the--
Speaker 2: --But it was Mississippi.
Speaker 1: --earliest things that you remember growing up there in Jackson [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I really remember this as much, I do remember getting stung by a bee in the yard next to my grandmother's [Sarah Jennings Blackburn] house 'cause they were living with his parents at the time and I still have the chair that he bought.  It was the only furniture they owned for my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] to sit on while she was pregnant.  It's one of those winged chairs, you know.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And as a little girl I was playing next door 'cause our neighbor had a big yard.
Speaker 1: This is when your mother was pregnant with your brother?
Speaker 2: No, with me.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: With me.  He had bought her this chair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the time--
Speaker 1: You remember that, okay.
Speaker 2: --Oh, I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that they were living with my grandparents.  I'm sorry.  I remember that.  They were living with them and so we were there until I was almost three because my brother was born in 1940 and they were building the house at that time.  We moved into our house at 1940.  But--so I was--we were there from--almost three of my first year, my first three years.  And during that time, I was playing in the neighbor's yard next door 'cause they had a big yard and got stung by a bee and I remember my Grandmother Blackburn having Grandpa [William Webster] Blackburn chew some tobacco to put on that, you know, wound--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and--and I remember playing up and down the street.  I remember the, you know, with the curbstones and the--that they had a tree in the backyard that had little black cherries on it.  But that bee stinging is probably my biggest remembrance and I remember a little cap that I had.  I must have kept it some years thereafter that I wore, wintertime, a snuggly kind of cap.  That's about--I remember watching for my father to come home in the evening and the front porch was screened and there was a door and there was a cross member in the middle of the door, you know, for strength, and I was just able to look under that crossbar to see if he was coming, see him coming up down the walk or whatever from the driveway or whatever.  So, that's about it but they have pictures of me in his rumble seat of his little car and also inside the car and I remember I had lots of little wavy hair, you know, kinky hair actually.  But it looks as though I was a little plump for a two-year old, or whatever it was at the time.  And-
Story_ID: 98925
Speaker 1: Do you remember those first days of attending school?  Kindergarten or--
Speaker 2: Well I remember that before I attended in a push-buggy thing over at Jackson College [Jackson, Mississippi], which is where my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] was working and--being with the sons of the dean of the school, Dean Sampson had two sons, they were both a little older than I.  They were actually bigger boys and they were standing around my little stroller I guess is the name of the thing, and so I spent my whole early life really on that campus because I went to nursery school there, in the basement of one of their buildings, they had a nursery school and then I went onto the elementary school on the campus there, and high school, on the campus of Tougaloo College [Preparatory High School] 'cause Jackson College left off at the elementary school.  It was a practice school because it was Jackson College for Negro teachers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when my mother had first gone there and met my father [Benjamin Blackburn] through his father [William Webster Blackburn], by the way, all of the new black teachers came through my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because of the State Teachers Association.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She remembers him telling her that he had a son for her and she remembers having known of the son when she was at Spelman [College] and that he had a notorious reputation and she remembered the girl that he dated--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so she met him kind of backing up but obviously she didn't back fast enough--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because they got married in '35 [1935].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that was '35' [1935], yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: So that's how they met?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --through his father.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they have pictures of him and his very best friend, Ray Wehr, who was from another little town in Georgia, here, with their Morehouse [College] sweaters, with their hems on, on the campus at Jackson College 'cause Ray obviously--I don't remember whether he actually lived in Jackson at that time or whether he was just visiting but he was my Godfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--and they were big Kappa's [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] together and all that.
Story_ID: 98926
Speaker 1: So the early school years were really there on Jackson State's campus [Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: I have pictures of myself and my best girlfriend whose father was president at the time, of us in the play yard of that nursery school.  I remember naps there that I didn't want to take.  I remember once getting caught 'cause we all went under the beds.  The beds were cots, you know, all like this, we were down under the beds, God knows what we were doing, all of us, kind of like, you know, in a little huddle down there, like in the boy scout tent, or whatever.  I remember being made to take those naps that I hated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember not liking carrots and getting choked on carrots that they were making us eat and going to the clinic on the campus 'cause I had tried to pull these carrots up and I had scratched my tonsils and things and they had to bathe my throat with iodine solution--
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: --over a period of a week or two, whatever.  And by that, I remember cod liver oil, every spring, standing in line, and they would come down--
Speaker 1: Which was very common for children.
Speaker 2: --at the nursery school.
Story_ID: 98927
Speaker 1: Did there come a period when the Jackson State School could not accommodate, you know, the elementary students and you had to go to public school?
Speaker 2: Not while I was in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It grew from an institute--Mississippi Institute or whatever it was when my mother went there to Jackson College.  The state took it over around the time of the [Great] Depression.  It was a Baptist school or it would have disappeared.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the president, B.B. Dansby was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]  graduate.  And he had, you know, they all came back here to Atlanta [Georgia] to AU [Atlanta University], and what have you, to recruit teachers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother had taught one year in Arkansas and then she had come back to Atlanta and had done a master's at AU so he recruited her for Jackson College and she built the Language Arts Department from scratch there and the Language Arts building is currently called the Willie Dobbs Blackburn Hall of Language Arts.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: They named it for her in '74 [1974] and just rededicated it in 2005 and her portrait had been stolen and we had to scurry around and get another picture for them and they--they rehung that portrait just this past February.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But she was there 40 years and built that department.  It was actually a division of the school, the Language Arts Division.  So, the school maintained--because it was--it became Jackson College for Negro Teachers and then Jackson State College and then Jackson State University but I went to what they called the Practice School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also the nursery school was used for their orientation, so, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a tiny--probably one of those Rosenwald schools, four room school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the campus and we had these teachers coming in all the time.  But we had regular teachers and a principal and it had four grades in it.  No, it had eight grades in it, four rooms, eight grades.
Speaker 1: And those eight grades took you up to the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98928
Speaker 1: And from there I went to Tougaloo College Preparatory High School which was about ten miles outside of town [Jackson, Mississippi].  We caught the bus every day.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My brother went to Blackburn High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right across the street from where we lived, which was in walking distance of the school.
Speaker 2: Named after your grandfather?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I think it was not named--it was not named Blackburn at the time that he was there, no, it was still called Jim Hill [High School].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he wanted to play football and Tougaloo College Preparatory High School was not about to be interested in football.  In fact, there were only 70 students in the whole school and it was on the campus at Tougaloo College and it was an old antebellum two-story frame house and I remember they had four grades in there, you know, nine, ten, eleven, twelve.  And I was chosen to be an early--entered into Tougaloo College out of the eleventh grade there.  That was their way of getting students to come to college there.
Speaker 2: And what year was that now?
Speaker 1: That was 1955.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], '54 [1954], '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955], academic year.  Fifty-four [1954], one, two, three, yeah, 1954.  And I was a straight "A" student and I got a scholarship for the next year but I was unable to accept that scholarship.  Can you guess why?
Speaker 2: Ah, no.
Speaker 1: Because I was a Dobbs and Spelman awaited.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Because all of my mother--my mother and all six of them had graduated Spelman, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And if I wanted to stay alive--
Speaker 2: You had to go--
Speaker 1: I knew from the cradle, practically, that I was going to go to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it was an opportunity, you know, to start college sooner and Tougaloo is a very good school and I got, as I said, a scholarship but I didn't come back that year but I transferred to Spelman as a sophomore.
Story_ID: 98929
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  The--now you're at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, that would be 1950--
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955]?
Speaker 2: Five [1955], '56 [1956], as a sophomore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had older cousins there, Alexine Clement from North Carolina, was a senior, and my mother's older sister's daughter, Jhon (ph.), was a senior.  Maynard's older--he had two older sisters.  This is the one right next to him and he was a senior at Morehouse because he was an early entrant there, very early.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So he and Jhon graduated the same year, '56 [1956], all three of them.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so in '55 [1955]--
Speaker 2: He was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --he was already at Morehouse and graduated--
Speaker 2: He graduated in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: In '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went there at the age of 14.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a Ford Foundation scholar.  That was popular, obviously, back then, these early entrant things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I did one at Tougaloo and he did the one here at Morehouse and also my other girlfriend with me in Mississippi, went early entrant to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] at that time.  I guess it was very popular.
Story_ID: 98930
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your earliest memories of meeting your cousin, Maynard [Jackson]?
Speaker 2: Maynard?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Earliest.  Well I guess we would have been 12, nine, ten, eleven, somewhere in there.  No, let's see, when they would have moved here, Carol Ann was already--she was 12, 13 years old and she's now going to be 60--she's 63.  So that was 50 years ago, that would have been, 19--.
Speaker 1: Fifty years ago would have been '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].  That's when they moved to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I would have been 17.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow, no, that's not right.  They--
Speaker 1: In 50--
Speaker 2: Maybe she was younger than I thought she was.  On this picture I'm envisioning in Dallas, Texas--
Speaker 1: You were--you were 18 in '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --I turned--in 1955, I turned 18 that Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Maynard would have moved here, he and his family--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to college at, no, I was 17, wasn't I?
Speaker 1: Yes, you would have been--
Speaker 2: I turned 17 that Fall when I came to Spelman.
Speaker 1: No, if you were born in '37' [1937], you would have been 18--
Speaker 2: I turned 18--
Speaker 1: --in October of '55' [1955].
Speaker 2: That's right, 18, 19, 20, I graduated at 20, that's right, from Spelman.  I was only at Spelman three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I turned 18--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Nineteen--eighteen to nineteen, nineteen, twenty, no, that's not right.
Speaker 1: The--where I'm trying to go on there is that earliest period--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you may have come here to visit was--Maynard was 12?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  No, I came--I remember visiting before--before, well no, I guess maybe that would have been about right.  Twelve, 15, years old, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't--the--
Speaker 2: Because they had their--he had his childhood in Dallas [Texas]
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I don't remember how old he actually was when he came here but they went--he was still in elementary school 'cause they went to Oglethorpe Elementary [School] and he went to David T. Howard High [School] right up the street here, which was right across the street from his grandparents house.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: That would have been 13, 14, 15, 16--
Speaker 1: But when you came--
Speaker 2: No, they took him at 16.  He didn't do all of his high school years then, obviously.
Speaker 1: I think--I think I do remember something like that, but what I'm--I was trying to get to was this first--
Speaker 2: Time meeting?
Speaker 1: Yeah, not necessarily the first time meeting, let me put it that way, but that significance of what people began to note, you know, others that they're bright, that they're this, that they're that, and--
Speaker 2: I think that if they had moved here around 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, it must have been at least, maybe '49 [1949]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --fifty [1950], because his father was minister of Friendship Baptist Church from '48 [1948] to '52 [1952], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they had come here in the '40's [1940s].  Somehow '46 [1946] rings some sort of a bell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in '46 [1946], I would have been nine?
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], you would have been nine.
Speaker 2: That's about right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I meant that conscious meeting.  Let's go on from there.
Speaker 2: Well I remember we were always excited to come to this big family of children 'cause he had, you know, six of them, eventually.  And the earliest time I remember visiting them was, we might have been 10, 11, 12, and I remember they had been left at home alone which I found very exciting and we cooked and all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it would have been around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll probably cross it again.
Story_ID: 98931
Speaker 1: You're a sophomore now at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And some of those outstanding things that you remember about that three year experience.
Speaker 2: Well, shortly after I got here, we would have come, I guess, early September, not late August, and then one month later I was having a birthday, October the 3rd.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That I was living in Packard Hall, which was the oldest dormitory there and for some reason I was absolutely astounded that they gave me a birthday party.  I didn't even know that they knew it was my birthday but I believe that's when I turned 18.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you're saying--
Speaker 2: And the students gave me--
Speaker 1: The students gave you a birthday party.
Speaker 2: My dorm sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gave me a birthday party and I remember living alone.  I didn't have a roommate for the three years that I was at Spelman, except for one, my senior year, I had a roommate 'cause I moved over to the new Abby Aldrich Hall and the first--well I was there as a junior, I had a single room but as a senior I had a--a friend that I had made on campus, she was a junior and I was a senior, we shared a room.  So, I remember going to class and cramming for exams and I remember that I went along with my parents thinking, when I first came, that I should probably major in education, even though that wasn't what I wanted to do, but I did start out, that first semester, in education.  I remember Mr. Bullock, who taught education, even though he was the building and grounds man at Spelman.  He had a house on the campus and he raised at least a couple of children, one of whom is Penelope Bullock, who was quite a shaker and mover here in Atlanta, early on, she's now--I think she's still alive but not very well.  But he taught the entry level class for education majors and I took it but I didn't like it and I wanted to major in art and my parents went along with that and I've always given them credit for letting a little black girl do that at that time in this country.
Story_ID: 98932
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneously)When--
Speaker 2: What made you think you wanted to major in art?
Speaker 1: Well, I had just become interested in it.  I sewed.  I did a lot of creative doll clothes making and liked colors and I drew a lot and whatever art we had in school.  I remember that wasn't anything special, though, but I do remember as a high school student, being interested in something that was part of, at the time, excuse me, you could write away to a school in Connecticut and do a correspondence course and they would run ads in magazines saying, "Can you draw me?"  And you would--
Speaker 2: I remember.
Speaker 1: --copy that and that would be your entry (bid)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --bid and I remember being, I think, accepted by them, the Westport School in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I didn't actually do the course but I do remember being interested.  And then my mother [Willie Dobbs Blackburn] took me and my brother, it must have been over several years, back to the campus in the evenings to take art on the campus.  She participated.  It was in the ceramics lab and we did--
Speaker 2: Now your mother had moved here to Atlanta by then?  Is that--
Speaker 1: No, no, this is in Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is high school.
Speaker 1: All of this is in Jackson.
Speaker 2: This is high school?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, as a child.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I only came here to go to college.
Speaker 2: Right, no I was taking you through your college years but you went back to your high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  I thought you asked me to go back to Jackson--
Speaker 2: No, no, that's okay.  But I--what I was trying to do--
Speaker 1: --in high school.  No, I must have misunderstood, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --was of how you decided, no I don't want to, you know, educate, but I want to do the art and obviously that did go back to your high school where--
Speaker 1: Years.
Speaker 2: --that high school years--
Speaker 1: Yes, even though I didn't have--
Speaker 2: --of where this budding--
Speaker 1: --art as such in high school.
Speaker 2: --this budding interest but you did not stand up to say, I want to be an artist and then your parents agreed in your junior year at--at Spelman, right?  Am I correct?
Speaker 1: My sophomore year, I went to Spelman.
Speaker 2: That's when you went to Spelman?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: But you did--you majored in education that year?
Speaker 1: Ah, I took the education course.  You didn't have to declare a major, I don't think, until your junior year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Then in your junior year--
Speaker 1: I did declare art, yes, as my major.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay, good enough.  And you graduated with a major in--in art.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 98933
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you do upon graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a little confused because teaching was the only thing you could do with art, as a black woman, in 1958 and that's really what the school was doing a lot of.  And several of my classmates actually were art majors and did go into the public school system.  But I was actually never interested in the teaching of it so much as I was in the, what they call commercial art at that time.  And I had a vision of maybe doing children's books 'cause I knew that was an area that would require a lot of pictures or designing 78 record album covers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was something that I also thought would be an outlet, and learning, because I think that the whole area of art business was evolving at that time.  As I said, they called it commercial art, they now call it graphics.  This was just emerging as a thing to do for anyone.  Perhaps the industry was really just growing.  Advertising was growing because of radio not being all that old, you know, and television was just beginning to come in.  In 1952, I think we got our first TV at home.  So that was what was really changing everything a lot and making more opportunities in the area of art.  And I always knew that I thought I didn't want to be a teacher because that was all I knew--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --and I wanted to do something, though, that I could wear my own clothes, because I was interested in clothes.  I didn't want to be a nurse, therefore, you know, or something of that sort where you wore uniform, but, and I didn't want to teach.  So, I was a little bit of a pioneer and that's why, I say, I give my parents credit for going along with it because, even then though, at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] the art major included, well I think you were required actually to take Home Economics but there was a class within the Home Economics thing in drawing and coloring, color theory and I took all of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I took them under a woman named Freddie Henderson, who's quite an artistic lady herself in clothes and design and fashion.  She taught all of that and I was very much influenced by her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And somebody pointed out to me years and years later, she also looked a little like my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that never dawned on me at the time.
Speaker 1: You are--you're graduating now and now it's time for you to face--
Speaker 2: And she had been a graduate of New York University.
Speaker 1: --and (laughing), ahh, okay.
Speaker 2: School of Retailing.  And I come back to Atlanta in the '50s [1950s] and had to teach.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because (unclear) wasn't ready.  But I followed her to New York University and did the major in Applied Art, which was fashion merchandising, but the business end of it, and this was before the MBA [Masters of Business Administration]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right before the MBA became a thing that you could do.  And the course of study was almost identical 'cause it was a business thing of how to become a buyer and run the business of a retail store.  How you buy.  How you sell.  How you calculate all of your costs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: How you deal with suppliers.  How you advertise those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it just so happened that I was a buyer in the area of fashion which, of course, was in the even more of an application of my art background, but we had to do the advertising for those things in our department.
Story_ID: 99762
Speaker 1: 'Cause while in college, I was searching for a major.
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-Well, let, let--in college--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Or something to do with an art major, I'll put it that way.
Speaker 2: Right, you wanted to find something to do with an art major in college.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-And my aunt--my aunt, my mother's younger sister, Mattiwilda [Dobbs Janzon HM], who was at that point an opera singer, suggested to me that there were, perhaps, opportunities in the area of costume and scenic design and I really wanted to major in the Fine Arts, not just in art painting, drawing, visual arts, but there was no such major.  I tried to see if I could put French, music and art together but Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] wasn't quite ready for that.  I'm saying that because eventually I did.  I had to go back to school later in life and do my doctorate in the Humanities to bring it all together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it did.  It brought my business--because my business was always in the area of applied arts because I had done advertising, marketing, public relations and had done video commercials, the writing part, all of it, at more than one place by the time I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and stumbled back into the school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that to say, you know you were interested in the original ideas that the young person has eventually coming out even though it wasn't spelled out for me because it didn't exist, really, at the time that I was coming along.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My parents were willing to support me in school.  And while I was in New York, I also took drawing, fashion drawing at Traphagen School, which at that time was a very well-known fashion design school.  It was started by this spinster-type British lady who had come to New York and had--the name was known everywhere if you knew anything about fashion.  And I was able to win some special recognition with some of my sketches there and I still have them but I never paid a lot of attention to that because while I was at Spelman, our art instructor made us enter the annual exhibitions at Atlanta University which Hale Woodruff had started in the '40's [1940s] and this was in the '50's [1950s].  And when I transferred to Spelman in '56' [1956], that first year, we were all entered into that national thing where he invited artists from all over the country and that's how Clark Atlanta [University] built its collection.  I was chosen to be in the exhibition and my name is actually on the program there and listed with all of the other artists and I don't know why I never got more excited about that than I did 'cause it was just recently that I went back and found the program and realized and was reminded that I had been in the exhibition and that I probably should have done something with my art as such, art for art sake, even though there was absolutely no hope of a real lucrative career at that time in the area.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's proven by the fact that most of the people who have that urge at that time and who did it actually ended up also teaching art.  So all of your artists, black artists, were, at one time or another, until some years later, were teachers.  But, at any rate, it all came together.
Story_ID: 99763
Speaker 1: Let's--let's go back to--you were going to New York [City, New York] to NYU [New York University] to learn some things, just a little bit different than what you had learned there, at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: New York was not readily accepting African American--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --artists and in this field.  What was it like?  What were some of the disappointments--
Speaker 2: That's an excellent question.
Speaker 1: --and obstacles--
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: --that you have to overcome?
Speaker 2: I had my very first racial experience after moving to New York.  Growing up where?
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: In Jackson.
Speaker 2: In the '40s [1940s].  But we were sheltered from it, you know, with Jackson College being the base for most of our activities.  I never was told to get to the back of the bus 'cause we didn't ride the bus.  We were lucky to have a used car.  But this was my first experience when I went for an apartment some years later after finishing school.  And I lived at the "Y" while I was in school.
Speaker 1: At 135th Street--
Speaker 2: At New York University.
Speaker 1: --or downtown?
Speaker 2: I was at the Lexington Avenue "Y", right near Grand Central Station and it was a direct shot down to NYU, you know, Astor Place, while I was doing my master's.  And then when I started working, my first job was with Alexander's in Regal Park and a cousin of mine had shown up at NYU at the same time and she and I took our first apartment together in, that must have been 1960.  And it was when we went for that apartment that the stuff hit the fan because we had found this little apartment, we liked it, it was on West 84th Street, right off West End--between West End and Riverside, and when we called up for it, they told us to come over and look at it and when we got there, it was taken.  So we went to--there was a commission in New York City, the New York City Commission on racial whatever and it was there to help follow these kinds of things up and they did and we got the apartment which may have not been a blessing in disguise because I remember being robbed there of my first camera and all that sort of thing and, you know, you had all of these fire escapes outside the window and it was a little tiny--I think it had been a hotel and they had turned it into an apartment building.  We had two little rooms and everything was in those two rooms.  But that was an experience.  And I don't think I've had one since.
Speaker 1: Tell us--give us more detail about your applying for that apartment and--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you looked it up in the paper.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The "New York Times", Sunday "Times", and I remember calling ahead to see if I could come, whether it was still available.  And--
Speaker 1: What did the person say?
Speaker 2: And I don't remember the details of that encounter but I know that they did not say anything out-of-the-way to us at the time except that it was, "Oh, they were sorry, it was rented."  And I said to them, how could it have possibly have been rented in this--I think I went right the same--like put down the phone and got on a subway or something like that.  And--
Speaker 1: Was it you by yourself or you and your--
Speaker 2: I remember going by myself, even though my cousin was going to share it with me but we--but I'm sure I told her what was happening and we were sure that this was it and we thought we should have it investigated, so we did.  And it turns out we were right because we did get the apartment.  It's called the Robin-Gay Apartments and it was one of those little narrow hotel kind of things, you know, in the middle of a block of apartment buildings but it was convenient.  It was 84th Street, near the 86th Street subway, Broadway and all that, you know, and I could get out to Regal Park Queens, which is where I was assigned first, Alexander's, out there.
Story_ID: 99764
Speaker 1: And then I got promoted, if you can call it a promotion, and they moved me to Third Avenue but it was--I was the first assistant black buyer that they had and that's where the opening was.  So, during that period, I got married and lived in the Bronx on Valentine Avenue and you could have told me that it wasn't made in heaven but it wasn't because it ended in divorce after about six years.
Speaker 2: Let me, so you don't skip too far ahead, the education that you received there in New York helped get you the job at Alexander's?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Right.  And that it did not experience anything other--
Speaker 1: Yes I did.
Speaker 2: --in getting there?
Speaker 1: That was my second encounter.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: When--oh, no this was--oh, I'm sorry, this would have been my first, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The apartment would have been my second but I wasn't face-to-face with this one so I guess that's why I wasn't really remembering it.  But as a graduating master's degree candidate and all that at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], they were helping us get jobs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we had had internships that year, that Christmas, in the retail stores.  Naturally, they were very happy to have the student help.
Speaker 2: And this is 19--
Speaker 1: This would have been 1958.
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], okay.
Speaker 1: December, and I was an internee, an intern, at Bloomingdale's on Third Avenue in New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the store was going through a change.  It was upgrading from having been under the "El".  They had just put the subway underground like three years before that, I believe, and the neighborhood was changing, upgrading a lot, and it was very interesting to be there at that time and I had a very--very good, very straightforward lady buyer that I was working for.  I was in the basement, though, basement lingerie but I learned a lot and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that was about two months I believe that I was at Bloomingdale's.
Speaker 2: As an assistant buy--
Speaker 1: As an intern--
Speaker 2: Intern buyer--
Speaker 1: --still in NYU and I finished NYU that spring and they were gathering--
Speaker 2: Spring of 1959?
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 99765
Speaker 1: They were gathering, and this is before the sit-ins, of course, or any of the integration movement but I do give credit to the retail industry for being ready, ahead of time, and I never felt discriminated against.  I always felt that I was given a free run to learn all that I could.  They were very willing to teach me things and I did learn and I did move up very fast because I became a buyer in '61 [1961] at Alexander's right before--no, I became an assistant buyer in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961]?
Speaker 1: It must have been '61 [1961] and then in '62 [1962], I think it was '62 [1962], I went to Sears, no, Lane Bryant, as a buyer--first an assistant and then I became a buyer at Lane Bryant in '63 [1963].  But I learned a lot at Alexander's and you got to go into the market buying office and in the market calling on manufacturers and then you were running the department in the store and you were responsible for the sales and you were responsible for getting the merchandise to your selling floor.  Once it hit the store, the buyer's responsibility was to get it to the store and we were responsible for keeping the sales because this was pre-computers.
Story_ID: 99766
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were going to tell us about a very bad experience at Alexander's, is that it?  An obstacle that you met.
Speaker 2: Oh, I never did tell you that. Oh, it was not at Alexander's, I'm sorry, it was at school because they were gathering jobs for us as we were completing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the course of study.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was--oh, no, it was for the time of the internship, that's what it was.  I was first scheduled to go to Saks Fifth Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for that Christmas period and all of a sudden, I think after they found out that I was black, they couldn't take me and Alexander's--Bloomingdale's did--
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: --for the internship--
Speaker 1: But Saks determined--
Speaker 2: --by the time we finished the course of study and we're interviewing for jobs, I was given the best offer that I got was from Alexander's.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, was it--
Speaker 2: So the discrimination thing came up at Christmas time for the internship.
Speaker 1: Was it Saks that turned you down?
Speaker 2: Saks turned me down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bloomingdale's took me which I felt was just as good because Bloomingdale's is the leader in fashion merchandising and they were having people come from all over the world, other merchandisers, to see how they did it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And this continued into the years that I was with Alexander's 'cause I was always a Bloomingdale's shopper after that and the way that they set up the store itself, which is what merchandising is, is the presentation of the merchandise and the pricing of it so that you get your profit and the advertising of it.  So they were leaders in the world--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in fashion merchandise.
Story_ID: 99767
Speaker 1: Now at Lane Bryant, you went there as an assistant buyer and became a--
Speaker 2: Buyer.
Speaker 1: A buyer.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, in women's sportswear.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any particular reason why that was memorable there besides, you know, the obvious?
Speaker 2: Well, here again, this was all pre-sit-ins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But these people were--were aware of the trends and they wanted to, I guess you might just say "do the right thing" and they were actually looking for minorities that they can bring in and Lane Bryant, being a Fortune 500 company at that time, knew that they needed somebody with some kind of experience and so my experience at Alexander's was important there and they knew that they wanted to move this person up to buyer but they put me with two buyers when I first came as an assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I learned the ropes and then I became buyer and we were buying, not for the Lane Bryant stores, but the Lane Bryant corporation owned several other chains of stores.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And one of them was called Newman-Benton and they were in the Midwest.  Another one was Coward Shoes.  Another one was the Tall Girl Shops, so they were a multifaceted corporation at that time but we were housed in the Lane Bryant store, on Fifth Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at 42nd Street and even as buying office--'cause we were buying long distance, you know for stores out of the Midwest, personnel--we would have to come downstairs at inventory time--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and help with all of that.  So we had some interaction with the actual New York store.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was buying for stores in the Midwest, called Newman-Benton Stores.  They were full-line department stores, regular sizes.  They didn't have anything to do with the Lane Bryant sizing and what have you.
Speaker 1: How long--
Speaker 2: And these were ingrained, older, middle western, white men, who were running those departments, whom I was having to give instructions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for whom I was buying.  So that was an interesting experience.  I don't remember having a bad one, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how long did you stay at Lane Bryant?
Speaker 2: About two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm trying to remember now why I left Lane Bryant.  I was getting a divorce, for one thing.
Story_ID: 99768
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, before we go there, let's--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-And I think that did it (laughs).
Speaker 1: --let's go back to your marriage.  How did you meet him?  What was the marriage like?
Speaker 2: Okay.  We met at New York University [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Lawrence R. Houston, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, H-O-U-S-T-O-N, and he was enrolled at NYU, also--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --undergrad but was working in the bursar's office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was very impressed when he saw this little black girl from Mississippi come through the line to pay her, whatever, at the window and I think he was intrigued by the fact that I had a scholarship from the state of Mississippi to go somewhere else and do it, girl, 'cause we don't want you here.
Speaker 1: We don't, right.
Speaker 2: What it was about was really that they did not even offer it there, in the state of Mississippi, what I wanted to take.  So I always helped myself not feel so bad about that in view of the fact that I wouldn't have been able to get it in Mississippi anyway.  But they were willing to train me and they did.  They had a big program going with doctors and one of my cousins married a doctor who went on the program from the state of Mississippi and--but they require those doctors to come back to the state of Mississippi for at least two, three, four, five years--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to practice.  That was their way of shoring up their amount of trained physicians in the state.  And they actually came back to Greenwood, Mississippi which was quite interesting in the '60s [1960s] which was civil rights.  He was the only black doctor in the Delta but I was on the--
Speaker 1: When you said, "he"--
Speaker 2: His name was--is Aaron Jackson, and he was from Jackson, Mississippi and I grew up with him and his brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He ended up marrying one of my cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm--
Speaker 2: He went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: I'm confused.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Aaron Jackson.
Speaker 2: Aaron Jackson, from Jackson, Mississippi, attended Morehouse College--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and then, I don't remember, I think he may have gone to Iowa [University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine] to medical school--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --from Morehouse but the state of Mississippi gave him a scholarship--
Speaker 1: To--
Speaker 2: --to help him do his medical studies.
Speaker 1: At Morehouse?
Speaker 2: No, at Iowa--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --medical school, which they did not have at Morehouse at the time.
Speaker 1: Right, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: See, the Morehouse School of Medicine is relatively new.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to Morehouse College
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then to medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but we--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But because he was a Mississippian, he was eligible for that scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99769
Speaker 1: Lawrence Houston, though, was in the bursar's office?
Speaker 2: My husband.
Speaker 1: Your--
Speaker 2: My soon-to-be husband.
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Was from Florida.
Speaker 1: At the bursar's office there in New York City [New York].
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--On New York University.
Speaker 1: And he was intrigued by this young lady who was being financed by the--
Speaker 2: Right, well there were not too many blacks, period, I don't think, at NYU at that time enrolled.
Speaker 1: Right, so he asked you out for a date or--
Speaker 2: Well, he asked if he could come see me and he did at the "Y".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll never forget that date because he was tall and thin and I always thought he looked like what Ichabod Crane must have looked like 'cause he wore this dark suit, white shirt, you know, and they had to be very businesslike, I guess, in that job, what have you.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he came with flowers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was not a bad way to approach a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] girl.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we sat in the calling room there at the--I was living at the "Y"--
Speaker 1: Lexington Avenue.
Speaker 2: --which also reminded me a lot of school, you know.  I had a little room upstairs, very much like what I had at school.  So that was a nice transition, I guess, into--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause they weren't--they didn't have rooms at the dormitory down at NYU.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, you started dating him because--
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.
Speaker 1: You were impressed with his flowers and so forth?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he seemed like a nice young man, you know, from Florida.  He'd grown up in Florida and his mother had been a very hardworking lady.  She had been at Edward Waters College.  She had done the food service there.  And he had a brother, older brother, named Sam Houston, if you can believe that, who was also in New York at the time.  So I got to know him and his, this was their first cousin, I think, who's sort of like a sister to them, that I met, and she had a house out in Queens [New York] and I remember she gave us a party when we were engaged and I have a picture of my brother sitting at her house, right around the time of our marriage.  But we were married, of course, in Jackson, Mississippi.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay, the--but from the time that you met him until the time you got married, what are we talking about in terms of--
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I came to NYU in '59 [1959], '58 [1958], I met him in '58 [1958], we got married in--let me count back.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  Don't worry about it.
Speaker 2: I remember the divorce.
Speaker 1: Don't worry about it.
Speaker 2: The divorce was '68' [1968].  We had been married six years.  Got married '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Lane Bryant--oh, okay, I'm sorry.  No, I wasn't getting divorced from Lane Bryant, I was getting married, Lane Bryant.  I was teaching Manpower Development and Training when I got the divorce.  That's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was--I got married while I was at--
Speaker 1: You were teaching--
Speaker 2: I got married while I was at Alexander's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], so it must have been '62 [1962] I went to Lane Bryant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: December of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were still at Lane Bryant when you were--
Speaker 2: Divorced.
Speaker 1: --getting a divorce?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You had moved on?
Speaker 2: No, I was at Lane Bryant--(unclear) somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lane Bryant two years, I believe, and '68 [1968]--'62 [1962], '60 [1960], that would have been '64 [1964].  I believe that's about right.  My brother was graduating dental school and I came home for that.
Story_ID: 99770
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And went back to New York with the Manpower Development Training Program--
Speaker 1: That's in New York?
Speaker 2: That was in New York.
Speaker 1: So you went to work for the city.
Speaker 2: It was a precursor of CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act].  It was a federal program.
Speaker 1: Federal, okay.
Speaker 2: Part of the Lyndon Johnson Domestic Peace Corp. kind of--
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: --thing.  And it was a school.  It was a chain of schools within the city where they trained unemployed people for work that was available.  And it ran the gamut from basic studies and secretarial work through air conditioning and heating and heavy duty, wherever the jobs were, there were classes in our school for that and I was developing the retail program because the state of New York--the Department of Labor, had jobs for people in various retail places and we were developing a program initially for Korvettes and later also we placed a lot of people at Alexander's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were training in salesmanship and also in junior management and we were developing the program from scratch.  All of the lesson plans and what to teach because they had to have English and math--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --straight English and math as a base and then you taught the specialty courses in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --buying and selling for them to be junior management people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had sort of left where you wanted to be and--but you were--
Speaker 2: I left the actual doing of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I went into the teaching of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the development of the curriculum which I really enjoyed very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because there were just two of us in that retail section--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a little young white man and I and we had, as I said, video cameras and recording, all of which was new at the time, to help the trainee see themselves and hear themselves and speak well if you were going to meet the public, you had to--back--that was the old days when you had to do it right (laughs).
Speaker 1: You had to do it right.
Speaker 2: And that was designed to help us do that and--so I really enjoyed that part which is something I came back to later.
Story_ID: 99771
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So, we're almost into 1970 and you were working in the Manpower and Training, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we were still in the '60's [1960s] because I got the divorce in '60' [1960]--
Speaker 1: Eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: --Eight [1968], yes.  And I had--by that time I had been teaching regular marketing, by the way, at Bronx Community College--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at night and I had also taught merchandising at Triborough.  I think it was Triborough Community College in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had that kind of little preview to college teaching and got the divorce in March, I think it was, of '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: My best girlfriend from Jackson [Mississippi], that I had grown up with in 1960 had gotten married to a Bahamian and moved there and it must have been 1966, '67' [1967], '68' [1968] when the Bahamas became independent from England and had their first prime minister rather than her governor being in charge, and so they were looking to train local people in all of the areas where they met the tourists because tourism was their, and is still their, major industry.  And a lot of the people didn't understand that.  So, the first black prime minister published a comic book called "Smile" and it was about how to get retail people to do the right thing with the tourist because they were not nice, and even to the black tourists.  And they would sit on a stool behind the counter and if they couldn't reach what you wanted, they'd tell you they didn't have it, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And they were keeping their money in little wooden boxes.
Story_ID: 98945
Speaker 1: Where we are, we're in the Bahamas.  The Bahamas has just achieved its independence and you are in New York [City, New York] and--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was encouraged by my girlfriend who lived there to move down and there was an opportunity with the British American Life Insurance Company to develop a training program for their chain of stores.  They had a chain of retail stores.  And it was a time when the cash register business was changing.  The--all of the mechanisms in retail were changing and computers were just becoming available but this was the early days when they still used punch tapes and the registers punched tapes and you sent them out to be read and you got a print-out sent back to you.  That was the way we tallied our sales in New York but I had a familiarity with the machine which made it easy for me to develop the sales training in the Bahamas and also junior management training and helped those people see that their jobs were tied to the tourism business and to help them also believe that they were going to be able to be promoted into junior management because they didn't think that the white British superstructure that they had was going to allow that and they wondered why I was there.  You know, who are you?  Are you on their side or ours?  So it took more than a year, I guess, to win their confidence but I did develop those programs and train them and I handled immigration personnel part of it and was a part of the development of the Bahamas training society there.  We brought down some very important speakers like Eli Ginzberg.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, who were you working for down there?
Speaker 2: British American Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they were in charge of the immigration and all of that?
Speaker 2: They handled the immigration for their own workers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every company who wanted to bring workers from somewhere else.  For instance, there was an immigration process for me, actually, to come in there.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And as they brought--most of the management was from England.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So as they brought those people in, I was in charge of handling that process as a part of also doing personnel training.  So it was all personnel, I guess, under the umbrella of the personnel function.  But a big part of what they did there because they were (unclear) islands, was immigration procedures.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was able to publish a newsletter which they hadn't had before and develop roundtables to get the workers, actually, involved.  And they were approaching the time when they needed to assign some of them to some of the better jobs and so they sort of had their own version of our Civil Rights Movement over there and I was a part of that.
Story_ID: 98946
Speaker 1: But at that point, Maynard [Jackson] was becoming a factor here in Atlanta [Georgia] and I really felt if I had something or anything at all to offer, I'd like to do it at home and I had been there three years.  I had taken a two-year job and had stayed an extra year so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I was unable to move to Atlanta, though, went back to New York.
Speaker 2: What year are we talking about now?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: With Celanese fibers, marketing, which was number 50 on the Fortune 500 list.  So that was an opportunity to really work for a major, major company.  And I did for two years and became manager of communications where we went out to states to speak to state organizations about manmade fibers which were new at the time and people did not know how to handle them.  I was a part of the retail operation right before that where I went into stores and trained sales people in the use of the fiber in either clothing or in upholstery for furniture.  W.J. Sloane and I went to Illinois, Bloomington, University of Indiana [sic, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] to do that kind of thing.  I also traveled to do trade shows to help the consumer become aware of what the manmade fibers could do.
Speaker 2: Okay, but all of this you were working for--
Speaker 1: It was that kind of involvement.  I was working for Celanese [Corporation].
Speaker 2: Celanese, okay.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.  And there were other companies that were our competitors, like DuPont and Monsanto and Kodak and all that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 98947
Speaker 1: But I wanted to come to Atlanta [Georgia] and the opportunity came when Sears Roebuck and Company decided they were ready to integrate and here again they didn't have a big pool of black executives to pull from so they hired me in New York [City, New York], trained me in New York, in the Sears way, so that they could transfer me into Atlanta as a Sears executive rather than bringing me here and moving me into the operation.
Speaker 2: Okay, you were working for Celanese but Sears did the training?
Speaker 1: No, I changed jobs, sorry.  I went with Sears.  I left Celanese.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You went with Sears and what year was that?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 2: Okay, and one of the reasons you did that was because--
Speaker 1: I wanted to come to Atlanta.
Speaker 2: It presented an opportunity to come to Atlanta, okay.
Speaker 1: And they were looking here in this territory, they call it.  They had five territories throughout the country to integrate 'cause this was after the sit-ins, of course, and one of my friends who worked with the Urban League knew--well they would contact places like the Urban League for recommendations and so that is how I got the job with Sears.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was an in-store, merchandise manager for the whole lower level at the Cumberland store here in Atlanta.  The store was two levels, hardlines they called them upstairs and softlines downstairs.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I managed quite a few departments and there was another merchandise manager for the furniture and the tools and all that sort of thing.  But that got me to Atlanta.  I had not been in the retail at that point for quite a while.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this was 1974 when you came back--
Speaker 1: That was '74' [1974].
Speaker 2: --to Atlanta, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, uh huh.
Story_ID: 98948
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And so I left Sears and went to work for a black hair care company--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: --you left Sears in what year?
Speaker 2: In 1974-1975, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and hair care product?
Speaker 2: So that was about a year and a half into Sears, black hair care--
Speaker 1: What was the name--
Speaker 2: --manufacturer who was based--had a base here in Atlanta.  It was called "LeConte", L-E-, capital C-O-N-T-E, is the name of the company.
Speaker 1: L-E-C-O--
Speaker 2: N-T-E, with an accent.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was looking to upgrade his business on the marketing end.  He needed somebody to help develop advertising and he did a lot of trade shows, which I had experience in all of that and just a marketing concept for the company and how we were going to expand the line and why and then how we would advertise that.  And so I did that as almost a one-person department for a year.  I even went to Oklahoma and in ten days organized a trade show with beauticians and with manufacturers showing their wares.  And at the trade show, we also had a lecture session that I conducted on how to run your business.  And we also did a cabaret at the end where I put together a male and female fashion show, cabaret style, and hired and had a television playback for that event, which in 1974 was a hard thing to do 'cause there were not too many video companies around at that time but we did do that.  And it came off and I somehow survived it (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was very good training and experience.
Story_ID: 98949
Speaker 1: And I moved on from LeConte to take an opportunity to work in Africa with the United States Department of State.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what year?
Speaker 1: That was 1977.
Speaker 2: 1977 you went to Africa.
Speaker 1: Sierra Leone, where I developed a cooperative program--
Speaker 2: With the State Department?
Speaker 1: --under the auspices of the U.S. Department of State, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Their Agency and Development program, "AID" it was called.
Speaker 2: Right, I was going to ask you was it AID, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, where they wanted to work with the women in development it was actually called.  The women had these cooperative businesses where they did the tie dye but they were unable to really market their goods beyond the immediate market so the idea was to test the market, see if there were other markets, to see if we could get their raw materials at a better price, help them determine whether they should make other kinds of merchandise, beyond you know just the muumuu things that, you know, they used locally, help the local people appreciate their art more than they did.  You know how it was always with the local people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in fact they would buy cloth that was imported from Belgium just because it was imported for their own clothes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when their stuff was highly in demand all over the world because it was art.  It was absolute art.  They were considered to be the highest and best tie dye in West Africa.  It was called "gara," G-A-R-A.  So I worked with them for three years.  No, I'm sorry, for two years and part of it was to bring three of them over here to be trained to understand this market and so I did bring three of them and we were--we had a booth at the very first of the Merchandise Mart's International Shows.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Atlanta Merchandise Mart, which is a major Mart in the world.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they were just beginning to do international stuff and I wanted these ladies to see the kinds of things that our buyers bought and what the buyer needed because they were going to be producers.  So we brought all kinds of things, arts and crafts, but especially their tie dye.  And I had helped them move into the area of making Western style clothes out of the tie dye material or doing things like making things for the office, covering books and notebooks and making tablecloths, tablecloth sets and Bloomingdale's was very interested in buying some of our tablecloths.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did sell some things to the High Museum [of Art] here in Atlanta.  They bought skirts and tops that were dyed to match.  There was a boutique--
Speaker 2: And you're still working for the State Department?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, this was just--it was meant to be a year's project, it actually went two years because we got it extended.
Speaker 2: Okay, who were you working for at this time?
Speaker 1: The State Department.  I was an independent contractor.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what I've got down is 1977 working with the State Department and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And Sierra--
Speaker 1: And when that technical year was over with the feasibility study that I had done--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I did take a job with MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], here in Atlanta, in the marketing department.
Speaker 2: Okay, what year was that?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was the latter part of the year but we renewed that AID contract.
Speaker 2: At the same time?
Speaker 1: Yes, and I continued to work with it on the American end because I was searching up sources to buy their merchandise and identified and trained and sent over there a young lady who actually worked with them in Africa.  She lived over there for another year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To help the production end of it be ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the United States was not interested in going to that level with the importation, unfortunately--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but I did all of the feasibility for that--
Speaker 2: So now we're--
Speaker 1: --including showing that the merchandise could sell here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 98950
Speaker 1: So now we're at 1977--
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978] now.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], okay, and-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We're in '78 [1978] but I am also working at MARTA.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are--
Speaker 2: I was a marketing assistant--marketing, what do they call it?  I've forgotten the exact title but I was in the marketing development department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where we did studies for the soon to come rails.  This is before the rail.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did the brochure about how to ride the train.  I walked the line.  I took pictures.  I did all the art--the layout if you follow what I'm saying, that my art, applied art, was continuing to be part of all of this work.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So textiles was certainly the only part of that.
Speaker 1: So you're working for MARTA, and you were doing something with--
Speaker 2: In the marketing.
Speaker 1: Right, in the marketing but you were also doing something for the--
Speaker 2: U.S. AID, still.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: But I was not having to live in Africa at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was another lady that we had placed in Africa and I was developing the market over here, the potential for their goods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did do that study but the State Department decided not to enact it because that really wasn't a part of the grant.  They didn't get it extended into that function.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I did bring three of the ladies over here and I arranged for them to go through training with a screen printing artist up in Massachusetts after we did the Merchandise Mart bit here and that gave them a skill to take back to Africa where they could produce fabrics more quickly than their hand--the total hand dying.  So the screen printing was something that they were going to do if they had gotten those J.C. Penney and Sears Roebuck's orders that they really wanted but I explained to them that they weren't ready for that because the quantity would have overwhelmed them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the idea was to develop the process on that end so that they would be ready--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --to export their merchandise and I did a feasibility study to show that they could sell over here.  I imported some items and did sell them here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98951
Speaker 1: By this time, MARTA's ready to introduce the train and I became marketing manager for MARTA and a few years following that I developed an employers' program because Atlanta [Georgia] was developing a bad air problem and the government was granting tax write-offs to businesses if they would encourage the use of transit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I developed the employers transit incentive program from scratch by myself.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Went out and sold it to a hundred employers and then they said, well, do the same thing with the visitors.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I got involved with the visitors bureau and contacted groups before they came to Atlanta and sold them cards for their conventioneers use which would require them to hire fewer buses--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --which would help cut down on the fumes in Atlanta.  Nobody realized that we had an air problem back then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This was in the '80s [1980s], middle '80's [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But because we are the City of Trees, the trees hold in the fumes from the cars.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now it's very well-known that we're way high on the list of bad air cities but it was a fairly hard sell then but we were able to get not only businesses involved, but some of the government agencies bought into the program.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And it continues today--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --where if the company pays part of the cost of the card, they can write that cost off of their income taxes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which was a decent incentive for them.
Story_ID: 98952
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're--
Speaker 2: By this time I had started back into school and MARTA was paying part of my tuition.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And I completed my doctorate in '96' [1996] and retired from MARTA and went into the school system.
Speaker 1: Completed the doctorate?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The college system.  Went to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I wanted--
Speaker 2: And I worked my way up to--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, doctorate.
Speaker 2: --chair of the Department of Architectural Studies there.
Speaker 1: Morris Brown.
Speaker 2: This was easier for me than some people before me because my husband, I had by this time, remarried--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --one of the earliest black architects and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What year did you get married?
Speaker 2: --understood a lot about that.
Speaker 1: What year did you--
Speaker 2: That we got married?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], good enough.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, 1979.  And Morris Brown had an undergraduate degree with that as an emphasis, architectural studies, but it was falling behind because the gentleman who had developed the program had gotten a new job under this president who actually took down the school, this last president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was more involved in that job which was facilities management than he was in developing his program.  But Atlanta has quite a few black architects here who were very willing and able to help me as well as the white architectural firms.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And our graduates were going to Georgia Tech.  So we were in the middle of bringing that up to life again when the school lost its accreditation.
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: I had also developed some courses and was teaching part-time at Clark Atlanta [University], even though I was full-time at Morris Brown, that allowed me to have a little bit of a transfer and I was able to take on other courses at Clark Atlanta, which I'm still doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But you might say that I'm retired at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98953
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I have started developing the Dobbs Foundation for Arts and Humanities Education.
Speaker 2: The Dallas Foundation?
Speaker 1: The Dobbs, D-O-B-B-S.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Named for my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Right, Dobbs Foundation--
Speaker 1: For Arts and Humanities Education.
Speaker 2: And tell--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- And we would do what I was doing in the colleges which is curriculum development and course development is where my doctorate is and that's the part that I had been doing even with the Manpower program in the Bahamas.  I had been doing a lot of curriculum development.  But I'm applying it to the fine arts as well as the graphic arts.
Speaker 2: When did you establish the Dobbs Foundation?
Speaker 1: This is a year old.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In terms of its formal 501(c)(3).  It actually got started in '03 [2003]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when I developed and delivered a seminar for the National Black Philanthropists.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes.
Speaker 1: Out of Washington [D.C.] they have a convention every two years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did another one this year, just last month.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, it was in June, in Minneapolis [Minnesota] where we talked about the relationship of the arts and the humanities to the development of givers of people who--giving attitude, you know, the character building aspects.
Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you, the mission of the, and you may have given it to me while I was writing, the mission of the Dobbs Foundation for Arts and Humanities Education--
Speaker 1: The development of young people--
Speaker 2: To develop young--
Speaker 1: --vis-a-vis their understanding and involvement in the arts and humanities, it's that specific focus, the arts and humanities, which is a broad area.  You know, it gets into the--all of the aspects of development but we wanted to do materials, teaching materials and programs to help young people know more about the arts and humanities.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in the result of that to become stronger people in whatever courses of study they follow or whatever occupations they choose.
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: But it's more of an educational thing and we hope to bring in some grants to do that and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and perhaps market some of the materials in other ways.
Story_ID: 98954
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you are there--are there any parts of this interview that you feel we might not have gotten or feel should be left in this?  Any parts--
Speaker 2: That should be added or taken away? (laughs)
Speaker 1: That should be, not taken away, added?
Speaker 2: Well, just that it has been interesting being married to an architect, a black architect.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I married him, he knew the names of all the black architects in the United States of America 'cause there were only about--
Speaker 1: Okay, did you give us his name?
Speaker 2: His name is LaFayette R. Beamon--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he's AIA, registered architect who started in California where he grew up and did his work at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And has worked for some really big firms out there in various areas and aspects of architecture like religious architecture or retail stores, etc.  And he had quite a role model out there because the first really well-known black architect, as you may know, was Paul Williams--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --who was also USC and who just made the most wonderful career there and most people don't know that he built Frank Sinatra's house and all that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In fact, LaFayette's father, who became a contractor, built Glenn Ford's house.  Most people don't know Glenn Ford.  You had to be pretty old for that one.
Speaker 1: Uh, oh.
Speaker 2: But he became a builder in California.  That's how LaFayette got involved with buildings--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and eventually went into the architectural part of it and he's done some very large projects here in Birmingham and Montgomery and all around and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we've been involved in furniture business together because that design and the knowledge of art and the applied aspects has stood us in good stead and I've come back to my original roots in that applied art.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 98955
Speaker 1: Let me ask you how--how would you like to be remembered?  What do you think your legacy is?
Speaker 2: That's a good question and it's high time that I gave it some thought.  Well, as--as perhaps a pioneer who was out there before the sit-ins, even, and I guess I was the first trained black retail buyer and a pioneer in that respect, and that I did it nationally and internationally and for very large companies as well as small companies and I parlayed it into other areas which I think young people need to understand that a training and an orientation in any, and your experience, can all be--must be related 'cause that is perhaps the greatest thing I've learned out of the doctoral work that I did it's an inter-disciplinary degree and that is becoming popular now in schools.  They're beginning to go back to where we started for all of the disciplines were together and, of course, we have now the majors, you know, where everything since the time of the Germans were split up into the university kind of thing.  But we're beginning to see that we need to talk more about the relevancies of those things and it's there, it's inborn, it's innate but we don't talk about them and we don't see how you can transfer information.  And the other thing that has been important for me in this area that my doctorate is in is the cultures of the world and the relevancies there because the arts of the world are the expressions of the cultures and this is what we want to teach young people now, through the Dobbs Foundation, but that this is becoming more important in our world today because if you did not know it before, you certainly do know it since 9/11 [September 11, 2001].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it was amazing to have to be knocking these heads open to put this information in before that time and then after that awful event, the kids were coming to us and it really gives me goosebumps that in this world we're now, untragically becoming aware of the fact that we really are all one and the way to understand that most of all is through the arts because everything has come out of that, the religions and the disciplines that we have developed and our ways of interacting with each other.  So I think it's a key and I'm very proud to be a part of it and hope that I can make an additional offering through the Dobbs Foundation.
Story_ID: 98956
Speaker 1: In the working world, we're unique.  Certainly at the time and kind of point up this thing about taking an art major which I give my parents credit for letting me do it 'cause it was very risky at that time in the '50's [1950s], even for white folks it was risky.
Speaker 2: And, you know, as parents--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)And then black and a woman, I mean, what are you going to do with that?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)I try to look back and think if I were your parents, she's just going to waste our money.  There's no black folks out there doing that, you know--
Speaker 1: No, they never really turned back.  They asked me to look at education and I did--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but after I said it wasn't really what I wanted to do, they were a hundred percent behind me and have been.
Speaker 2: No, I give them credit.  I give them credit.
Speaker 1: My mother's now 95 and a half.
Speaker 2: But--but--
Speaker 1: --and still ticking.
Speaker 2: She's got to be a wonderful--wonderful woman.
Speaker 1: She is.  That's a story in itself, it really is.
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: All of his daughters were.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: All of his daughters were.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maynard's mother.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Now that's fascinating.  I found that very fascinating.
Speaker 1: Integrated the libraries here in Atlanta and produced the first black mayor of the town.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My mother was at Jackson State and the building's named for her.  Millicent taught at Spelman [College] and introduced the idea of African studies.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And introduced the High Museum to African art.  Went to Africa 12 times, raised three boys and Josephine married into the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, family of the Clements, and raised six children and then after all of that, went back.  She was a teacher along the line, went back and became head of the school board in Durham and a politician.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, which took that part of her farther, you know, and of course, Mattiwilda was the first trained black opera singer at the Met.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There was one black at the Met before her, Marian Anderson sang there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before her but she was a concert singer and they wanted to give her that honor which she duly deserved but they tailored a role for her and she only sang it one time and they had done their duty, I guess, and then they hired two blacks into the company, my aunt, Mattiwilda, and Robert McFerrin.  Does that name ring a bell?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Bobby's father.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Bobby McFerrin.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so that's her legacy and June, the baby daughter, was the first black trained with Masters and Johnson.  Went back to school after three children and got her doctorate in home and family life and parlayed it into that kind of thing and is quite a specialist in AIDS and teenage pregnancies.  Been with the University in Washington.  She was at Amherst College for quite a long time.  Her daughter's the first black to graduate at Amherst.  She's now here in Atlanta, been with CDC and is now retired.  So they all have a story.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They all have a story and he was the most powerful person and I like to recount the fact that he not only--most people don't know that he reregistered the blacks in Atlanta to vote in the '30's [1930s], singlehandedly from 300 to 3,000.  Then he put the Masons of Georgia behind the effort--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they brought the statewide.  Then he put the black Masons of the United States of America behind Thurgood Marshall and they raised the most money for him for the "Brown versus the Board of Education".
Speaker 2: I did not know that.
Speaker 1: Except for the CIO, the second biggest amount of money came from a black group.
Speaker 2: I did not know.
Speaker 1: And the people do not know that and that is how--
Speaker 2: I did not know.
Speaker 1: --the basis of my dissertation and showing why he was a worthwhile figure to--to recount.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because he changed the world for all of us.  He was very--he brought Thurgood into the Masons.  Thurgood would come down here and help him raise money.  Thurgood Marshall was at his funeral.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King Jr. gave the invocation at his funeral and was a protege of his.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In fact, Martin Luther King asked him if he could use my grandfather's metaphor about the check, the cancelled check.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And believe it or not, my grandfather was a protege of his grandfather, E.D. Williams, of Ebenezer Baptist Church.
