Story_ID: 24624
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Charles Frank Bolden, Jr.  It's C-H-A-R-L-E-S, F-R-A-N-K, B-O-L-D-E-N, and then Jr.  And I am the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Administrator.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Born in 19-, August 1946 in Columbia, South Carolina, Good Samaritan Waverly Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you gave us your title already.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm, I'm the NASA A-, I'm the Administrator of the NAS-, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Speaker 1: Right. You're a former pilot for--
Speaker 2: I'm a, I am a retired Marine.  I spent thirty-four years on active duty in the Marine Corps, and I retired as a major general in 2003.  My last command was the--I commanded the Third Marine Aircraft Wing in, at the Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you've been to space?
Speaker 2: I've actually been to space four times.  I was a space shuttle pilot from 1980 through 1994 and during that period of time flew four shuttle missions twice--my first two as, as the copilot or pilot and the last two as the mission commander.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, today is the 28th of August, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C., and you're in my basement.  You're in the, in the television studio at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 24625
Speaker 1: Alright, before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we always ask as sort of a warm-up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: First one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, and you want to know what it is (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: I, I love, I love fish dishes, but I love seafoods--shellfish, crab, oysters, so, and clams are probably my, my most favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Alright, time of the year?
Speaker 2: Time of the year for me is summer.  I like it hot, and I don't mind it humid.  So I am a son of the South.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Ooh, favorite vacation destination.  You know, we don't get very many vacations, but, but my favorite place to visit so far is the country of Japan.  I'd, I, we lived in Japan for two years, and my wife and I travelled all over it as a part of my duty there.  And we fell in love with the country of Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is "Do your best."  And it, it is a phrase that I use usually in signing photos or, or anything for kids, for students.  And it's a phrase that my mom and dad always taught me when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 24626
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask about your family history, and I'm gonna--
Speaker 2: That'll be short (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side--
Speaker 2: That'll be really short (laughter).
Speaker 1: --but separately so we won't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: But can you give us your mother's full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My mother is Ethyl Evangeline Veronica Martin Bolden.
Speaker 1: (He's Ethylane?)
Speaker 2: And she is deceased now.  Yeah, Evangeline is like Evangeline, Veronica like Veronica, and Ethel is E-T-H-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ethel Evangeline Veronica Bolden.
Speaker 2: Martin Bolden.
Speaker 1: Martin Bolden.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her, her maiden name was Martin.  And the, the Evangeline Veronica--I think they come from either aunts or grandparents or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah
Speaker 2: Now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: She was born in Charleston, South Carolina, and her birth date--she and my dad--I gotta remember this.  It was December, 1917, and I want to say it was December 4th, because we always thought it was December 14th and she discovered I think--I, I can't remember exactly what happened, but she discovered very late in life that she had been celebrating the wrong birthday, but she refused to change it, because she and my father's birthdays were separated by two days.  He's born on the 16th of December and she refused to recognize her real birthday.  But, but I think her real birthday was, was December 4th, 1917, and his is--well, you're gonna go to him later.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 1: There's a big hump.  I can go--because my fa-, my mother's side of the family actually has a genealogy, several genealogies.  So, I don't have it memorized, but I do know I can go back to the very first member of my mother's family to be brought here from Africa.  She was a young sixteen-year-old slave girl by the name of Tracy who was sold at auction on the auction block in Charleston, South Carolina.  And it was 16-something, I think, or s-, may have been 17-something, but I, I can't remember the date.  But she was, she was many great-grandmothers back.  And then after that--she had six sons and those six sons became the, the Martin Jardine several-other-name families spread over South Carolina.  So--and, and we are the families that, that get together in reunion now and then.  But that's as far back as I can go.  And then it comes all the way up to my mother's mother who was Ethel Sinkler, I think.  And, you know, I know of my mother's grandparents but not very much about them.  Her father left in--her mother died when she was eight, so she actually grew up with her aunt and uncle who were Episcopal missionaries who travelled all over South Carolina.  So she, though born in, in Charleston, her father left the family shortly after the birth of her baby brother, Charles, and they never saw him-they--not never, they did not see him again until, until they were all grown--in fact, I think I was about twelve or thirteen when they discovered that their father was still living and he had ended up in a, you know, in a, a home in Columbia, South Carolina, in our home town.  And, and my mom got a call and went out, she and one of my, my uncles, and determined that, yeah, it was her father, yeah.  He died shortly after that, but--so I know almost nothing about the, you know, my grandfather on that side of the family.  But--
Speaker 2: Do you know what he did for a living or--
Speaker 1: They don't know anything about him.  They, they just know that he left shortly after--I guess he left while my mother was a, was an infant, and she never saw him again until she was older and had two kids.
Speaker 2: Now the Episcopal missionaries--were they missionaries in the South, particularly?
Speaker 1: They were in the South.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were, they were--and, in fact, I think their names were actually Sinkler.  And what they did was they travelled around small communities in, in South Carolina--places like Peak, Pomaria, Jenkinsville--and, and started, tried to start Episcopal churches.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: My mother had three brothers.  They were--she was the only girl, but she had--two older brothers were Thomas and Joseph.  Joe--, Uncle Joe was a postman in--retired from the postal service in New York City.  Uncle Thoma-, Uncle Thomas, who we called Uncle Buddy--Uncle Buddy was a retired school teacher in Columbia, South Carolina and, and very active in physical education and sports, actually he was most noted in South Carolina for developing athletes among African American kids back--'cause I grew up in the segregated South.  And he taught me to swim, my brother to swim.  He, he, he was essentially--he ran Drew Park swimming pool, which was the, the black swimming pool when I was growing up, named for Dr. Charles Drew.  And then her baby brother was, was Charles Sinkler Martin, who was sort of the black sheep of the family.  Uncle Charles--the other--Uncle Charles, I think, came out of high school, served in the Army with my dad and two, and other two uncles, but then never went back to school and became a, essentially a maitre d'.  He, he was a very, he was a professional hotelry person, was a maitre d' for many years at the Ocean Forest Hotel in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, and then moved down to Miami where he became the maitre d' at the Hotel Americana for--until the time of his death.  And, and he would, he would work the Masters now and then, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was the, he was the fun uncle (laughter).
Story_ID: 24627
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I was thinking about the Episcopal missionaries.  I know there--what is it--Vorhees?
Speaker 2: Vorhees is a--
Speaker 1: Is that a Episcopal school?
Speaker 2: Vorhees [College] is a jun-, it used to be a junior college.  It's now a four-year college, Episcopal college in Denmark, South Carolina.  And, and we had very good--the, the president I remember the longest was Dr. Potts, who was a very good friend of our family.  And, and he and my mom and dad had actually gone to school together at Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte [North Carolina].  My mother [Ethel Martin] and father [Charles Bolden, Sr.] went to Booker T. Washington High School in Columbia, South Carolina.  And then both went to, went to college at Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte, North Carolina, graduated, and came back to Columbia to teach.  And, and they taught all their lives.  My father actually--they graduated in the class of 1940 out of Smith. My father and, and my three uncles were drafted almost immediately so in 1941 they all went through Fort Jackson, South Carolina, went through basic training and ended up serving mostly in Africa, North Africa, and Europe--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --throughout the war, so they came home in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Well, I don't wanna go too fast away from your mother--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause there might be something in your mother's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did your mother say that--and she had an interesting background being raised by these missionaries--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as they, they were trying to work in South Carolina, and did, did those t-, the missionaries have anything to do with Vorhees [College] as--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I, I, I don't think so.  But I don't know.  But she was raised to the point of high school by, by her aunt and uncle.  And then for high school they all came together and--it's not clear to me, you know, who they lived with in Columbia, but they settled, all the kids settled in Columbia.  And I think it was probably with an aunt or uncle or maybe the Sinklers, you know, settled down and stayed in Columbia.  But I, I just remember my mom and her brothers grew up on, in a house that was on Marion Street in Columbia, South Carolina.  And she--my Uncle Buddy actually essentially raised the family after that through high school, yeah.  And then she went on to C-, to Johnson C. Smith.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so, so your mother, now, she, she was able to--so the Sinklers provided a good education for her and her aspiration was to become a teacher.
Speaker 2: Yes, and she, she actually became a librarian.  She taught initially, and then when--I think shortly after she took her first job in Columbia, she actually opened the first library for black students at Waverly Elementary School in Columbia.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And, and once I was born, my brother and I, she actually in the early 1950s went off to Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia, and got a masters in library science.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And, and that was her--she taught very briefly at the beginning but then became a, a librarian and, and was a librarian in elementary and junior high school in the segregated South.  And then once the schools were integrated in the, in the mid to late 1960s, she was one of the first black teachers to be moved to a formerly all-white school.  And so she was moved from W. A. Perry Junior High School where I went to school to, to Dreher High School in Columbia, South Carolina, to become the head librarian there.  And, and she retired from teaching from, you know, full-time, paid teaching as the, as the librarian and media specialist at Dreher High School in Columbia.
Story_ID: 24628
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My father--I'm a junior so my father is Charles Frank Bolden, Sr., and he is deceased.  He, he was born 16 December, 1917 in Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I can, you know, my father's side--I don't know very, not as much as I do about my mom's [Ethel Martin], not as far back anyway.  But, you know, my father, my, my grandfather was Mose Bolden who was a jeweler in New York City in Harlem.  I met, I met him several times because we generally spent the summers in, in Harlem.  You know, when school got out, with my mom and dad being teachers, we either got in a car or got on the Silver Meteor and went north and--.  So I spent a lot of time in Harlem growing up.
Speaker 1: So he had a, his own store in Harlem?
Speaker 2: He had a jewelry store in Harlem.  And he had actually been separated from my grandmother for some time, but, but my mom, my dad knew both his mother and father.  And my grandmother I did not know very well at all.  In fact, I think I saw her once in my life.  And it was--we went to Boston, Massachusetts, where she was really sick.  And it turned out she was on her deathbed, so I, I don't--that's the only time I remember seeing her.  My father had, he had a brother that they, that was lost in, in childhood and--named Leroy--I never knew.  And then he had three sisters.  He had Martha, who was the baby, who lived in Columbia, South Carolina, with us--well, not with us but same town.  And then his two older sisters, Fredrine and Lillie Mae actually lived in Harlem.  They were down the street from each other on 135th Street.  And so that's who I usually spent the summers with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had an aunt who was married to a gentleman--they were the Bradleys.  And Aunt Rosa was--and, and we used, used to call her husband Uncle Al-, Uncle Halcott.  Don't--I think his name must have been Halcott Bradley.  But he, he was a, an assistant mortician in a local funeral home, in Johnson Funeral Home there in Columbia, South Carolina, when I was growing up.  And so my dad had actually grown up dr-, when he was a-, old enough to drive, he drove for the funeral home.  It--because I think he had actually lived with, with Aunt Rosa and Uncle Hal-, and Uncle Halcott.  And--
Speaker 1: That's Halcott like Richard Halcott, H-A--
Speaker 2: I think it's H-A-L-C-O-T-T, but I'm not, I'm not certain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my dad drove for Johnson's Funeral Home, you know, until he went away to college, when he just went to Smith [Johnson C. Smith University].  So--and then he had another aunt, Lillie, who was in New York City.  And I knew Aunt Lillie just very, very--not very well.  And he had another aunt who was a beautician in, here in Washington, D.C., and, and we visited, visited her quite a bit in the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your father went off to the war right after he finished--
Speaker 2: I think he spent a year teaching and then was drafted.  So he was in the Army I think from 1941 to '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Came home--
Speaker 1: --and you say he served in North Africa and--
Speaker 2: Served in North Africa, Italy, and then in, you know, northern Europe.  He--yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories he shared with you about serving--
Speaker 2: They never--he and my uncles never, at least not with us around--they never talked about the war.  They, they had pictures and everything, but they, they never talked about it.
Speaker 1: That, that seems so strange that--
Speaker 2: No, not from--if you ever met people from World War II, they don't--your family may be different.
Speaker 1: My dad talked to me a long time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, I've just--hard--I guess if he had lived long enough, he would have started talking about it because, you know, I associate with some guys called the Montford Point Marines who, who came into the Marine Corps about the same time my dad came into the Army.  They didn't talk a lot about what they went through until recently.  So--but my dad died relatively young, he was in his late fifties, early sixties and so--.  And he was always very active.  He was my high school football coach and was the athletic director at the time of his death in a high school, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: --he, he never had a chance to retire and sit down and talk about old times the way that, that a lot of people do when they, they tell you about what it was like in the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now your dad was--there's a stadium named after him, I hear.
Speaker 2: That's right.  He, he--my father was a, was a very well- known football coach in C. A.--he coached at C. A. Johnson High School in Columbia, South Carolina, which at the time that I was growing up, C. A. Johnson was one of two black high schools in the city of Columbia, and it was one of the largest black schools in the state of South Carolina.  And it was a perennial football champion in the black system.  But our rival high school was Booker T. Washington--my father's alma mater, by the way.  But C. A. Johnson opened in 1949, and my dad was the first football coach there, and he coached until well, well after I graduated.  I graduated from C. A. Johnson in '64 [1964].  And I think he stayed there another three or four years before moving back to Booker Washington for a while.  He was only there for a short period of time, though, as the athletic director because in, when integration came, Booker Washington was closed and the University of South Carolina bought it and, and then started using the buildings.  But eventually everything was torn down so the only thing left of Booker Washington today is a, is a marker on a curb, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father play football himself somewhere?
Speaker 2: He played football at Booker Washington and he played--he was a, he was a star quarterback both at Booker Washington High School and then at Johnson C. Smith [University].  They played the single wing, so he was, he was something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now they did talk about that--a lot, but mostly football at Smith.
Speaker 1: At Johnson C. Smith, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24629
Speaker 1: Alright, let's see here.  Now when you think about your parents' personalities--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --their talents, their habits, the way they walk, the way they look, you know, their mentality, you know--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: The most?  Boy, that's a good question.  I--because they were--in many ways they were very much alike.  My mother [Ethel Martin] was very quiet.  So I'm not very quiet, so I probably take after my dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] there.  But my mother was very studious, and, and I, in my younger years (chuckles) I was very studious.  I definitely took after her in, in terms of my--I, I had an insatiable appetite for reading when I was--actually until, until later in life.  I'd, I think once I became a test pilot and started having to read technical papers a lot, then I kind of lost my thirst for reading.  And so what went away was my, was my fun reading.  But, but I remember growing up--I couldn't, I couldn't get enough books.  My mother really instilled in me a, you know, the, the need to read.  Both my mom and dad as teachers had always instilled in us the importance of studying and, and really encoura-, encouraged my brother and me to study everything.  I just happened to be interested in, in science and math and stuff so I got--I was fortunate in that regard.  In terms of being daring and doing crazy things, I probably got that from my dad.  My dad was a, was a member of, a lifetime member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, which, which has a certain reputation.  We're trying to, trying to calm it down.  But, but all my life I wanted to be like my dad in that regard.  I wanted to be, I wanted to be a football player like him but I was, I was lousy.  So I played for him, but I, I never, I was never anywhere close to having my dad's prowess, you know, his ability.  I was a relatively decent baseball player--I couldn't hit, but I was a great fielder.  And I was really a good swimmer.  So swimming turned out to be my, my number one sport.  My dad couldn't swim, ironically, nor my mom.  But I just--my Uncle Buddy got all of us in the water really early and, and so I became a pretty good swimmer.  Yeah, and then I picked up boxing when I went to the Naval Academy.
Story_ID: 24630
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you mentioned the Charles Drew pool.  A lot of people don't know that Drew was a great swimmer.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.  It--Dr. Drew, the father of the blood bank, from here in D.C., by the way and--.  And the guy that used to be the, in fact, was the acting administrator here for a little while, but he was the longtime deputy administrator here at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is Fred Gregory, who was Charles Drew's nephew, yeah.
Story_ID: 24631
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so when--can you name your brothers and si-.  Now how (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I have one brother.  My brother is Warren.  His full name is Warren Maurice Bolden, and Warren is four years younger than I am, so--.  And he still lives, he and his wife, Wendy, live in the house in which we grew up in South Carolina, in Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When my mom [Ethel Martin] died in 2002, she asked us not to get rid of the house.  And, and she asked me to make sure I took care of my brother.  And so he, since he lived in Columbia, he was the logical one to move (chuckle), move into the house 'cause I was not going back to Columbia.  And so, so he and, he and his wife moved in in 2002 and they've been there ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you grow up in the same house the whole--
Speaker 2: Same, no.  I started on Haskell, a street called Haskell Avenue in Columbia.  And I lived, we lived in the house on Haskell Avenue until 1949.  And then we, we built, my mom and dad built their house on Barhamville Road in '49 [1949] almost coincident with C. A. Johnson High School opening.  My dad had been a teacher at, at Carver High School, which was, which then became Carver Elementary, which was a school that my brother and I attended.  But when, when they built the real high school and Carver became an elementary school, C. A. Johnson right up the street from us became the high school.  And, and my mom and dad built their house in 1949.  So, from '49 [1949] all the way through the Naval Academy I--that was my home.  So I didn't, I didn't leave until after I graduated from the Naval Academy.  And, and then I, I got married three days after graduating from the Naval Academy.  And my wife, Jackie, and I were both, we both were born and raised in Columbia.  But we struck it off, went to Quantico, Virginia, for training as a Marine officer and then to Pensacola [Florida], and then never back to South Carolina.  She, she lived there one year while I was in Vietnam.
Story_ID: 24632
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I don't want to get too far past this early stage here.  We always ask this question, believe it or not:  Do you have an earliest childhood memory, earliest?
Speaker 2: Earliest?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have several--one of them that's not real pleasant.  My mother [Ethel Martin] made me take ballet and tap.  So, I remember to this day--I can see it.  There were three boys in the ballet class, Pete Pendergrass, Kelly Harvey, and me.  And the three of us were really good friends all the way through school.  We were, we were all, our parents were all in Jack and Jill together, you know, which is a, an infamous black social organization.  So--and we hated Jack and Jill, like most kids in Jack and Jill.  But that, that, that was one of my early, early, early, embarrassing memories.  Very early on--let me think.  I don't remember it, but it's indelibly imprinted in my mind because my mo-, my, my dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] and my wife's [Alexis "Jackie" Walker] dad tell us the story that when we were three--.  She and I went to kindergarten together.  And, and we are, our, their fam-, our families were always good friends because they both went to, went to school when they were in high school.  And--but I am told that when we were three years old we were at the beach one day and my dad--Jackie is one of three girls, and she's the middle daughter.  And, and said my dad looked, looked out in the surf and we were out there playing and he told Jackie's dad to save the bowlegged one for me.  And so, so we were, we were, I guess, a, an arranged marriage from the age of three--is the way the story is told.  I don't remember that story, but I like to tell it now.  And it, it embarrasses my wife a little bit, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Story_ID: 24633
Speaker 1: Alright.  So now here's another question we always ask:  Can you describe your--now did--was there a name for the neighborhood you lived in in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in the W-, it was called the Waverly district.  And, you know, for the life of me I have never been able to find out why it was called the Waverly district because Waverly School, which was where my mom [Ethel Martin] started, was, was miles away.  So there, there may--I don't know whether Waverly was a black person because it was a black community at the time.  And, you know, we--eventually, they built the projects behind us called Saxon Homes.  But I don't know why it was called that.  It was just--that's the way everybody recognized it.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Waverly district.
Speaker 2: Waverly district.
Speaker 1: When you said Waverly district, everybody'd know that's the part of town--
Speaker 2: Everybody would know you were talking about where C. A. Johnson [High School], Carver Elementary, Drew Park--that was all in the Waverly district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24634
Speaker 1: Alright.  Well, can you describe the house you grew up in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of house was it?
Speaker 2: It was a--the one I grew up in was a one-story brick house with two bedrooms, a relatively big living room, relatively big dining room, and an, a kitchen--my mom [Ethel Martin] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] decided at some point when I was still there to expand it, so they, they built an addition on the back that was really just a big party room, I guess it would be.  But that's where we put the television and everything.  And a basement on that part of it, which--and that always brought back memories because the basement always flooded.  It--we, we think--we never have figured it out, but we think the con-, the contractor put the cinder blocks in backwards.  I have, I've been told by construction people that cinder blocks actually have an inside and outside.  And so the best thing we could figure was that the, they put them in backwards and so every time it rained really hard we just--the basement would really flood.
Speaker 1: So instead of letting--
Speaker 2: And it still floods.
Speaker 1: --letting the water, keeping water out, it let it in--
Speaker 2: It, it let it in, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I remember that because I was always a tinkerer.  And it, and they, the contractor didn't finish the basement so my mom and dad let me go down in the basement and finish it.  And I, you know, I painted it.  And it became my room.  I actually, I actually moved, you know, we moved the bed down there and I, I ended up staying down in the basement a lot of my high school time because it was just, it was a nice place to be.  You know, I had a television and, and a shower, and, and toilet and all that kind of stuff.  So I, I finished it out and everything.  The washer and dryer was down there and all that so--.
Speaker 1: So just you and your brother, so your brother stayed in the other room--
Speaker 2: He [brother, Warren Bolden] stayed up in our room, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And I didn't always stay down there.  But if I wanted to get away from him then I went down in the basement (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're the oldest, right--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest by four years.
Story_ID: 24635
Speaker 1: Okay, you are.  So, now this--what--can you describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sure, the sights--because I--like I said I was always kind of adventurous.  So the sights for me were almost always the Broad River and the Congaree River.  Woods--I love the woods.  So my uncle, my cousin--I had a cousin who was about my age, Herbert Bynoe, and Herbert and I hung out like brothers.  And then Raymond, who was Herbert's younger brother, and my brother, Warren, were together quite a bit.  But on the weekends we were always either at one or the other's house.  And, and frequently we were either on the railroad tracks or we were in the woods or we were down on the river where we--all of, all the places we knew we shouldn't be.  But we just--they were all very exciting so--.  I remember the smell of, you know, the, the smell of the Congaree and Broad rivers.  They, they kind of flow right through Columbia [South Carolina].  Railroad track--you, you always remember the smell of ozone, you know, from the, the, the wheels on the track and stuff like that.  And I had, I used to have to walk the railroad track to get to Jackie's house when I finally got to high school, and, and we started dating my last two years of high school.  So I remember that.  I, I remember the sound of the crunch of the gravel under my feet as I walked along the rail bed because, you know, there, there was--we just kind of walked along the side of the railroad track.  And frequently you'd, because it was just so rough, so rugged on the, on the sides, it was easier to get ins-, in between the two tracks because the, the gravel filled in the, the crossties, the railroad ties.  So you could get a relatively smooth walk, but you were still crunching rocks as you walked along.  So those are three sights, smells, and sounds that I really remember a lot.  I also remember the smell of chitterlings and collard greens.  My dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] loved to cook.  That was his passion.  He was--two things he loved more than anything, more than--probably the only things that, that he loved anywhere close to my mother and that was cooking and football.  And so Saturday mornings starting before I even woke up--I would wake up, as a matter of fact, to the smell of coffee and then soon chitterlings or collard greens or fried chicken or something.  'Cause my dad cooked everything on simmer.  And so started at 6 a.m. in the morning.  Whenever I got up, we'd go to the grocery store and buy, buy the food for the week and, and come back.  So he'd have green--he, he would've probably gotten some greens on Friday afternoon if there wasn't a football game or early, early Saturday morning from the farmer's market.  And so he'd put his greens on and, and maybe put a turkey or a chicken or something like that in the oven.  And, and he, he loved beer.  So, so I grew up liking beer.  He used to drink Pabst Blue Ribbon or Falstaff--back in those days, you know, I guess it was Chester Peak, the mascot for Falstaff.  They used to sponsor the Baltimore Colts when there was a Baltimore Colt.  But, you know, weekends for us was football and--in, in football season anyway.  And--but my dad was, he, he love bourbon so he would usually have a little bottle of bourbon under the sink, you know, in the brown bag the way you did it back then.  But he would cook all day long.  He just loved to cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24636
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I was talking about food and my--and the fact that my dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] loved to cook.  And so I can just, I can still smell, you know, the aroma of all kinds of foods 'cause I love to eat anything he cooked.  And then the smell of chlorine because I, like I said, in summertime when the, from the time the pool opened until we closed it in September to go back to school I was usually in the water, you know, at, at the swimming pool.  So, so always, always had chlorine on me, in me, everything.  So, so those are some of the, some of the smells.
Story_ID: 24637
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Alright, we're rolling again.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And we're talking about sights and sounds and smells, yeah, I think I was getting ready to swi-, yeah--
Speaker 2: School.
Speaker 1: --go back into school, right.
Speaker 2: You're gonna talk about school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Bethlehem Seneca Community Center [in Columbia, South Carolina] for kindergarten and pre-school.  And then walked across the street to Carver Elementary School [in Columbia, South Carolina], which, although it was across the street from Bethlehem Center, but it was through the woods to my, to my elementary school from my house.  I walked right past the church across the street and, and through the woods and I was at Carver Elementary.  And then for junior high school, I went to W. A. Perry Junior High School [in Columbia, South Carolina] and that was like a three-quarter of a mile walk up the hill, up the street.  And then I came back closer to home for C. A. Johnson High School for high school [in Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you, okay, Carver Elementary School--now, as an elementary school student were you interested in math and science?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I think I was always interested in math and science.  My, my interest kind of really accelerated when I was in seventh grade because I had two teachers--my, my science teacher was, was Mr. J. P. Neal, who, who really encouraged us to participate in science fairs.  And once I did it once then I was hooked.  So I did that the rest of my time in junior high and high school.  And then my, one of my math teachers was, was a guy by the name of King Benjamin Lindbergh Jeffcoat, and Mr. Jeffcoat, who later became Dr. Jeffcoat and principal and superintendent of the schools.  But Mr. Jeffcoat had been to a summer training program out in Indiana or somewhere and had learned what then was called new math or set theory.  And when he came back he offered the opportunity for any of us in the class who were interested who wanted to learn something a little bit over and above.  And so he taught us set theory and, and I, but I had always liked math and science and--.  And again I was always a tinkerer.  So I was always taking things apart, usually electrical things.  So my, my interest tended toward electricity and electronics.  And, and it let to my, my desire to become an electrical engineer, which I never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24638
Speaker 1: Now you, you came along at a time when television was--you're--
Speaker 2: Black and white.
Speaker 1: You're the generation where television is a, I guess, a feature of life for the first time.
Speaker 2: It was a luxury.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not everybody in my neighborhood had TV.  We--I remember when we got a television we were, we were among the first in the neighborhood to have a television, a little square black and white tele--we actually had a cons-, had a console.  It was a, a Phillips or Philco, not Phillips.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a Philco black and white.  And we could get, at the time we had one station and it was WBTV Channel 3 from Charlotte, North Carolina.  So we got to see the Red Skins no matter whether we wanted to or not.  That's the only, that was the only football you had on Sunday.  And my dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] and I both hated the Red Skins, learned to hate them because that was the only team we could see.  And they, they were segregated at the time.  They were also--
Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They were the last, they were the last NFL team to, to, to integrate when they got Bobby Mitchell.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But--I think it was Bobby Mitchell.
Speaker 1: From Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But--so we never like the Red Skins.  And, and I remember when we got our second channel it was a CBS affiliate, WNOK TV Channel 19.  And they carried the Baltimore Colts.  And we fell in love with Baltimore 'cause they had Lenny, you know, Lenny Moore, John Unitas, Ray Berry, and, I mean, just, just incredible, so--.
Speaker 1: Big Daddy.
Speaker 2: Big Daddy Lipscomb.  So we became big Baltimore fans.
Story_ID: 24639
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you watch any science on TV that--
Speaker 2: We had Mr. Wizard.  There was a program called 'Watch Mr. Wizard'.  And I watched that--it was usually on Saturday mornings.  The local television had a guy by the name of Mr. Knozit.  The W-, when, when we got a third station it was WISTV Channel 10 and it was the NBC affiliate.  And the weatherman doubled as a, as a guy who had a little children's show called Mr. Knozit.  And Mr. Knozit usually had animals that came on or he talked about science and stuff like that.  And his name was Joe Pinner.  He did sports and Mr. Knozit.  And then--but, but the big guy for me was, was Mr. Wizard, 'Watch Mr. Wizard'.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Don Herbert played him--
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: --did him.  And he, he just passed away--
Speaker 2: And not very long ago.
Speaker 1: --I think last year, yeah.
Speaker 2: We have a guy now in the Astronaut Office by the name of Don Pettit who just came back from the international, from six months on the International Space Station.  And I call Don Pettit my modern day Mr. Wizard.  He is, he's absolutely incredible with, with anybody, but particularly with kids.  And he's just like Mr. Wizard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can explain like--
Speaker 2: Everything, anything, yeah.
Story_ID: 24640
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you--now your mother's a librarian.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time in the library?
Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time in the library.  And when I was in junior high school, because she [Charles Bolden's mother, Ethel Martin] was the librarian and I was a library assistant and--so I worked for her, you know, in, in my spare time, middle of the day.  And after school we usually stayed around to, to reshelf, you know, res-, reshelf the books and--.  And then going into summer break--back then when schools were closed in the summer, in the library we always wrapped all the books in newspaper so they wouldn't get a lot of dust on them and stuff like that.  They don't do that anymore because schools are usually open, whether it's for summer school or something but almost open year round.  And the other thing is kids don't use books that much.  They're always online (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did--you mention the t-, the math teacher--
Speaker 2: Mr. Jeffcoat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Mr. Neal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the science teacher, Mr. Neal.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Both of whom were very unusual at the time because they were in junior high school.  The male, male teachers when I was growing up were almost all high school because they were coaches and they were the disciplinarians in the high school.  My dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] taught civics and social studies and, and government, and he was the high school football coach.  But my dad had, he had coached ba-, varsity basketball, varsity football, tennis, track, everything when the school got started.  And then they started hiring other coaches.  But--so he stuck with football, with his passion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24641
Speaker 1: Alright.  You grew up at a time when there were civil rights changes all over--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --the country and you would have been--when you were in middle school, say, you were twelve in what, 19--
Speaker 2: When we started the s-, when the sit-in started and all that or--
Speaker 1: You're not saying 19--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In '58 [1958] I was twelve so I was going into--I graduated in 1964 from C. A. Johnson [High School, in Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I would have been going into junior high in '57 [1957], '58 [1958].  And, and, you know, the civil rights movement was underway for all intents and purposes.  And then we started marching and doing sit-ins in very early '60's [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we had Woolworth's and McCrory's.  We had a couple of places that were, that were the high profile places for sit-ins.  Not, not as big as, say, Greensboro, North Carolina, but, but we had a Woolworth's that, that really took it.
Story_ID: 24642
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you remember segregation vividly--
Speaker 2: Very well, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was all I knew.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what was it like going into downtown Columbia--
Speaker 2: I've--it was okay 'cause you knew where you, you knew where you could go and where you couldn't.  And you knew where you better not go.  And, and so you just kind of governed your life that way.  It was, in many ways it was a lot easier than when I got to the Naval Academy where, you know, Baltimore and other places were recently integrated to be quite honest, but they weren't.  And so even then there was de facto segregation.  And you could really get yourself in, in, in a bad way going into some places in and around Annapolis, for example, and not know that you weren't supposed to be in there.  You went in there because that's where all the other midshipmen went.  But they made it very clear when you came in that, you know, you were not welcome.  And that, that lasted all the way--I graduated in 1968.  And I remember one of the, the worst experiences I had at the Naval Academy was, was just before my graduation when we were told we couldn't--there were, there were three of us, three, three of my friends got in--Buddy Clark, who turned out to be my best man in my wedding and was from Chicago; Frank Simmons, who was from Birmingham, Bessemer, Alabama; and, and me.  And we went into a, a place in, on the outskirts of Annapolis in Maryland and, and we were told that they wouldn't serve us, that, you know, we had to go around the back.  And we, we were not inclined to do that so we (chuckle), we, we finally left after some time.  But it was not, it was not nice, yeah.  So I, I've, I remember segregation very, very, very vividly, yeah.
Story_ID: 24643
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now some--now how were your grades in school?  Did you get good grades?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I, I'd, I, you know, I'd--and I think that was just the influence of my mom [Ethel Martin] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.], my mother probably more so than my dad.  You know, I'd, I think they were both good students.  But my mom was really, she was a very studious person all the time, very seri-, much more serious than my dad.  My dad, my dad could be a practical jokester and stuff.  His mouth was, was filthy (chuckle).  In fact, we used to get my, my, his baby sister--my Aunt Martha used to call the house every once in a while because we practiced it up on the hill--that's the w-, that's what it was called at C. A. Johnson [High School].  You went down into this little valley and then back up on a hill where the practice field was.  And, and off the, off the schoolyard but down at the end of the block--I mean it was a long way away--was one of my father's cousins.  And she was an older lady.  And she used to call my Aunt Martha all the time, say, "Martha, you know, you gotta tell Charles he needs to wash his mouth out."  My dad could curse like a sailor.  (Chuckle) And it was--he--and you could hear him all over th-, that part of Columbia, you know, when he, when he would just get angry with us (chuckle).  He, he was something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  You played football in high school you said.
Speaker 2: I did.  I tried.
Speaker 1: Now what did you play?  What position?
Speaker 2: I was a quarterback.  I, and I was, I was little, I was slow, I couldn't throw, but other than that I was fine (laughter).  But I was, you know, I was, I was good enough to be my dad's second string quarterback.  And--but it was just, I think it was just I had, I had a big heart.  And I was a, I, I think the reason that I ended up playing was because I was smart and, you know, I, I knew all the plays.  I could run a good offense.  I just couldn't throw the ball.  And so I could move the team.  But if you were gonna, if, if he needed to pass, it wasn't gonna happen with me.  And, and so I was never the starting quarterback.  And we just recently, I just learned that recently we lost the guy that was the, the starting quarterback for our team when I was playing--a guy named Algernon Goddard who was really good.  And, and I remember when we went down to Charleston [South Carolina] to play for the national, for the national, the state championship, the night that President [John F.] Kennedy had been assassinated, Algernon got hurt and I think in the first or second quarter and I ended up having to go in the game and play the rest of the game.  And we beat a school called Burke High School for the state championship.  And I think I threw one pass (chuckle) and my--and I'd, I, I couldn't believe it when my dad sent the play in 'cause he had--that was the last thing he told me.  He said "Do not throw the ball."
Story_ID: 24644
Speaker 1: Now was this like a black school championship?
Speaker 2: Black school.  Yeah, it was.  We had totally--you asked me if I remember segregation.  I do because that's all we had.  You know, there was a black school system and a white school system.  And, and different spay, pay scales for the teachers.  So my mom [Ethel Martin] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] made less money than the white teachers.  It just, just different.  Different credit union, different, different teachers' union, different everything.
Speaker 1: I imagine a lot of young--
Speaker 2: Two different worlds.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of young people watching this, they're seeing you as head of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's--
Speaker 1: --would never believe--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you grew up in a system like that.
Speaker 2: Well, I would never--when I was growing up in that system, I'd, I'd tell people all the time, I said never in my wildest imagination did I, did I think that I would ever be the sitting NASA administrator and particularly never serving a black president, you know, having a black president as my boss.  That's--people can't c-, I don't think most people can comprehend that (chuckle).
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24645
Speaker 1: So, okay, in, so in high school now you're taking the sciences, you're on the, you're on the college track, I guess, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you got, you know, you got, your parents are teachers and, you know, so they're giving you good advice.  Like what made you decide to apply to the U.S.--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --Naval Academy.
Speaker 2: I saw a program on television called 'Men of Annapolis' when I was in seventh grade.  And my mom [Ethel Martin] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.], you know, they, they were very encouraging.  They--I don't, I don't think they were overly excited about my wanting to go to the Naval Academy [in Annapolis, Maryland].  Yeah, I didn't know anything about the military at all because, like I told you, I knew my, my dad and my two, and my three uncles had served in the war and I saw their pictures and stuff.  But they were always sitting around, you know, having a good time.  I never--I knew what, I thought I knew what war was like and all that.  But, but I just decided I really liked life at the Naval Academy by what I'd seen in this, this show about life at the Naval Academy.  And so I decided that's where I wanted to go to school.  And I--you needed an appointment to get there, a congressional appointment and--or an appointment from the vice president of the United States.  So, I started, I actually started applying when I was in ninth grade.  And I'd, I remember I'd get letters back from the congressmen and senators and the vice president all the time saying, hey, you know, just hold on.  You're a little early.  Wait until you're a senior in high school when--.  And I'd always write them another letter, say I just want you to know who I am because, you know, the time will come that it'll, it'll be okay.  And, and in my senior year I knew, I was pretty certain, in fact, I knew I was not gonna get an appointment because my, my state senators were Olin D. Johnston and Strom Thurmond.  And, and Thurmond, for all intents--Johnston told me no way.  He was not gonna make an appointment at all.  Thurmond, Strom Thurmond offered me an appointment to the Merchant Marine Academy, which I, I had no interest in.  And then Albert Watson was my congressional representative and he said no way, I'm not about to do that.  So neither of them would appoint an African American.  And so my only hope was Vice President Johnson, Lyndon Johnson.  And, and I had written him and, and then President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated as I mentioned on the night that we went to play for the state championship.  So I knew that any hope I had of going to the Naval Academy was gone.  But I wrote to the president and I, I reminded him that I had been writing, you know, saying how much I wanted to go to the Naval Academy.  Never heard from him.  But a couple of weeks later a navy recruiter came to my house and, a chief--.  And he was looking, he said he was looking for me and said he heard I wanted to go to the Naval Academy.  Then a couple of weeks later a retired federal judge came to my school and Lyndon Johnson had sent him out around the country looking for qualified African Americans and Hispanic kids to try to increase the diversity at, at the service academies.  Back then there was, you know, there was--the Air Force Academy was brand new, but we had West Point, the Air Force Academy, and, and Annapolis is the three, the big three.  And then you had the Coast Guard Academy and Merchant Marine.  But, but President Johnson was trying to increase the diversity at the academies and--and I ended up getting an appointment from Congressman William Dawson in Chicago, Illinois.  Never saw him, never met him or anything, but, but it was arranged through the [Naval] Academy.  So that's how I got there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's legendary in Chicago, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One time I think when he was in there was only (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He was the first--
Speaker 1: --Clayton Powell and him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to say he was the first black elected to the House.  And he had also been, you know, had served in World War II.
Speaker 1: He was, he was the only--the first one was Oscar DePriest from Reconstruction but also in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then Dawson took DePriest's place, Dawson being a Democrat, DePriest being a Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Then Adam J. Powell was elected in (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But at the time that you were, you got the letter from Dawson there were only two black congressmen in Congress.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, you're right.  And because I, I went to the Naval Academy in '68 [1968], I mean in '64 [1964] and graduated in the class of 1968.  And ironically the only two things I knew when I went to the Academy was:  I was not going to fly airplanes, because that was inherently dangerous and a I was definitely not gonna go in the Marine Corps.  So I was going to be something in the navy.  And, you know, I, I, I didn't know I would like ships, but it turned out I fell in love with ships.  I could have, I could have sailed forever.  I loved being at sea and stuff.  And--but what happened to me was my first year there, my company, my first company officer was a, was a young marine major, guy by the name of John Riley Love who became my lifelong friend until he passed a number of years ago.  But he was, he was really hard.  He was like my dad, really tough.  But, but he was compassionate and caring and a strong disciplinarian.  So you knew what he expected of you.  And, and he just so impressed me that four years later, three years later, you know, after I, after he left the Academy and was no longer there, I decided I wanted to be like him.  So that's how I decided to go in the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 24646
Speaker 1: Okay now this is back to high school for a second.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Now when you graduate from high school did you graduate with honors or did you--
Speaker 2: I was the vale-, I, I wasn't the valedictorian, I was the salutatorian, so I was the number two in my high school class, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were you, did you run for class president or--
Speaker 2: I was the class president and I was president of student council and I was on the newspaper staff and--I did everything.  I, I was on, I was on the concert band.  I played timpani, a percussion on the concert band.  Because I was a football player I couldn't be on the marching band.  And--but I was a member of the honor society, the Palmettos Scholastic Press Association.  I, I did too much.  I, I just liked being in activities and everything.  And it, it kind of, it kind of got to me when I got to the Naval Academy because I did the same thing.  I was, I was in a lot of stuff at the Naval Academy.  My, I had very good grades at the Naval Academy for my first three years.
Story_ID: 24647
Speaker 1: Now this is the U.S. Naval Academy and, well, both the academies really were notoriously tough on black cadets.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We had--my class started with seven.  We lost one at the end of plebe summer.  We lost the second, Emerson Carr, at the end of football season.  He was a big guy.  Ended up coming back the next year.  He's from Minnesota.  He played defensive tackle on the football team and, and he just didn't like the [Naval] Academy [in Annapolis, Maryland] so he left at the end of football season and then decided that's where he really wanted to be.  So he came back in the class of 1969.  But we had another guy by the name of Jimmy Frizzell who was also a football player, was a running back.  And, and Jimmy flunked out so he left at the end of plebe year.  So that left four of us:  a guy named Buddy Clark from Chicago [Illinois], Gill Lukas from Ohio, Frank Simmons from Bessemer, Alabama, Birmingham, and then me.  And the four of us went through the Naval Academy together.  Frank, who had been formally enlisted and came through the Naval Academy Prep School, NAPS, had been a, a--he had been with the naval security group.  He was a, an electronics technician and ended up going (excuse me) going back to that as a career.  Buddy went into aviation, went to flight school.  He and I went down to Pensacola [Florida].  And, and Buddy ended up flying helicopters and got out after his normal tour.  He, he just didn't like the military and ended up going to, to met-, to law school at University of, I want to say University of, of Wisconsin.  So got his law degree there and practiced law for a while in Chicago before he, he just gave it up.  And, and then Gill Lukas was, served a career in the navy.  He was a nuclear submarine guy.  And so Gill retired as a commander.  Frank, Frank retired from the navy as a commander.  And then I stayed in the Marine Corps for thirty-four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you all, you guys bunked together or--
Speaker 2: No, we were, we were in four different companies.  So there were four of us out of four thousand, you--out of, out of a thousand in our class when we started. When we got there my plebe year there were four members of the class of '65 [1965].  They were the firstees--guy named Paul Reason who eventually became the vice CNO in the navy, four star; Floyd Grayson who got out after a normal period of time and, and actually went into real estate development up in Columbia, Maryland; and then Stan Carter who stayed in the navy as--made it a career.  And he was a, a what they call a black shoe.  He was a ship driver.  And then the class ahead of me, immediately ahead of me, your class of '67 [1967], had two guys.  Had a guy named Cal Huey who was the first black to play football for Navy was a wide receiver.  And, and a guy named Pete Toms--Pete stayed in the navy.  He was a nuclear power guy and, and became a captain in a submit-, submarine flotilla commander.  The class of '66 [1966] had none.  And so there was three in the class of '65 [1965], none in the class of '66 [1966], two in the class of '67 [1967], and four of us in the class of, of '68 [1968].  And that was it for the Naval Academy when I was there.
Speaker 1: I've read in the material we have that, that you wanted to come home.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wanted to come home, please, I'd call home every weekend during plebe summer and plebe year.  And I told my dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] I made a big mistake.  I mean after, after all I went through to get to the Naval Academy [in Annapolis, Maryland] I'd, I'd call home.  I said this is not for me.  This place is crazy, it's tough.  And, you know, nobody wanted you there and all that stuff and--.  And my dad would keep saying just stay there one more week and so that, that's what kept me going.  And, ironically, the thing that finally convinced me that I was gonna stay was I remember two guys, one from Alabama and another one from South Carolina.  They were both juniors in my company in second class.  And they came in one night and made it very clear to me that, that I was not gonna graduate, I was not gonna get through plebe year.  They were gonna run me out.  And I said, oh, okay, thanks a lot.  And so after that, although I didn't want to be there, I, I just decided I was not gonna let them run me out.  And so I s-, I made it through plebe year and then the rest is history, so--.
Story_ID: 24648
Speaker 1: Okay, was there, was there any figure on campus that was encouraging or served as any kind of mentor--
Speaker 2: Oh, the three guys in, in the class of '65 [1965] that year were very encouraging.  Paul Reason, who was the very, the more sophisticated of--he had actually graduated from, Paul had graduated from Howard [University, in Washington, District of Columbia] and then come to the Naval Academy [in Annapolis, Maryland].  So Paul was a college graduated when he came.  And he--we all met at a place--and we all met in a h-, in a home right out, right off the campus on College Street.  And it was the--there was a mother and daughter--Lilly Mae Chase was the lady who, who essentially raised me there because we lost our mother [Ethel Martin] during my plebe year, so--.  But, but Lilly Mae and her mother took in black midshipmen on the weekends.  And that became, that became the model for what is, is one of the most successful programs for retention of midshipmen today called the, the Sponsor Program.  But, but long before there was any sponsor program, Lilly Mae and her mother took black midshipmen.  And, and one of the superintendents noticed that, you know, in spite of everything, we were getting through.  And, and he wondered.  And Lilly Mae worked as a maid in the, she was a domestic in the, in the Naval Academy Museum.  And there was a guy named Jim Cheevers who was the cus-, who was the curator, who was a very good friend of Lilly Mae's.  And I think he's the one that told the superintendent about the sponsorship thing that, that Lilly Mae and her mom had been doing.  And so, you know, the s-, the, a superintendent after I graduated decided, hmm, we ought to try this thing.  And so every midshipman at the Naval Academy today, when they come in as a freshman, as a plebe in, in plebe summer, they get, unless they absolutely say I don't want one, they get a sponsor.  And it is a family in the D.C.-, in the, the, the, the overall Annapolis area.  It's a family that's somewhere within quick distance.  Because they can, you can ride in a car if you go with your sponsors on the weekend.  Otherwise, as a plebe, as a freshman, you can't be in a car at, at the Naval Academy, even today.  So, but the sponsor can come pick you up and then the sponsors take you to their home and, and you can go there and put your, your, you know, your PT gear on, your shorts and tee shirt and just kick back.  Other than that you're in uniform all the time walking around town, so, yeah.  But Lilly Mae and--got me through the Naval Academy.
Speaker 1: So that's something a black woman started doing--
Speaker 2: Oh, shoot, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to help the--
Speaker 2: She and her mother.  From the very first midship--she--the guy named Wesley Brown who died, was the first graduate of the Naval Academy out of class of '48 [1948] was a classmate of Jimmy Carter's.  Wesley Brown was raised by, was taken care of by Lilly Mae's mother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --so this, this a program that these black women started--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that is now for everybody in the navy.
Speaker 2: It's, it's now a formal--back then it was just these two ladies reaching out to black kids that they saw struggling, you know.  Lilly Mae saw us all because she was right there in the museum.  So she saw us come through the mu--you know, you had to go through the museum in, in groups to get your, you got your, your indoctrination, they, they just fed you with facts that you had to memorize.  And so Lilly Mae could see every day the black midsh-, the few black midshipmen coming through there.  And so she kind of, you know, would sneak up to you and, and tell you, you know, this weekend come by my house and, and so we'd, we'd all congregate.  And then after a while the black midshipmen would, would find younger black midshipmen, the freshmen, and, and, you know, say you ought to stop by Lilly Mae's on your way--.  And, and you would get an opportunity to, to be with some of the, the senior blacks.  They, they wouldn't, they wouldn't do anything, show favoritism on the yard, but they at least would try to help you understand what you were up against and get you through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any idea of, of any of the history of blacks in, black people in U.S. Naval Academy--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --before you--
Speaker 2: You mean people who preceded me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just wanted--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and one of the things was really helpful was when you went out to Lilly Mae's, Lilly Mae had, she and her mom had scrap books.  And so Lilly Mae would sit with you and, and all of us, and she'd go back to, you know, to the very first time they ever saw a black midshipman come on the yard.  And almost every one of them they had taken care of.  And she would, she would tell you about them all, you know, what their good, what their, what their positive points were, what their negative points were.  And, and she had, she had some that she loved to death, that she was really proud of.  And she had some that she said just turkey, she could never do anything with them.  But, but she wanted you to know everybody that had preceded you.  And so, so Lilly Mae was really good about, about teaching.  She was the (greeto?), if you want to, if you want to consider it that way.  She was the storyteller.  (Chuckle) She was incredible, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24649
Speaker 1: What is, what was the toughest aspect of the Naval Academy for you?  I mean when you considered going home--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those early days.  What was the toughest part--
Speaker 2: Oh, I just, I think what was most difficult for me during my plebe year [at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland], my freshman year, was just this feeling of being alone.  You know, you were, I was the only black midshipman in my company.  Most of my company mates were really, really good.  I mean they were very friendly and helpful.  I, I roomed with four guys my entire w-, you know, at least some of them my entire four years.  We became tight.  I mean we became very, very good friends.  So--but it, it wasn't that.  It was just, it was just so much more difficult than I had ever thought it was gonna be.  And the academics was really tough.  I mean, you know, you, you took my--right off the bat, you were taking chemistry, physics, and calculus--all at one time.  And I hadn't had any of those.  And the, the good thing was I liked science and math.  But I mean I was studying all the time.  And I ended up doing very well.  I got, I got really good grades.  But it was, it was just gr-, getting in and grinding and stuff.  And so, you know, when I made it through plebe year, I, I figured, okay--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --can't be any worse.
Speaker 1: A physicist told us last week that if you hadn't had calculus in high school and come to college, the train has left the station, he said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you were able to get back on the train.
Speaker 2: I, I had to, you know, if I was gonna get through, 'cause you--that was first semester.  You had, you had calculus I and II.  So you had calculus first semester, calculus second semester.  You could not get away from it.  And you had chemistry first semester and physics second semester.  So you had calculus and chemistry, physics and chemistry.  The, the, the physics I was okay with.  The chemistry I struggled with because I had, I had not had a formal chemistry class in--again, though, I'd have to go back to Mr. Neal and Mr. Jeffcoat.  Because while I had never had calculus, new math had taught me a lot of things that, that I could use that helped me understand some of the concepts anyway.  And, and then the--I'd done a lot of science fair projects that had dabbled into either chemistry or, or electri-, electronics and stuff like that.  So the, so the physics, while not easy, it, it, it came to me okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you choose a major in, at the [Naval] Academy just like you do in any other college.  What--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We didn't--it wasn't required from my class.  My class was the, was the first class that was offered the opportunity to select a major.  You didn't have to.  Every class after that, the class of '69 [1969] on, you had to select a major.  But with my class and every class prior, your major was naval science.  And, and that was considered to be your major.  You got a bachelor of science in naval science.  And with our class they decided they would experiment and so you still got a naval science background, basically an engineering degree, a general engineering degree.  But you were allowed to pick something you wanted to major in.  My major was electrical engineering when I started.  I flunked a course called 'Electromagnetic Waves Theory II', you know, my, my senior year at the Naval Academy.  And, and I went before the academic board and, and, and the admiral asked me after they looked at my case he said, you know, you have a sterling record up until now, you know, just--.  I think I had three six six [GPA 3.66] or a three seven [GPA 3.7] or something like that.  He said we'd like to give you an opportunity to go back, retake this course and, and wipe the F off your record.  And I--and there was one guy that taught electrical science, electrical engineering and it was a, a guy named Professor Lee.  And, and Prof. [Professor] Lee and I just never got along.  And, in fact, I think there were twenty-five others who started the second semester course and, I can't remember, there were very few of us who stayed in it.  And there was one A, a guy named Jim Schaefer who had, who had come to the Naval Academy with a bachelors in chemistry from the University of Rhode Island.  So he, he already had a, one college degree.  He got the A.  I think there were two Bs and then maybe one C and then the rest of us down there had either a D or an F.  And I, I told the academic board, I said, you know, I could take this course for the next hundred years and, and I'd never pass it as long as Prof. [Professor] Lee is the teacher.  And so I said I'll take my F and go.  So I came out--I, I was-, I didn't qualify for the major in electrical engineering but I got a minor in electrical science.  So, it, it's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1964--
Speaker 2: '68 [1968] then.
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You came out '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah
Story_ID: 24650
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, now you came out--this is the same spring I guess that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: It was.  Yeah, I mean that--my, my senior year was horrible.  We lost Dr. King, we lost Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy.  It, it was just--
Speaker 1: Riots in the communities.
Speaker 2: Riots in the streets.  In fact, in the springtime, particularly after Dr. King's assassination, we were confined to the yard for s-, for many weekends because they just, they were just afraid to let us go into D.C. [District of Columbia], yeah.
Story_ID: 24651
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what were your plans in '68 [1968]?  What did you--
Speaker 2: When I, when I got into my senior year, my plans were to probably go on aboard a ship, become a black shoe as they call it, a ship driver.  I'd--my last cruise, my cruise before my senior year had been on the Destroyer, had been on the DD-860 USS McCaffery, a Korean War destroyer.  I had, I had boarded in Sasebo, Japan.  We had sailed almost immediately into the Gulf of Tonkin so we spent a little while on the gun line doing fire support for Marines on the, on the ground in Vietnam.  And I kinda fell in love with that.  And I came back and that was what I thought I was gonna do.  I knew I didn't want to go nuclear power, 'cause they, they had been totally unimpressive.  And--but when I started thinking about it toward the middle of that senior year, I said, you know, the one person, the one person who has impressed me more than anybody else here is this doggone Marine Corps major that I met way back in my plebe year.  And, and I said I think I want to be like him.  And so I, I changed everything (chuckle), changed everything.  And went down on Service Selection Night and walked over to the Marine Corps table and said I'm here (wave).
Speaker 1: Now who was this person?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, John Riley--at the time he was a major.  He was Major John Riley Love.  He was an infantry officer.  He retired from the Marine Corps as a colonel and lived in Carlsbad, California, until the time of his death.  And, and we stayed in touch off and on.  But, he--I, I always credited him with everything I had done.  You know, I, I chose the Marine Corps because of him.  I was gonna be an infantry officer to be quite honest.  And, and I found I just, I just didn't like crawling around in the mud and being cold.  So my wife [Alexis "Jackie" Walker] was the one that talked me into going to Pensacola [Florida].  And so we went down to Pensacola, Florida, after my six months at The Basic School [in Quantico, Virginia], started flight training.  I, I was number one in my class in, in ground school.  And we, first time we got in an airplane I just fell in love with it.  And so I was number one in my class coming out of basic.  So I got to pick what I wanted.  I, I picked jets.  And so I, I went through the jet pipeline and then--and I, I came out number one in, when I graduated from flight schools and I picked VA-6 Intruder.  So, that was what I wanted to fly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went from, from never gonna be a Marine and definitely not gonna fly airplanes (chuckle) to, to flying A-6s.
Speaker 1: Being a flying Marine.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 24652
Speaker 1: And now, now this, now you got married in '68 [1968], too, right?
Speaker 2: I got married [to Alexis "Jackie" Walker] thre--we got--we waited.  We got married three days after graduated.  So we hung around Annapolis like a lot of us did because there--two of us got married.  Gill Lukas and I got married the same day.  In fact, he and, he and his wife, his first wife, married an hour before we did.  And then we were the last wedding on Saturday night out of the Naval Academy Chapel.  So we had the traditional Naval Academy wedding, you know, this, the arches and all that stuff.  And, and, and, so we, yeah, we married then.  Same woman I'm with now.
Speaker 1: Alright, and this is the woman that you grew up with, basically.
Speaker 2: Grew up with and, and hated most of my, most of my childhood.  We couldn't stand each other.  We fought all the time.  And, and I, you know, I, I think I secretly--I just--I think I fell in love with her when I was in junior high school.  But, but like I said I was a little shrimp.  I was a little bitty guy and she was dating my, my cousin at the time anyway.  So I, you know, couldn't do that.  And then they broke up in my junior year.  So I invited her to the prom, to the junior, senior prom.  And then, and then I think we, we dated--it, it depends on whether you talk to me or her.  I said we dated through senior year.  She says we started before then.  But anyway we, we dated through senior year.  And then she went off to Spelman [College, in Atlanta, Georgia].  And although we had dated in col-, in high school, we made the agreement that, you know, neither of us was seri-, was that serious.  So we were just gonna go and do whatever we wanted to do but we would stay in touch.  And so we were back home together at Christmas.  I always invited her up for the Army [United States Army]-Navy [United States Navy] game in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the fall.  And she would come up.  And, and then springtime I'd always go down to, to Atlanta and, and, you know, mess around with, with Jackie and her friends.  And that was just sort of our custom.  And, and then in the summertime I always had thirty days of leave so--.  I would pick my thirty days to go back and help my dad with the football team.  I'd, I'd go the end of the summer so I could help him with conditioning.  And, and then we, we kind of--I asked her to marry me at the ring, the ring dance, my, at the end of my junior year.  And so then we, we were serious senior year, so--'cause we knew we were gonna get married then. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay.
Story_ID: 24653
Speaker 1: Alright now it's 1968.  Now, yeah, Vietnam War is really--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --jumping then.
Speaker 2: Tet Offensive had occurred in the, you know, middle of my senior year.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and I decided I wanted to be a Marine and go to Vietnam as an infantry officer, which, which to my wife [Alexis "Jackie" Walker] and my family made no sense, none.
Speaker 1: Now what, what made you--
Speaker 2: I just, I wanted to be like Major [John Riley] Love.  I'd, I was, I was young, naive, foolish, and indestructible.  So, you know, he had made it and, and I could make it.  I knew what the law of averages was, but, but it wasn't g-, I was not gonna be one of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Young men still do it today, young men and women.
Speaker 1: You would have gone over as a second lieutenant, right?
Speaker 2: I would have been a second lieutenant in Vietnam.  I would have done my six months of basic training, ba-, The Basic School [in Quantico, Virginia], you know, to learn how to be a rifle platoon commander.  And then I would have gone to Vietnam as a second lieutenant and been a s-, probably a platoon commander and--.
Speaker 1: They-now, now platoon second lieutenants in, in Vietnam, the Vietnam War in combat, they had a--
Speaker 2: Their life expectancy was months, at best, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what I've, that's what I've heard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what people keep saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Lot of platoons run by staff sergeant, somebody else, 'cause the lieutenant's dead, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of the critiques in the Vietnam War?  Did you take them seriously?
Speaker 2: I knew what, you know, I, I, I followed it and everything.  And I remember--I got to the war late.  And, and I questioned the war even, even as I was going because it, I mean, people were marching in the streets and stuff.  And you--but, but I had chosen to serve.  And so I felt it was my duty to, to go, unless it was unlawful.  And I believe that even to this day.  You know, it--you don't have to like it and you don't have to believe it's right.  But if you choose to be in the military, unless you think something's unlawful, then you, you probably ought to either get out or make it, you know, just say I'm willing to do this.  And so, you know, when I started flying in Vietnam and seeing the, the tactics that we were doing and everything else, it, it, it was very obvious that we really did not belong there.  We were just, you know, we were losing young men at, for no reason.  And it--I couldn't be convinced otherwise.  But I felt, as an aviator, you know, my job was to try to make sure that, that people on the ground were as safe as I could make 'em.  When I got there we had actually pulled American forces, ground forces out of Vietnam.  So we were pretty much supporting the, the South Vietnamese army with their American advisors.  There were still a lot of American advisors down there on the ground, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it--alright, so, now you, you, you had to go to Marine Corp training--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --around '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --down in Quantico, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's, it's called The Basic School.  And its, its only purpose, its primary purpose is to take everybody from whatever source you happen to have come, whether it was Naval Academy, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], OCS [Army Officer Candidate School], or Enlisted Commissioning Program [ECP], and put you through a six-month intensive course of training to make you a rifle platoon commander.  So, you know, we say in the Marine Corps every, every Marine is a rifleman.  And so every single officer in the Marine Corps is trained to be a rifle platoon commander, no matter what you're gonna do.  And then from there, from The Basic School, you go off into your, into your individual military occupational fields or military occupational specialties.  And I cho-, chose aviation.  So, you know, the, the infantry guys either went directly to Vietnam or they went to advanced infantry school where, you know, they, they would go and train with the Army Rangers [United States Army Rangers] and stuff like that.  Many of them were gonna go off and they were gonna be advisors for the, for the Vietnamese military.  They weren't gonna be with a Marine unit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but you don't really get to Vietnam--
Speaker 2: Late.
Speaker 1: It was '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: '72 [1972], la-, real late, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, because of the training and the other things that you--
Speaker 2: I, and I had--you know my first duty station was Cherry Point, North Carolina.  And I was flying A-6s and, and it just--we--people were sent individually and I--it was just the luck of the draw that I didn't, I didn't get sent until late.
Story_ID: 24654
Speaker 1: Could you describe the A-6 Intruder for us.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's an awesome airplane.  It was a--probably the best airplane ever made.  It, it was an ugly airplane.  It, it looked like it was flying around backwards because it had a big, bulbous nose (holding hands apart to describe), big radar dome was what it was.  And what made it really ugly was it had a refueling probe that sat right up on the nose, right dead center.  And it kind of just sat up like this.  And so you--that's the way you refueled the airplane.  You'd, you'd fly that probe into a basket from a refueler.  And then the, the pilot and the bombardier navigator--it was a two-place airplane, so the pilot sat on the left-hand side, bombardier navigator sat on right-hand side.  If you looked at it from the front, it looked like a, like a bumble bee or something, you know, looked big--the, the, the, the windows in the front looked like big bee eyes or fly eyes or something like that.  And then it had a pointy tail because it, it slimmed down to a point on the tail.  Non-supersonic at all--it was a subsonic airplane.  But it could fly, it could fly really fast, five hundred feet, a hundred off the deck.  Carried a lot of bombs.  It, it could carry twenty-eight five hundred pound bombs.  So next to a B-52, it was the, the biggest ordinance deliverer in the American inventory.  So, so you, you could put a lot of bombs on target.  It could also carry forward firing rockets.  And we could carry either five-inch Zuni rockets that were sort of like that size and about six feet long or you could carry a two point seven five inch rocket, which was nineteen, usually nineteen of them in a pod or four Zunis in a pod, yeah.  No, no offensive capability whatsoever.  You could, you could actually mount sidewinders, which were heat-seeking, you know, infrared heat-seeking missiles.  And sometimes the Navy guys would carry sidewinders on the, on the, the launch, the, the rack that carried the bombs.  But Marines almost--I don't think Marines ever put anything offensive on there.  So you were, you were out there alone and unafraid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to have fighter escorts--
Speaker 2: No, you didn't have any escort.  That was, that was what I liked about the A-6 mission.  The A-6 mission was generally one airplane.  We did mostly night interdictions.  So you, you had--and, and you could have a number of different kinds of missions.  You, you would usually get one hard target, and that may be like a, a railroad crossing or a, or some, some, some place where we knew, we knew weapons were located or a unit or something.  But the rest of the mission was, was what we call armed reconnaissance by the time I got there.  And we were really trying to stop the flow of weapons coming into South Vietnam from China and North Vietnam.  And there was a thing called the Ho Chi Minh trail that ran right down the western co-, the western border of, of North Vietnam, right on the border between Laos and Vietnam.  And so we did what we called armed reconnaissance.  The A-6 had a capability of--it had two radars and one was a search radar that could find things.  And we used that mostly with the, the hard targets.  But it had a track radar that, anything that was moving at faster than five miles an hour showed up on the radar.  So we could, we had something called AMTI, Automatic Moving Target Indicator.  So we could actually detect moving, movers on the ground.  It got so bad, though, when I, by the time I got there, the North Vietnamese were just driving with their lights on.  So you could see where they were.  And you just--the bombardier navigator would lock them up on the radar and you just went down the road.  And usually we would carry what--it was called cluster bombs.  They're outlawed now.  But, but a, a cluster bomb or rockeye--it opened up like a clamshell and there were 372 of these little bomblets that came out.  So you could, you could get a whole bunch of trucks, you know, in, in one run up the road.  So that's generally what we did.
Story_ID: 24655
Speaker 1: Now you say they're, they're outlawed now by--
Speaker 2: Oh, they're illegal.  They're, they're outlawed by, by, by convention, by--I mean there are rules of, believe it or not, there are rules of war.  Even in war people try to be civil.  You know, they try to make these rules because what you don't--the problem with cluster bombs was they frequently, any number of them would dud.  They wouldn't, they wouldn't explode.  And so what you had was hundreds of these little bomblets left across the countryside.  And kids go out, pick them up or walk across one and we--you have a lot of--if you--you'd--you hear stories about mines.  And cluster bombs became mines on the surface.  And so, you know, mines are outlawed in most places.  Cluster bombs are outlawed.  Because you're trying--I mean war is supposed to be civil.  It's--but don't ask me why we do it 'cause it's not civil.  But, but even, even in war people try to protect the innocents.  And so we outlawed--like there was a propel-, a, like a--napalm was firebombs from World War II.  Napalm was outlawed because it was just, it was so brutal what it did to people that weren't even involved in the war if they happened to be hit by it.  Same thing with cluster bombs.  Cluster bombs could kill kids or people years after the war ended and everything.  So we try not to do those kinds of things.  Or, if you, if you use ammunition like that then it has to have a, a timer or something on it that, that makes it explode after a certain amount of time so that it's not left sitting around on the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, I ask that question be--these days it seems like it doesn't seem to be any, you know, people do all kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Well, not legally.  And it's, and, and you, you may remember there were a lot of questions early in Iraq about were we using certain munitions.  Because there--we are a mem-, we are a si-, a signature to the Geneva Accords.  And most of the ille-, illegal things about warf-, warfare come out of Geneva, out of the Geneva Conventions.  Made after, you know, after World War II because of stuff that the Nazis did, and the, and the Japanese did, and in some cases we did.  But supposedly making, trying to make war civil.
Story_ID: 24656
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I had not asked you about the space race.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And I, I guess I should.  Now did you kind of follow that when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was a kid, when I was going through flight school I knew ex-, I mean I followed space quite a bit.  It's just b-, I think it was kind of a combination of having grown up in the segregated South and knowing that that was--you remember I said you knew where you could go and where you couldn't go.  There was no, there were no black astronauts.  You know, I, I watched and admired the, the original seven.
Speaker 1: Did you know the names of all seven?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I knew 'em.  I knew 'em all.  But that was something that was not gonna happen for me.  I just, I just knew that, you know, black kids didn't--they weren't astronauts.  And so I didn't, unlike Mae Jemison, for example, who will tell you there was never any doubt in her mind she was gonna be an astronaut.  She didn't need a role model.  I needed role models.  And so if I didn't see anything that looked like me, I didn't think it was gonna happen, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did you know about Ed Dwight or Robert--
Speaker 2: I didn't know about Ed Dwight at the time nor did I know about--
Speaker 1: It's Robert Lawrence, I think.
Speaker 2: --Bob Lawrence.  I, I didn't know about either of them.  I didn't know about them until after I got, after I became a test pilot, and then started thinking about the astronaut program.  That's when I learned about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So it seems--neither one, one, well, you know, Ed Dwight, they washed him out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: He kind of, you know, if you talk to Ed, he just got tired.  And so, you know, he just said, okay, I give.
Speaker 1: Well, it was a big political struggle.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: He--we had an interview with him not too long ago.
Speaker 2: He, he was, he was, he was a Kennedy selection, supposedly.  And, and people like Chuck Yeager and others, as the story goes, decided, you know, he wasn't going to make it.  Bob Lawrence died in a, in a--it's still not, not clear about his accident.  He died in an F-104 crash and so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Yeah, we, we know his wife at Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barbara, yeah.  She's really nice.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) so those are two that at least in the beginning--so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were two pioneers.
Story_ID: 24657
Speaker 1: So in 1969 just as you were, you know, a year after you graduate--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --when you were in Marine training, I guess--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, Neil Armstrong walks on the moon.
Speaker 2: When he walked on the moon I was a student at, at, I want to say I was in VT-9 [Training Squadron NINE] in Meridian, Mississippi.  And, and, as a matter of fact, Meridian was still segregated.  My, my wife and I lived in the middle of town and we, it was unknown that we were there at first.  We, we couldn't find anyplace.  And so we, we called a realtor by the name of Jack Youngblood and, and he rented me an apartment sight unseen.  He never saw me.  But we had, we had been playing phone tag for, for weeks.  I had taken my wife back home to South Carolina because we couldn't find a place to stay.  Every time we would call and they would say, okay, we have an opening, come on out, we'd, we'd get there and they would see us and then either they had just, they had just rented it or they, there was a mistake.  We, we were at the wrong place.  You know, they didn't, they didn't have anything, so--.  And we went through that for a while and my, my wife ended up miscarrying while we were there.  She was expecting the set of twins.  And so when that happened I just took her back to South Carolina and, and I, I went back, and we, and, and I, I had talked to this guy named Jack Youngblood on the phone and he left the key for an apartment on a desk in his office.  And I told him if I liked it, I'd leave him a check for two months' rent, and I did.  And we moved in.  We were in the middle of downtown Meridian.  And, and we had some really good friends there.  And we, we became very good friends with the local police because they were at our house, at our apartment every night.  You know, we had this older white couple on, that live next to us, and they, they would call the police every night.  And, and they would come out and they would apologize.  But, but we felt very comfortable and everything, so-.
Speaker 1: No threats or anything--
Speaker 2: No, never, not that I knew of.  You know, they had, the Navy had had to move an integrated couple into the BOQ [Basic Overnight Quarters; Army housing] because they had actually, they had actually have people come into their house and threaten them.  I think it was a white naval officer married to a black woman.  And I think they had actually been assaulted.  So the Navy moved them on, on the base, moved them into the BOQ.  But we were out at the BOQ--we had just come back from, from a re-, a revel-, revelrous weekend in New Orleans.  And we rushed back to, to be there sitting in front of the fireplace and the black-and-white TV watching Neil Armstrong step foot on the moon.  But even then I didn't, you know, I, I just admired him.  And--but I, I never dreamed I could, I could do that.
Story_ID: 24658
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, how long did you serve in Vietnam.  You got there in '72 [1972]--
Speaker 2: I was just there for a year.  I, I, I got there in June of 1972 and came home in June of 1973.  And that was just, that was the rotation then.  You know, you, you didn't go as a unit the way we do today.  We deploy as units today.  You were always on individual orders then and so you joined a squadron that was there in country. And I went over, and a year after I got there it was time for me to go home.  So I rotated back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This--it says here when you came back you did some recruitment for the Navy?
Speaker 2: I went to--I came to L.A., to Los Angeles [California], and I was a Marine Corps recruiter.  And my first year I was actually what was called an 'Officer Selection Officer'.  So I wasn't just a normal recruiter.  My job was to recruit young men and women out of college to come into the officer ranks of the Marine Corps.  And then my second year, the Marine Corps experimented with something called 'Consolidated Recruiting'.  So, so I became a real Marine Corps recruiter, and I, I gained responsibility for seven recruiting substations around Los Angeles and, oh, I don't know, about twenty-five enlisted recruiters.  So I, I became responsible, not just for officer accessions, but also for the enlisted accession.  And it was, it was pretty interesting.  I, you know, I enjoyed my time there.  I didn't particularly want to be a recruiter but, but good things happened.  I was responsible for, gees, a hundred colleges and universities in the, in Los Angeles County [California].  And that's where I, that's where I became associated with the University of Southern California [in Los Angeles, California].  Fell in love with the campus and the people there.  And they always treated me great when I came on campus.  And, and they offered a masters degree program.  So I used, I used the GI Bill and, and got a masters at USC [University of Southern California] and--
Speaker 1: Well, was it hard to make the transition from, from flying a hundred combat missions to--
Speaker 2: Recruiting?
Speaker 1: --to going back to southern California?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Southern California was different.  I mean L.A. was not San Francisco [California].  You know, my, my counterparts in San Francisco, they were--every time they went on campus they knew that something bad was gonna happen.  They were either gonna come out and find their car up on blocks with the, you know, the tires, the wheels removed or they were gonna get paint dropped on 'em or, or batter, cake batter or pot flour or something thrown on 'em.  They were doing warfare on the streets in San Francisco. L.A. was, man, they loved the, they loved the military.  They loved the Marine Corps.  And so with very few exceptions, Long Beach State [California State University, Long Beach, California], which was not one of my schools, but UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] was.  UCLA had a chancellor who was just antimilitary.  And so he would not allow us out on campus.  I could come--he couldn't keep us from coming to the school, but, but they put us in the, way back in the back of the placement office.  But every other campus I visited, Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, in Los Angeles, California], you know, California Lutheran [University, in Los Angeles, California].  I could go to church schools, Loyola Marymount [University, in Los Angeles, California].  Everybody let me set my table on the lawn and, and a blanket and--.  And, you know, whether I got anybody or not was up to me.  But, but Southern Cal [University of Southern California] was, they were absolutely incredibly hospita-, hospitable.  They had a very big naval ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] unit.  So they put a lot of, lot of kids into the Navy and Marine Corps, ordinarily.  And it was a private school.  Unlike, unlike UCLA that was public, so they could do whatever they wanted to do.  They didn't have to worry about anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so this is like, this is about 197--
Speaker 2: That was 1973.
Speaker 1: Three, right.
Speaker 2: And I, I was a recruiter from '73 [1973] to '75 [1975].  And then just went--we just--we bought our first house out there, lived in Carson [California].  And then I was transferred down to El Toro [California], which was the Marine Corps Air Station at the time, and went back to an A-6 squadron for a year.  And then served in, in, in the group headquarters for a year where I flew.  Still flew A-6s but also started flying the TA-4, which was a--we used it as a utility aircraft for target towing and different stuff like that.  And then my third year I, I became the executive officer for what was called MABS 13.  It was a Marine Air Base Squadron [MABS].  And we had all the cooks, the, the chaplains assistants, the--we had the chaplains, the doctors and dentists, the launch and recovery guys.  So people that built runways and ran 'em were in MABS in the Air Base Squadron.  So I was the EXO, executive officer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24659
Speaker 1: Alright, so Vietnam War officially ended in '74 [1974], I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's when it ended.
Speaker 2: Two years at--through--a year after I came out--in fact, my last mission in Vietnam was flown off the end of the runway at Saigon.  So we knew things were bad.  And, and then a year later they did the evacuation of Saigon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you're recruiting and--now, now at some point you started going to school at UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: I went to U-, USC [University of Southern California, in Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: USC.
Speaker 2: --not UCLA.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I actually started, I started my graduate work at USC probably the middle of my first year of OSO [Officer Selection Officer] duty.  And then I had to stop for a year because my (chuckle), when I became a consolidated recruiter I, I worked for a g-, a, a colonel in the Marine Corps named Mel McCoury.  And, and he did not have a college degree.  So, you know, he felt, if he didn't have one, nobody else needed one.  And, and he, and he also felt if you, if I had time to go to school then I wasn't devoting myself 100 percent to recruiting.  So, so he suggested that I, that I stop.  And so I took a year off and then went back and finished up my degree the first year that I was down at, at El Toro.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And the course was such that, you know, they offered it on military bases and, and places.  So you--they were very flexible about--you could go around the southern California area and find a place that had the, the next course you needed.  So I took my last two courses at Norton Air Force Base way up in San Bernardino [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the type of degree you got, you got a master's degree in systems management.
Speaker 2: It, it was called a master's, Master of Science and Systems Management.  It was a course that they, that Southern Cal [University of Southern California] put together for the, for the Air Force, actually.  They were noticing that they were getting more and more into acquisition.  And they didn't have people who were trained to do it.  So it, it was a, it was a, sort of a hybrid of a, an engineering degree and a mas-, and a, and a, and an MBA.  But they--the focus was, was acquisition, was how do you, how do you go in and, and purchase weapons systems and other stuff like that.  A lot of the courses were case studies and, and the like, so.  It was sort of a hybrid of an MBA--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for, for military acquisition.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah this is being an informed MBA about a specific thing to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, specifically put together for the military.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they offered it all over the world.  They had an incredible program.  The University of Maryland essentially has taken it over now because they, they actually have a school that's called the University of Maryland University Campus or University College.  And they do essentially what Southern Cal used to do.  USC stopped doing it for, I want to say, about twenty years ago.  But, but University of Maryland's been doing it for almost thirty or forty years.  And they do it incredibly well.  They do, you know, they use video teleconferencing--all kinds of stuff.  'Cause I've, I've spoken at two of their commencements--one when I was stationed in Japan for a graduating class over there at Yokota Air Base.  And then did it just recently over in Stuttgart, well, Heidelberg, Germany.
Story_ID: 24660
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, so--and, and I guess in, in '70 [1970] it was--did you start becoming a te-, start as a test pilot--
Speaker 2: Test pilot?  I actually--
Speaker 1: --in '70 [1970]--
Speaker 2: I didn't go to test pilot school until 1978.  So one of the things that I decided I wanted to do while I was going through flight training, believe it or not--I, I was very impressionable.  So, one of my flight instructors in Kingsville, Texas, was a guy named Pete Field, who was an, a Marine Corps major.  And Pete was a test pilot.  He had actually, he had been through test pilot school at Patuxent River, Maryland, and had served as a test pilot there.  And he used to talk about what it was like to be a test pilot, the challenge of being a test pilot.  He dispelled any, any of the myths about the glamour and stuff like that.  And, and sort of for the same reason that I chose the A-6 because it was a very demanding airplane, it, it sounded exciting to me to be able to, to fly very precisely.  And, and so I, so I started applying for test pilot school.  Very similar to my applications for the Naval Academy [in Annapolis, Maryland], I think I applied for, oh, I want to say, gees, probably seven years.  I can't remember exact how many--many years.  And I started applying long before I was anywhere close to being eligible.  And then finally in 19-, it wasn't seven years 'cause I, I didn't--well, I started applying in 1970.  So, yeah, it was seven years.  And so finally in 1978 I was accepted by the Marine Corps.  And so they sent me to Pax [Patuxent] River.  And I, I went to, to test pilot school in 1978, graduated in '79 [1979], spent the year '79 [1979] to '80 [1980] as a test pilot at Pax River.
Story_ID: 24661
Speaker 1: And then met Dr. Ron, the late great Dr. Ron [Ronald] McNair while I was serving as a test pilot at Pax [Patuxent] River [in Maryland] who was in the very first group of space shuttle astronauts selected.  And, and we had an opportunity to get to know each other over a weekend.  He and I both had grown up in South Carolina.  He, African American graduat-, graduated from Carver High School in teeny weenie little Lake City, South Carolina.  And, and, I mean, here was this guy who--he had no more reason to believe he could become an astronaut than I did, but he really believed it.  And he always wanted to do it.  And so he left Lake City, went to North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], intending to become an astronaut.  Was an honors graduate at North Carolina A and T, went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and earned a Ph.D. in plasma, in laser physics, and then subsequently applied to the Astronaut Program, was selected, and, and was a member of the, the class of 1978, which was the first group of people selected specifically to fly the space shuttle.  And I met Ron and he and I talked for a weekend.  And, and when he left he asked me if I was gonna apply for the program.  I told him no--not on your life.  And he said why not?  I said they'd never pick me.  And he, he looked at me and he said, you know, that's the dumbest thing I ever heard.  He, and he just said, he said, how do you know?  If you don't apply, how do you, how do you know?  And it, it sort of embarrassed me because what he said was essentially what my mom [Ethel Martin] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] had told me all my life.  If you want anything, you gotta ask for it.  You gotta work really hard.  But then you go ask for it.  And people tell you no.  You, you can't say you didn't try.  And so I, I applied for the program and, and ended up being nominated by the Marine Corps and invited to come and interview with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and, and got selected in the second group.
Story_ID: 24662
Speaker 1: Now, now some of the other people, that first group--there was Sally Ride, Guion Bluford.
Speaker 2: Sally Ride was, was Ron's classmate, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the first woman in space.  And you got Guion Bluford.
Speaker 2: And I actually worked with Sally.  Guy [Bluford] was, Guy was the first, the first African American to fly in space.  But that class had three African Americans.  It had Guy Bluford, Ron McNair, and Fred Gregory.  Fred was an Air Force officer who was a, he was the only pilot in that group.  Both Ron and Guy--although Guy was a, was a combat veteran pilot, but he was not a test pilot.  And so the Air Force only nominated him to be a, a mission specialist and he was selected and then flew first as a mission specialist in '83 [1983], I want to say.  And then Ron flew.  And then Fred flew as the first pilot.  And, you know, and, and then I flew after Fred.  But I was, I was the only African American in the, in the second group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there were four of us at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Mae [Jemison] came.  And then after that more came.
Story_ID: 24663
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, so you graduated from the Naval Air Test Center in 1979.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was test pilot school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--now how--then you were accepted into the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Space Program in 1980.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Went there and then--you had to go through a year of candidacy so you were not really an astronaut.  You were, you were called an astronaut candidate.  And even after you became an astronaut I didn't think you were still an astronaut 'cause you hadn't flown in space.  So I, although I, I became a quote unquote astronaut in '81 [1981], I didn't fly my first mission until 1986.  And we were--I was named to a crew in '84 [1984], originally scheduled to fly in '85 [1985], and a number of delays.  And so we ended up flying the first flight in January of 1986 and then ten days later we lost Challenger.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we don't have to gallop so fast ahead, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but if there's something significant (unclear)--you're accepted into NASA's Space Program in 1980.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what did that look like from the ground?  Now if I'm accepted into NASA, then what, what do I do?  Do I, I report to someplace in--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, well I, I got the call.  And I mean it was literally a call.  I was on my way out to fly a test hop.  And, and George Abbey, who at the time was the Director of Flight Crew Operations--and I had known, I--you know, when you leave after your interview they said, okay, it's gonna be a while before we notify people who's been selected.  But if you get a call from George [Abbey], you've probably been selected.  If anybody else calls, you haven't.  And so I was getting to walk out to my airplane and a guy said, "Hey, there's a, there's a Mr. Abbey wants to talk to you."  I said, "Whoa."  So I went over to the phone.  It was in the ready room.  And, and I, I talked to him and he asked me if I still wanted to, wanted to join the Space Program.  I told him I, yes, sir, I did.  And said, well, you've been selected.  And so I said, when do I need to be there?  And, and he said, aw, you know, you--I'm--that was my wife's birthday.  It was May 31, 1980, that I got the call.  And he said, don't tell anybody because we're gonna put out a press release tomorrow.  But once, once the press release comes out then you can talk about it, but don't tell anybody except your wife.  And so I did and--.  But everything leaks and so that night the Washington NBC channel was down in Pax [Patuxent] River [in Maryland], you know, looking for the several of us who had, who were rumored to have been selected.  And so--but, anyway, so we stayed at Pax River for another month and then came down to Houston [Texas].  I reported in on the 1st of July, 1980.
Story_ID: 24664
Speaker 1: So you reported to Houston.
Speaker 2: Yep, to the Johnson Space Center.
Speaker 1: This has got to be one of the most exciting periods in anybody's life.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, for me it was.
Speaker 1: --somebody's that's not an astronaut who just sees this, I know that somebody selected be an astronaut or the possibility to be one.  Very select few people that go into outer space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty--
Speaker 1: Now I heard--
Speaker 2: It was, it was not lost on us.  It was, it was quite exciting and, and, and in some ways daunting, you know, because I, I just couldn't believe it, for one thing.  And--but, but it was also very humbling because when we got there, there was still some Apollo astronauts around.  And, in fact, the guy that was our, was our den dad, a guy named Alan Bean, was with my class for the whole year.  Al Bean had walked on the moon, you know.  He had, he had been on Apollo 12 when they were hit by lightening.  And, and yet he still walked on the moon.  And this was the most unassuming--nobody was as humble as Neil Armstrong, let me put it that way.  But Neil was not--by the time I got there, Neil Armstrong was gone.  There were just a handful of the old Apollo guys left.  John Young was the chief of the Astronaut Office.  Al Bean was still there.  And there were a couple other guys.  But, but Al was just incredible as a mentor and a, you know, and a den dad, if  you will.  But he--
Speaker 1: Den dad.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he had the nineteen of us, twenty-one of us, actually, because we had two Europeans who joined our class--nineteen Americans and two Europeans.  And he was with us on every trip.  You know, he set up, he set our schedule and everything and, and was our counselor and confidant.  And when we wanted to cry, we went and cried on him and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who, who were the two Europeans?
Speaker 2: A guy named Claude Nicollier from Switzerland and then Wubbo Ockels from Holland, from Dutchland, from Nether-, from The Netherlands were the two--they were two European Space Agency astronaut candidates.  And so they joined us.  And, and both of them flew--Claude [Nicollier] stayed.  Claude [Nicollier] actually left ESA [European Space Agency] and, and became an American astronaut, joined the--was transitioned over to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  Wubbo flew and then went back to Europe and became the head of the, the European Space Agency's astronaut training center, and, and, and then retired after a while.  But Claude [Nicollier] is back in Switzerland now.  He lost his wife a number of years ago and decided to go back, back to Switzerland.  And so he's back over there doing a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, okay, now what is this--now, now you're--your wife [Alexis "Jackie" Walker] moved to Houston [Texas], too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we moved together- Okay.
Speaker 1: --with the kids, two kids--
Speaker 2: You have two kids.
Speaker 1: --in tow.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, our son was going into fourth grade and our daughter was Pre-K.  So, she was four years old and our son was nine, 'cause they're five years apart.  And so they, they didn't have a clue--I, I'm convinced.  You know, they, they didn't--it didn't--they didn't know what being an astronaut meant.  And the fact that their dad was an astronaut was not a big deal to them.  They were just another student in the school.  And, and because we were in an area called Clear Lake [Texas] that was--everybody's parent was connected with the Space Program.  So, either Johnny's dad's an astronaut or Johnny's dad's a flight controller or a flight director or something.  So in our community it wasn't a big deal, you know, to, to have a dad who's an astronaut.
Story_ID: 24665
Speaker 1: Now it--you just reminded me of something that, that I remember taking place and it was the, the seven astronauts were first chosen--everybody was so excited.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Kids like myself knew all the names, all seven, read about them and talked to our friends, hey, you know, so-and-so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Alan Shepard, this and that, and John Glenn.  So--Deke [Donald] Slayton and all those guys.
Speaker 2: Yep, Deke [Donald Slayton] was still there when I got there.
Speaker 1: But, you know, somehow the position was losing some luster by the time, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, shuttle--
Speaker 1: --the space shuttle--
Speaker 2: --came around.
Speaker 1: --started coming around.  We had already been on the moon.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it seemed like for some reason--I can't explain--this is a cultural phenomenon but it seemed like it--the--as awesome as this is, the, the country was focused on other stuff.
Speaker 2: America's so short.  I mean we're, we don't have a lot of patience.  And, and our attention span is incredibly short.  You know, everybody's angry now because we, because shuttle has now been out of operation for a year.  And, and people forget that, you know, when Gene [Eugene] Cernan left the surface of the moon in 1972, we didn't fly any--well, we flew the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, which was, you know, this thing we get the Soviet Union and America together.  And we flew three Skylab missions, which were orbiting space stations.  But other than that, we didn't, we didn't fly anything until Shuttle flew in 1981.  So between 1972 and 1981 we did three Skylab missions and, and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, but that was it.  And people forget that now-a-days and so--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, at any rate, did you--'cause you were saying your kids didn't know really what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, didn't have that sense of it.  And I don't know to, to blame the media or what.
Speaker 2: No, I--it, it just, it had fallen off the radar in the U.S.  People in Europe still knew about space.  They--and it's the same way today.  If you go almost any other country in the world, if somebody knows that, that you were an astronaut or, or are an astronaut, it's still--they go berserk.  It's, it's still a big deal outside the United States.  And I think it's because they still, most of them are still waiting to have an astronaut, you know, that they can say is our astronaut--most nations anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think India has a space program.
Speaker 2: India has a space program and has--they have actually had people who have flown with us on Shuttle.  China has a, a pretty good space program and, you know, that they operate on their own.  And then Russia, like us, is sort of the big, the big daddy, if you will.  You know, we've got the most experience in space, particularly in human space flight.  And then the European Space Agency is a conglomerate of nineteen different European nations that, that have done both human and robotic space flight.  And then the Japanese.
Story_ID: 24666
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did they tell you what project you were gonna be working on [at NASA]?
Speaker 2: The first year [at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA] you're really just trying to get through candidacy.  And at the end of the first six months, then they assign you to, they assign you to a, a, another astronaut who's got more experience.  And generally it's somebody who's, who, who is either scheduled to fly or maybe if you were really lucky you got assigned to work with one of the guys who had either done Apollo-Soyuz or had done a Skylab mission.  But there weren't too many of them around.  So, so you end-, usually ended up working with somebody out of the previous class.  In my initial work, I worked with Anna Fisher, Sally Ride, John Fabian.  A group of us worked for a guy named Bill, Bill [William] Lenoir.  And we were what was called the, the tile repair tiger team.  When, when Columbia had been flown from Palmdale [California] to, to the Kennedy Space Center [on Merritt Island, Florida], it had lost all kinds of tile.  I mean they just fell off the vehicle.  So we became very, very concerned, not only about damage to tiles, but losing tiles.  And so the tile repair tiger team had two missions.  We were supposed to find a better adhesive to make sure that the tile didn't fall off but also to find a way to repair tile if they were damaged.  And we were successful in finding a new adhesive that worked really well, unsuccessful totally in finding a way to repair a tile.  So when we flew Columbia the very first time in 1981 we didn't have any way to repair it.  We didn't, we didn't know--but we figured the chances--the law of, of, of--the chances of something happening that would be serious enough to bring the orbiter down was very, very, very, very slim.  And, and we can--the more we flew, the more we were comfortable with that until we lost Challenger.  And--
Speaker 1: What were the tiles made of?
Speaker 2: Tiles are made of w-, a material called silica.  It's essentially blown glass.  It's a bo-, blown sand, not blown glass.  They take sand, just like you're gonna make glass, and, and it goes through a proc-, a refining process.  And then it's--you kind--it kind of spun out and it be-, it's, it's made into blocks like this that vary in thickness, depending on where, where it's gonna go on the orbiter.  Incredibly light--feels like you're, you have a piece of Styrofoam in your hand.  And very prone to puncture, you know, a piece of debris hit, hit a tile could put a ding in it.  You could put a ding in it with your fingernail if you tapped it hard enough--so, very fragile.
Speaker 1: Then why is that fragile material used?  Is it because it withstands--
Speaker 2: Because all we needed was something to protect the vehicle against heat.  And, and it does an incredible job in, on that, with that particular mission in mind, yeah.  It dissipates, you know, as it heats up going into space and also coming back to earth.  It just dissipates the heat.  It's--it throws it away.  Nobody--I don't think anybody knows how it does it.  But it, it essentially acts as a radiator and it radiates heat away from the vehicle, yeah.  But it's not intended to protect the vehicle against impact--as we found out with Columbia.  With Columbia, we, you know, we knew we had had this piece of foam come loose from the tank, and we thought pretty sure that it had, it had struck the vehicle, but we didn't know exactly where until you started really looking seriously at the film.  And that's when they saw that it had struck the, the underside or the leading edge of the, the, I want to say the left wing.  And--but nobody understood the seriousness of it at, at the time, you know, not until sixteen days later when they were coming back home and, and disintegrated in flight.
Story_ID: 24667
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't want to get too far ahead.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In '84 [1984] you were assigned to a shuttle [at NASA].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, now--
Speaker 2: And that was the original teacher in space flight.  It was gonna be--we were gonna be STS-51-L.  And, and then the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] administrator had gone to the Congress [United States Congres], and he had offered two flight opportunities, one for a member of the Senate and one for a member of the House.  And Senator Jake Garn accepted the, the opportunity.  He was the chairman of the Senate Science Committee.  And so he accepted the opportunity to fly to represent that committee.  And then Senator Bill, now senator, but then Congressman Bill Nelson, who was chairman of the House Science Subcommittee accepted the invitation to fly and ended up being assigned to my crew.  So, so we, we moved the Teacher in Space flight to the one behind me and assigned a guy named Dick Scobee and his crew to it and, and we went off and flew with Sen-, with now Senator Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--see you flew in--
Speaker 2: 1986, January.
Speaker 1: 1986, January, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, from--we, we launched--
Speaker 1: This is the Columbia?
Speaker 2: --on the 11th [of January] on Columbia.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  (Pause) Okay.  So the Columbia, the commander was Robert L. "Hoot" Gibson.
Speaker 2: Hoot, Hoot Gibson, yeah.  And Hoot was a hoot.  Hoot was a--I'm not a fighter pilot.  I'm an attack pilot.  And there's a subtle difference.  Hoot was a fighter pilot--had flown F-8s, F-4s, and F-14s, and he was, he was incredible.  He was a--for me, he was the perfect mentor and teacher.  And I just loved being his pilot, you know.  And he, he taught be a lot about flying in space and flying airplanes and everything and a lot about life.  So we had a lot of fun together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hoot Gibson and you had--the rest of the crew was Stephen--
Speaker 2: Steve Hawley, yeah.
Speaker 1: Franklin--
Speaker 2: Chang-Diaz.
Speaker 1: Chang-Diaz.  You have George D. "Pinky" Nelson.
Speaker 2: Yep (excuse me).  And Pinky was--Pinky, Steve, and, and Hoot had all flown before.  So they were on their second flights.  Franklin Chang-Diaz was my classmate--had not flown.  And then we had Bob Cenker, who was an op-, an engineer from, electrical engineer from RCA.  And he was there because we had a, we had an RCA satellite to deploy but we also had an infrared imaging camera that was in the payload bay.  And so it, some of it, some aspects of it were classified.  So Bob [Cenker] was on board to run a certain number of tests for the classified program that, that it represented.  And, and that, that rounded out our crew.  So there were seven of us.
Speaker 1: I didn't--I don't know if I'm jumping too far ahead of the story now but do you remember meeting a Katherine Johnson?
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: She was a mathematician.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to remember when I met Kath-, Katherine [Johnson].  It was much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, much later.
Speaker 1: I figured it might 'cause you're, you're in Houston at this point--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not in, you know, not anywhere near Hampton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She talked about you so much when we interviewed.
Speaker 2: (Chuckle)
Speaker 1: Interesting person.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A human calculator.  So, okay.  Alright, so how, how is there not--now this is--so you go through months of preparation or simulations--
Speaker 2: For the flight?
Speaker 1: For the flight, yes.
Speaker 2: It's about a year of training.  And, you know, the first six months of that training cycle is focused on the shuttle itself, just generic training.  And it's--you, you relearn everything you've learned about the shuttle in your candidacy period.  And, and you start to train as a team.  And then after six months, you, you shift to dedication to the payload, the actual experiments and things you're gonna, you're gonna carry.  And the focus shifts on the l-, on the ground team, the ground control team.  So, you know, everything that's done then is done to train the flight control teams.  So, the first six months they teach you how to deal with problems on the orbiter and how to solve problems and fix malfunctions.  And then the second six months leading up to the flight, everything's focused really on the flight team, on the flight control team because in reality their gonna see things wrong, I mean, days before we do, unless it's something really big.  And, and the, and the flight control team usually works through anomalies.  And they, they can actually solve some of them without our help 'cause they can remotely move switches or go to an alternate system or something like that.  So, that's when you get into what we call integrated training, where you put the ground and the crew together in training.  So you have, you have a lot of integrated training in the last six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24668
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, okay, as you were ready to fly then this is, this is January you said of '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: When I flew?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was January--well, we started in December.  We were scheduled to fly in December.  And we went to the launch pad--I can't remember the date.  But we got down to fourteen seconds, no, no, no, yeah, we got down to fourteen seconds and, and the system aborted because it detected a, some problem in the right-hand side rocket booster.  And they, they didn't know whether it was real or not.  And so it, it was in the hydraulic power unit that, that moves the nozzles around.  And so they decided that we would scrub for the day.  And as they got into it, they realized they had to get in and actually change out a box.  And so that caused us to slip completely through the Christmas holidays and into the new year.  So then we came back, I want to say we came back down on the 3rd of January and attempted to launch and didn't.  We got down to thirty-one seconds and didn't get off because we had a problem with one of the main engines.  Then the next time we went out we got down to thirty-one seconds and this time not only did we, did--well we had problems with a, with a main engine valve and it wouldn't close properly.  And when they, when they did the troubleshooting after we got out of the vehicle and it turned out as they were detanking the time before a, a thermal probe had broken off.  And it jammed one of the, one of the valves.  So, turned out to be a good day not to fly because couple of things could have happened, the, the worse being the back end of the shuttle would have blown off because it would have gotten an uncontrolled shutdown because the valve couldn't close carrying the liquid oxygen, liquid oxygen.  And the motor, the engine would have over spun and (indicates explosion)!  So, so it was a good thing we didn't fly that day.  Then the fourth time we went out, we, we laid out there on our backs for two hours in a thunder storm, in a driving thunderstorm with lightening and stuff going on.  And we finally talked our way out of the vehicle.  We, we started talking among ourselves and--because we knew the flight surgeon was listening in on the, on the intercom.  And so we started talking about being worried about getting hit by lightening, laying out there on the metal, on, on top of four million pounds of propellant.  So they finally said, okay, we're gonna scrub for the day, and they came and got us.  And, and then the next day we went out, which was the 12th of January--flawless.  Everything, I mean, everything went like clockwork.  And we launched and then came back.  Originally we were only gonna fly four days and then the weather at, at the Kennedy Space Center [on Merritt Island, Florida] just kept getting worse and worse and worse.  So, so we got an extra three days tacked on.  So we ended up with a seven-day mission, but we landed in the middle of the night out at Edwards Air Force Base [in East Kern, California] because the weather just never improved at, at Kennedy [Space Center].  And so that was the 18th of January and in--
Speaker 1: Now what was the flight like?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: It was awesome.  I mean it was, you know, my first time in space.  Just getting, just getting yourself adapted to being weightless and moving around and, and, and that kind of stuff.  And then we had a lot of work to do.  We had a lot of, we had a lot of very small experiments plus we had, we had one satellite, one RCA satellite, communication satellite called SATCOM KU-3, KU-2, that serves today.  It's a, it's a KU band satellite that's used to get television imagery down.  I think it had--HBO was one of the channels it was gonna be on this particular satellite.  And then we did a lot of medical experiments, which I enjoyed quite a bit.  And then we had the infrared imaging camera on that, that I got a chance to play with quite a bit with Bob Cenker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, we landed, like I said, on the 18th of January.  And we're in the closing phases of our debrief on--what was to have been the last day of our debrief we were sitting in, in, in a debriefing room at, at the Johnson Space Center when we took a break to go watch Challenger launch.  And, and seventy-three in sec-, seventy-three seconds in the flight it just disintegrated.  And so life changed after that.
Story_ID: 673697
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My name is Charles Frank Bolden, Jr. [HistoryMaker General Charles Bolden, Jr.].  It's C-H-A-R-L-E-S, F-R-A-N-K, B-O-L-D-E-N, and then Jr.--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --originally from Columbia, South Carolina, born and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --born and raised.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in nine--August 19th, 1946.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm currently self employed.  I am the former NASA administrator.  I served as NASA administrator for the two terms of the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration.
Speaker 1: And you were the--were you the third or second black man in space--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was actually the first to be permanently appointed as [U.S.] Senate confirmed, as the NASA administrator.  So I was the twelfth NASA administrator and the, and the first African American in that position.
Speaker 1: And as an astronaut, you were--
Speaker 2: I was the second astronaut.  Doug--Dick Truly [Richard H. Truly], who was a good friend of mine, who had been previously in the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program and [U.S.] Air Force program, or DOD program [U.S. Department of Defense], and then in the shuttle era, was a shuttle pilot when I was in the Astronaut Office.  We were there together.  But he became the first former astronaut to be the NASA administrator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you follow, in terms of the African American astronauts--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you would follow I guess [HistoryMaker] Ed Dwight--
Speaker 2: I would be the--
Speaker 1: --who would be the--
Speaker 2: I would be the fourth shuttle astronaut, and I followed Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory], Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford], came in in 1978 in the very first group of people selected to be shuttle astronauts.  So I was, I was in that, in the second group selected, so that brought us to a total of four.  Ed Dwight was prior to, to my time of even thinking about the space program.  And Ed was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base [California], selected for Air Force training but, but never actually got to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  He--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --ran into problems with, at, at, it--and I'll, I'll let somebody else--
Speaker 1: He did tell--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --talk about him.
Speaker 1: --his story. He told his story and it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he has a very interesting story--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: --about his battle with the, actually with the Air Force over getting an opportunity to go to Houston [Texas] and, and become an active member of the, of the space program.
Speaker 1: And then there was an astronaut that was killed--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --that's--
Speaker 2: In, in fact, Bob was--oh geez--was actually killed in an F-104 [Lockheed F-104 Starfighter] accident at Edwards.  And because he had actually flown in the X-15 [North American X-15] and had been to space, he was later designated as, as an astronaut, which was something that they denied Ed Dwight in, in his time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Bob Lawrence [Robert H. Lawrence, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: I apologize.
Speaker 1: --that's right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's right.  I know Barbara Lawrence [Barbara Cress Lawrence]--
Speaker 2: Barbara--
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois], his wife--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And so we, we're completing an interview--oh, what, what is today's date? I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Today is Friday, the 3rd of February, 19--oh, not 19--2017.
Speaker 1: And where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And sometimes I feel like we've gone back to the 1900s (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, recently especially, yeah and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673698
Speaker 1: Now, we left off in 1986.  We were talking about the Columbia mission [Space Shuttle Columbia] on January 12th through the 18th, 1986 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you--I want to go back a little bit to when you first got into outer space, how you felt, 'cause we didn't talk about that.  We were trying to get the interview finished, and we didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but how did you feel?
Speaker 2: You know, it had been quite a long time preparing for the mission.  We, we trained for more than two years because we were originally scheduled to fly in, in 1985 and finally flew right at the beginning of '86 [1986].  So, one of the things I had done was study a lot of geography of the African continent because I wanted to--being a person of African descent, I wanted to be able to look down and look at the country from which my ancestors had come.  And I, I knew it was somewhere on the West African coast.  And so, when we finally got to launch on the morning of, of January 12th, ah, you know, we were excited a little bit but anticipating the, the mission.  We felt very well trained and very well qualified and ready for it.  We launched and probably nine, ten minutes into the flight because it only takes you eight and a half minutes to get to space.  So about nine or ten minutes into the flight, the vehicle was at that time upside down.  And, and then we rolled upright, but as I had an opportunity to pull my seat up and look out my front window, I noticed that the British Isles were going beneath, and then I saw this giant island out front.  And, and it didn't take too long when I realized that giant island was the African continent.  And I was so awestruck that I, I began to cry.  So, you know, in the first ten or fifteen minutes of my first time in space, I became very emotional and, and actually wept a little bit at the, the fact that I was looking at the place of my ancestry, but more important, that I was looking at a continent with no lines, no boundaries that showed.  And I didn't have a clue, you know, where my ancestors may have come from.  I knew where the Atlantic Ocean was.  I could see that.  But once you got on land, you had no idea where North Afri- North Africa was, you know, whether you're talking about Morocco and some of the other countries there or whether you're talking about Nigeria or Ghana or anything else; you just didn't know.  So that was another thing that contributed to my, to my tearing up, the fact that, boy, this is an incredible world on which we live, that there are no boundaries from up here, no da- no divisions between people.
Story_ID: 673699
Speaker 1: So all the hard work that your parents [Ethel Martin Bolden and Charles Bolden, Sr.] told, told you that you would have to put in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: They were right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --in order to get an opportunity--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --like this,  I mean pays off, and you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, it had to be really that an emotional experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, it was for me because, again, we may have talked about this before, before I read--met the late great Dr. Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], who was also a South Carolinian, I never dreamed of going to space.  I, I, I was not--came out of high school in C- at C.A. Johnson High School in Columbia, South Carolina.  The two things I knew for certain was when, when I got out of the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] I was not gonna go in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and I was not gonna fly airplanes.  Other than that, I had no clue what I was gonna do, be something in the [U.S.] Navy.  And lo and behold, when it came time to graduate, I looked back on my first year as a midshipman, and the person who impressed me the most happened to be a Marine infantry officer.  So I decided I was gonna go into the Marine Corps; I was gonna go into the infantry; and I was gonna go to Vietnam like everybody else.  Fortunately for me, my wife [Alexis Walker Bolden], she prevailed, and we went to flight school, went to Pensacola [Naval Air Station Pensacola, Pensacola, Florida], something I said I would not do, fell in love with aviation, and over the course of training and then flying, decided I wanted to be a test pilot.  And it was as, serving as a test pilot when I had an opportunity to meet Dr. Ron McNair when he came along with some of the other astronauts from the first group of shuttle astronauts selected in 1978.  And I had an opportunity to spend a weekend with him and talk about growing up in South Carolina, as he had done.  He grew up in a little place called Lake City, South Carolina, about forty-two miles [sic.] from Columbia.  But unlike me, Ron had always dreamed of being an astronaut.  He just knew that that was what he was gonna do.  And he chose a totally different course than I did.  I went in the [U.S.] military.  He went to North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], became an Aggie, and played on the band, and became an honor student, and went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and earned a Ph.D. in laser physics, and became one of the world's foremost laser physicist, but also a very accomplished jazz saxophone player, so, and a black, fifth-degree black belt in karate.  So I had done none of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, but you were pretty good.  I imagine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was, I was--
Speaker 1: --you were a ace--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I was okay at what I did.
Speaker 1: As a pilot, you were, you were more than likely an ace as they call it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was a, I was a pretty decent pilot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Ron McNair was recruited into the astronaut program I read by [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols of 'Star Trek.'
Speaker 2: Nichelle actually joined forces with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] since she was a star on 'Star Trek' and traveled around the country and became sort of a show of force for NASA, a, a physical image of NASA's desire to bring diversity into the Astronaut Corps [NASA Astronaut Corps].  And so she was responsible not only for Ron and Fred [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory] and Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford] but for the six women who became the, the first women to actually become astronauts--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Ron's class.
Story_ID: 673700
Speaker 1: Who was on board the Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] with you?
Speaker 2: My crew was very interesting.  My commander, who became another role model of mine, was, was Robert "Hoot" Gibson [Robert L. Gibson], who is legendary in the, in the area, in the annals of aviation history, is now in the, in the U.S. Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton [National Aviation Hall of Fame, Dayton, Ohio].  But Hoot was a [U.S.] Navy fighter pilot, Vietnam era, as I had been, a test pilot school graduate also.  I was his co-pilot, or in, in shuttle parlance I was the pilot on the mission.  And then we had three mission specialists who were NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] astronauts, Dr. Franklin Chang Diaz, whose story in and, in and of itself is, is amazingly unique.  He is born and raised in San Jose, Costa Rica, came to the U.S. to be an astronaut at the age of seventeen, and went on to earn a Ph.D. from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in, in plasma physics.  The other two mission specialists were Dr. Steve Hawley [Steven Hawley], who was an astronomer from Kansas, and then Dr. Pinky, George "Pinky" Nelson [George Nelson], who was another astronomer--sometimes they call themselves astrophysicists--from Washington state [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington].  And then we had two payload specialists, people who were not NASA astronauts but were flying because of some expertise that they had.  Bob Cenker [Robert J. Cenker] was there representing RCA [RCA Corporation] because we had a, a prototype infrared imaging camera on board that he, he interpreted the data that I got as the operator of the camera, and then a person who has become a lifelong friend of mine, then-Congressman Bill Nelson, from the State of Florida, who became the second member of the [U.S.] Congress, following Senator Jake Garn, to actually go into space.  Today Senator--Congressman Nelson is now Senator Bill Nelson from the State of Florida.
Story_ID: 673701
Speaker 1: So, I know, I know you talked about the mission the last time and, and what the objectives were.  And I think I asked you about it was, what your responsibilities were--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as pi- pilot and--
Speaker 2: As the pilot, my job was to assist the, the commander in whatever means were necessary.  We divided responsibility for the systems on board the shuttle [Space Shuttle Columbia].  Shuttle was a very complex vehicle.  And so the commander was responsible for what we called the Environmental Control and Life Support System, just getting air and, and water and everything else into the vehicle.  He also was responsible for the data processing system, DPS.  So he had controls for all of that on the left side of the cockpit and overhead.  And then everything else was the responsibility of the pilot, the propulsion systems, the main engines, the, the smaller reaction control system jets that moved us around while we were in space and enabled us to maneuver the vehicle, the hydraulic system that, that moved actuators and moved valves and everything else.  And, and the big thing was the electrical power system, which powered the whole vehicle.  So that, that was the most complex part, and that was the one that the most challenging for me in training because I would, I considered myself an electrical scientist.  You know, I had, I had decided at the Naval Academy [United State Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] that I was gonna study and, and learn as much about electrical engineering as I could because I was gonna serve five years in the, in the [U.S.] Navy I thought, get out, go back to graduate school, get a, a, a doctorate or a master's in electrical engineering and make money, and that never happened.
Story_ID: 673702
Speaker 1: The flight [STS-61-C] lasted longer than it was supposed to, right?
Speaker 2: We actually--the flight lasted a little bit longer than its plan once we got to space.  We were originally planned for about a seven day mission.  We were so late in our, in our launch, we had slipped several months.  And we were pressing up against the STS-51-L, which became known as the Teacher in Space flight.  It was the ill-fated 51-L that we la- on which we lost Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger].  And we were beginning to push that flight so far out that there was a discussion of canceling our flight or at least delaying it and slipping 51-L in first.  So, when we launched, the attention of the agency [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] became in trying to just get us back on the ground.  And they originally said we were gonna fly four days.  And what happened was, the weather at the Kennedy Space Center [John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida] and even at Edwards Air Force Base [California] and White Sands [White Sands Test Facility, Las Cruces, New Mexico] was just extreme over a two, three day period of time.  And although they wanted to get us back early, they couldn't.  There was no availability of a landing site, so we ended up staying seven days, so going back to the original length of the flight.  But, but in the record books or in the history books, it goes down as a, a flight that was extended by three days due to weather.
Story_ID: 673703
Speaker 1: You return on January the 18th--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Eighteenth.
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighty-six [1986], right?
Speaker 2: Middle of the night.  And, and that too was a unplanned return to Edwards Air Force Base [California].  We were going to be the first mission to land at the Kennedy Space Center [John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida], and Kennedy's weather just did not cooperate.  We tried three days to get into Kennedy with, with no luck.  And finally they decided that, okay, we'll make a night landing at Edwards Air Force Base, which was okay with Hoot [Robert L. Gibson] and me.  We had trained about, 50 percent of our, our landing training was at night, so we were, we were qualified and very comfortable flying night landings, and that's what we ended up doing, flying a, a night land--approach and landing into Edwards Air Force Base instead of a daytime landing at the Kennedy Space Center.
Speaker 1: Now this is much different from the capsule, space capsule flights--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --of the '60s [1960s]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --nowhere near like the Apollo [Project Apollo], Gemini [Project Gemini], Mercury [Project Mercury] programs.  We were not in a capsule.  We were in a spacecraft.  We were in a, in a, we were in the world's largest glider, a 200,000 pound glider that left the planet as a rocket ship but came back to Earth as a glider.  We had no power.  You know, there were no engines, so your reentry, you, you relied on gravity to bring you back.  The only thing you did was you turned yourself around backwards, lit two big engines on the back that we call orbital maneuvering system engines, and they were our deorbit engines.  And we slowed ourselves down roughly three hundred to six hundred miles an hour.  And that was enough to allow gravity to take over and pull us back to Earth.  So, whereas it took eight and half minutes to get to space, it took us a whole hour to get back to Earth because we had to slow down; we fell freefall back to the atmosphere.  That took about half an hour.  And then you began to decelerate as you went down through the atmosphere.  The vehicle really heated up from friction.  You, you'd--we experienced almost none of it in the cockpit, but on the outside the bottom of the vehicle could get up to thirty-two hundred degrees Fahrenheit.  The plasma that was at the leading edge of the wings and the, and the vertical tail could be as hot as six thousand degrees, and that was what caused us to lose Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] in 2003.  It was just the hot plasma gas got through a hole in the, in the left-hand wing and destroyed the vehicle that way.  But, but it was a half hour just to get to the atmosphere and then a half an hour falling freely.  And, and you, you took over when you went super--subsonic.  And you know, I was able to fly the first half of what we call a, a heading alignment cylinder.  And then Hoot took over for the last half of the, the approach to the Edwards runway and, and actually made the landing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you're gliding in.  You, you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you have some you say rocket assistance, something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Once you get back in the atmosphere there is no rocket assistance at all.  It is a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --glider; it's a pure glider, and, and it doesn't glide very well.  It--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Is there any propulsion--
Speaker 2: None, zero.
Speaker 1: --mechanism at all?
Speaker 2: No.  You have propulsion that, that takes care of you that half hour that you're trying to get back to the atmosphere.  So it can gradually--it, what it does is it causes you to make what we call gentle S turns to get you to the point that you want to be to actually start falling down through the atmosphere.  But that goes away pretty quickly once you get in the atmosphere because the reaction control system jets, they're rocket engines, and they are not built to operate in Earth's atmosphere.  So they pretty much shut themselves off, and then you're just gliding.  The, the, the orbiter was a, was very--was an incredible vehicle because although it didn't fly very well, it, it didn't glide very well.  It still had a, a capability of going a thousand miles, what we call a thousand miles cross range, so you could--if you started early enough, you could vary your course to go a thousand miles north or south or east or west of your path.  And you could, you could actually dip the nose and go a little bit faster than, than planned, and you could cut your, your distance over the ground short.  Or, you could pull it up, not very much, but you had a little bit of leeway to pull the nose up and, and cause yourself to, to fly a little bit farther down range, if for some reason the navigation, the guidance and navigation was off, which we almost never had a problem with that.
Story_ID: 673704
Speaker 1: Speaking of guidance and navigation, as we sit here, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --number one movie in America is 'Hidden Figures'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --about Katherine Johnson [HistoryMaker Katherine G. Johnson]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who I know is a friend of yours.  Did, did you ever encounter her in those--
Speaker 2: You know, I did not know that Katherine Johnson existed until--actually, I, I, I was made aware of Katherine Johnson about two years ago when I was the commencement speaker at West Virginia State, which is his- a historically black college [HBCU], and it, it was Katherine Johnson's alma mater.  And my speech writer had written a passage in there about, he talked about Katherine Johnson in trying to allow me to speak to the graduates about their legacy coming from Katherine Johnson, this phenomenal woman who had been responsible for, you know, getting John Glenn safely back from space and then had worked right on through the Apollo program [Project Apollo], landing on the moon, and then actually working into the Space Shuttle program [at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)] before she retired.  So I learned about her.  I physically met her when I was, I was honored to be present in the White House [Washington, D.C.] when President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] bestowed upon her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2015.  That, that was awesome to, just to be in her presence and then having opportunities to, to work with her once the movie came out, because we were at different screenings, mainly with her family, but every once in a while Katherine would make it.  She's ninety-eight years old now on this day, anyway, as we sit here, and, and mind like a steel trap.  She is still sharp, you know, body--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed her when she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --is a little bit weaker, but, but she's incredible.
Speaker 1: I think she had to be at least ninety-two when, when we interviewed her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's--
Speaker 1: --in Hampton [Virginia], down in Hampton--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --she's ninety-eight now.  And, but Katherine was one of many.  She was one of the three women featured in the movie, 'Hidden Figures.'  The book ['Hidden Figures: The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathematicians Who Helped Win the Space Race,' Margot Lee Shetterly] goes into much more detail about each of them, because they were three different kind of employees at, at the Langley Research Center [Hampton, Virginia].  Katherine came out of, of West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], used to be the Institute [West Virginia Collegiate Institute].  I think she graduated at the age of eighteen and applied for and accepted a job as a mathematician at Langley Research Center.  And so she became a human calculator or a human computer.  Two of the other women featured, one was an engineer, actually became the first African American engineer, if not the first female engineer at Langley.  And, and then Olivia Spencer [sic. Octavia Spencer] played the part of, the role of, of the woman who was a manager and for all intents and purposes of all the, the black computers, the women, the women, mostly mathematicians who were employed there at Langley.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, by the time that Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] is reentering the atmosphere--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're relying on computers.
Speaker 2: I'm relying on computers.  However, Katherine Johnson, if I'm not mistaken, was still in the program, because even though we relied on computers on board, which they didn't have during John Glenn's day, the mathematicians were still responsible for making sure that the, the codes and the, the, the software or the, the formulas that the computers used were in fact accurate and were gonna get us to where we wanted to go.  The computers just did what Katherine did in her head a lot faster.  But still, we generally had mathematicians, even into the early days of shuttle, who were kind of double checking to make sure that, that what was put in the software was in fact what, what the computers came out with.
Story_ID: 673705
Speaker 1: So you come in for landing on, in, at night.
Speaker 2: At night at Edwards Air Force Base [California].
Speaker 1: Edwards, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The runway was very well lit.  We had these huge strobe lights that, that illuminated the runway from the approach end, so you kind of flew down through the lights, and they ended up behind you.  And our, our guidance systems on the ground, we used--because it was a glider, we used a lot of manual lighting on the ground that, that was used to determine your glide slope, because you had to keep your energy up.  It was a glider, as I said, and you wanted to make sure that you kept up enough energy such that when you started to pull the nose up, the vehicle would start decelerating very fast, like we'd lose a knot, a nautical mile a, a second, a, a nautical mile an hour a second as we pull the nose up.  So you went from three hundred knots or just a more--a little more than three hundred miles an hour on the glide slope to touching down and landing at about 195, 200 miles an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, after you landed, you're examined and debriefed.  You, you had, you have, you have to debrief with the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and that takes--how, how long does that take?
Speaker 2: The, the, the debrief, once you get out of the vehicle, takes about an hour to safe the vehicle and make sure that, that the ground crew can come aboard.  They open the hatch and then get you out, and your medical debrief, and you actually do a, a, a whole series of medical tests that, so that they can determine how you performed on those tests, they can compare how you did before the flight, how you did in-flight versus how you did once you came back to Earth.  So that took several hours for us to get through that.  And then we spent one night out at Edwards Air Force Base, and then we flew back to, to Houston, Texas, which was the home of the astronaut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is almost thirty years ago, now right? (Unclear) or just about there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is, yeah, this is--
Speaker 1: Thirty-one years ago, yep.
Speaker 2: --man, almost--yep, you're right (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 673706
Speaker 1: You were in space another couple of times--
Speaker 2: I flew three more times--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, three more, yeah.
Speaker 2: --after that mission.  We lost Co- we lost Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger], as, as you men- as you mentioned earlier, ten days after we landed at, at Edwards Air Force Base [California].  And so that caused the program to sort of come to a halt for almost three years.  I went over and took over the space--the Safety Division at the Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas] in helping with the recovery.  And then once we got through that and started flying again, then I was assigned as the pilot for my second flight, which was STS-31, and that was the flight where we deployed the Hubble Space Telescope in the spring of 1990.
Speaker 1: Now I'm a go back a little bit here--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to the day--'cause you were sitting--you were watching the takeoff of the Challenger, right?
Speaker 2: We were not at the Cape [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida], but we were in, in a conference room in the Astronaut Office at the Johnson Space Center in Houston [Texas].  And most of us--my crew was in our very last debrief from our flight [STS-61-C].  And we got word that, that the, that the countdown had proceeded, and, and they were within minutes of launch.  So we took a break like everybody else and crowded into the conference room to watch.  They had scrubbed the day before because it wa- the temperature was just incredibly cold, and they had had a problem closing the hatch.  They couldn't get the outer hatch properly closed, so they had decided to scrub the mission.  But we sat there and watched.  And as, as everybody now knows, about seventy-three seconds into the flight, when the computers powered up the main engines, a, a sequence that we call throttle up, they pull the engines back--the, the computers do, throttle the main engines back as you're going through an area that's what we call maximum dynamic pressure.  The, the pressures on the vehicle from the external environment, winds and everything else, is very extreme, and so you don't want to have the engines thrusting at the same time that you're having all this external pressure put on the vehicle.  So once you get through that, the computers throttle the engines back up, and although it, it really had nothing to do with the throttle up of the engines, but everybody associates it with the call, go it throttle up.  But the engines throttled up before the call could be made that everything was good.  The vehicle just--we had the explosion in the right hand solid rocket booster.  Everybody saw this, just this giant plume of smoke with fire in the middle, and that was--that led to the end of, of, of Challenger and the crew.  What actually happened--people say the vehicle exploded.  That was not what happened.  The solid rocket booster came apart.  It exploded, which caused the vehicle to get sort of out of, out of the, the main wind stream.  And the, the crew module where the crew was, the only pressurized part of the vehicle, it literally broke off from the rest of the vehicle.  And once that happened, all air in--all pressurization into the cockpit was just gone.  And so the crew was, was killed from asphyxiation and, and depressurization almost instantly.  There are still questions about how long they were able to survive, but, but it wasn't very long.  So, and then you could see the--when we went back and looked at all of the videos, you could actually see the crew module kind of come up out of the plume.  The solid rocket boosters kind of went two different ways.  And, and, but the crew module came out intact out of the plume and then went into the ocean, and that's where we found it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it was a definite pattern--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that is--people have drawn this.  I mean, you've seen it in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --cartoons--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --political cartoons on--I mean, they, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's this, people know the pattern of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the disaster--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what it looked like, you know.  The nation was glued to their sets--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --about that, it was something that everybody took note of everywhere.  I know I was on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] in a theater group.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And we stopped everything we were doing and watched it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  Everybody was just glued to--
Speaker 2: It, it, it was traumatic for--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --everybody involved in the program.
Story_ID: 673707
Speaker 1: And there, there have been and probably will be many, many books written about it from here on out.  But one that became particularly insightful for people was a book that was written by an author [Diane Vaughan] that was called 'The Normalization of Deviance' [sic. 'The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA'] And it was where, when you look back on it, we had seen things not working right and going wrong for, for years, for a number of flights, but we in the program [NASA Astronaut Corps] had come to accept them as well, it's okay.  This isn't normal, but it's okay.  And I, I, I think about that frequently in today's world as we, as we--in, in our political world as we--I call it normalization of deviance when you look at something that's just not right, but over time people accept it and say it's, it's okay; we can, we can do with this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, well, (pause) I guess it's worth it to fix these--I mean, something that's needed, right?
Speaker 1: And, and, and that's exactly what--
Speaker 2: I mean that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --we did.  We went back, and one of the things that was my responsibility, heading the Safety Division at the Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas], was to go back to the beginning, to, was to pretend that we had never flown shuttle, look at the basic design, look at how we had chosen to do what we had--how we had chosen to--should it be a glider?  Should we put, should we put air breathing engines on it, so that when it came back, you know, it could fly to its destination?  We redesigned the solid rocket boosters to put up where--because they were in segments.  They were four segments, and they, they all came together, and, and we had what was called a tang and clevis.  And I don't want to get really complicated, but, but it was one part that had another piece that fit over it sort of this way.  In the original design it didn't have the U shape, I guess that would be the clevis that fit with, with two sets of O rings.  We only had one, one O ring on the original design, and, and that was where our weakness was, was discovered.  That O ring, in the case of Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger], had become pretty brittle.  It's supposed to be very pliable, such that it expands and contracts and fills the void to not allow hot gases to come out of the, out of the pressure chamber part of the solid rocket booster.  And that, that was where the failure occurred.  So we redesigned the, the connection point between the, the solid rocket booster, such that it now had two O rings, and it really had to go around the compli- complex system if we were to get any hot gases escaping, and that, that, that worked out.  So that was one improvement.  We made a number of improvements in the, in the shuttle design after the Challenger accident that--
Speaker 2: The O ring--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that, that helped.
Speaker 2: --is like a gasket?
Speaker 1: O ring is a gasket.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's all it is.  It's a rubber gasket that goes all the way around.  And, and we introduced two O rings, so it went around both the inside and outside of a part of the, of the, the, of one of the segments, such that when the other segment came in and made it, then it had this seal, this double seal.
Story_ID: 673708
Speaker 1: I mean you lost one of your best friends in this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Actually seven crew members.  We had--we knew them all incredibly well.  I had boxed at the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] with, with Mike Smith [Michael J. Smith], who as the, the pilot on the mission [STS-51-L].  Ron McNair [Ronald McNair] was the person who had inspired me to apply for the Space Shuttle program [at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)].  And we had actually trained with Christa McAuliffe and Greg Jarvis [Gregory Jarvis], who were the two payload specialists.  We had trained with them until about six months out from our flight [STS-61-C] when, when we had switched out crews.  And, and my crew gave up the Teacher in Space flight and took on the, the, the, the congressman's flight, so we became crew members with, with Bill Nelson and Bob Cenker [Robert J. Cenker].
Story_ID: 673709
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how, how you came to become the chief of the Safety Division [at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas], in '87 [1987] the next year, now this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Af- after the accident, and, and my guess would be because of the background that I had in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, in [U.S.] Marine Corps Aviation, I had frequently been the aviation safety officer in my squadrons.  So I, I had a, an aviation safety background.  And, and the only thing I can figure is that, couple of things.  They wanted, they wanted astronaut involvement, leadership involvement in the recovery, which was we really didn't have any management positions prior to that.  And so I was--because everybody felt that safety had been--they used to call it the silent safety organization because there had been no concerns raised by the safety organization prior to the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] mission, in spite of all the things that had been going wrong or the mi- the mi- the, the, the, the faults that we had found in the system leading up to Challenger.  So I was sent over, one, to represent the Astronaut Office [of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)] but also to take my background and operational safety expertise.  The Safety Division at the time was mostly focused on industrial safety, so keeping the launch pad safe, keeping the environments around the shuttle, but not a lot on operational safety, which was, that was what got us with, with Challenger, not a lot of emphasis on the operational safety.
Speaker 1: Did, did you notice--well, what--I, I, I assume that you were not silent and you noticed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --some other problems.
Speaker 2: The biggest problem that I noticed is, as soon as I got over to the Safety Division was the fact that we were incredibly good in industrial safety.  We had very few people who knew anything about operational safety.  And so we, that division, had responsibility, prime responsibility for oversight of the safety program with very few people in it who had any operational safety experience.  So one of the first things I did was begin to bring in engineers, safety--operational safety professionals, so we, we beefed up the safety organization.  The, the, the or- the program itself put more emphasis on, on safety and, and empowered the safety organization, in fact, almost demanded that we be present in all decision making meetings and that they would not--we would not fly until the safety organization said they were go.  So there were a number of things that changed after Challenger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I hope this isn't an insight into the obvious, but, or quet- question, but what is operational safety in this regard?
Speaker 2: Well, operational safety is the ability to look at the design of a vehicle, to look at the way that it's built, and look at--today we talk about--we, we lump reliability and quality control.  We, we lump all that into, into this category of safety.  So you're looking at--you're going all the way back to look at how the vehicle was designed, identifying areas where it, it has weaknesses, what we call hazards.  So we do hazard analyses and the like, and you determine where the weak points are in a system.  You can't fix everything, so you do something that's called a probabilistic risk assessment.  It's a very formal set of mathematical calculations that says this has a risk that is a certain level.  And, and so the, the value of probabilistic risks assessments is that it allows you to look at what are the most, what are the most critical risks?  Which ones are more likely to happen than others?  So if you've got limited funding, you'll apply the money that you have to fix those more--most likely to occur hazards than you will those that are very unlikely to occur.  So that's, that's sort of what the operational safety community does.  It's subdivided into reliability and quality calculations, if you will.  So that, that's, that's the big difference, and that's what they were not doing leading up to Challenger.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked for three years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, in that capacity, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, two, two to three years.
Speaker 1: Two, two--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I worked almost to the return to flight.  I had stepped away to start training again.  And I was replaced by a former flight director by the name of Jay Greene.  So once again, I was replaced with somebody who would not normally have been in the safety organization.  We didn't bring a safety professional in.  We brought a flight director, somebody who had operational experience and, and had to rely, just I had, on the safety professionals to, to do the down and dirty work inside.  We were, Jay and I were brought in because of our, our leadership and management expertise.
Story_ID: 673710
Speaker 1: And I just want to point out that you were cited twice for exceptional service during this period of time--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --before you pilot the Space Shuttle Discovery--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 1990.  Now tell us about that, that mission.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hubble was a, was an incredible mission.  It was, it was STS-31.  It was the, the mission that actually deployed or put the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit.  It, it, like many other flights, had been scheduled to fly years before, but Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] had kind of pushed everything back, so we ended up flying in, in 1990.  Our job was to take this incredible observatory, if you will, every--it, its name was Hubble Space Telescope, but Hubble was actually a, a space born observatory.  It had six different instruments on it, all of which in- were individual telescopes in their own right.  So our job was to carry that to space, use the remote nip- manipulator system, the mechanical arm and remotely piloted arm, and lift it out of the payload bay, get it in the proper orientation to be released, and then it would fly around Earth on its own, using the velocity imparted to it from its journey to space with the shuttle.  So we took it to a record setting altitude of about six hundred kilometers, four hundred nautical miles above Earth, and released it there, and, and that's where it operates.  It, it's altitude decreases somewhat each year because of drag, but, but it still operates in the 360 to 400 nautical mile range orbiting Earth and just making incredible discoveries about our universe, not, not just our own solar system, but about the universe.  And Hubble has dwar- has dwarfed all prior knowledge about the universe.  We've rewritten textbooks on astrophysics and astronomy and the like.  And things that we thought were true before we find, nah, that's not exactly the way it, it's worked.  So, Hubble has been incredible.  We're about to replace it in a little bit more than two--a little bit less than two years with another instrument called the James Webb Space Telescope that will dwarf what Hubble has taught us or--has allowed us discover.  So we'll, in less than two years, we'll deploy the, the James Webb Space Telescope.
Speaker 1: Okay, first step in science is observation, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --Hubble is--
Speaker 2: Hubble is an observatory.  And it provides the data and, and it, and, and it goes to the next step, which is to evaluate your hypothesis, you know, to find out whether what we thought was true.  We take the data from Hubble, and in some cases, like something as simple--simple I say--is the universe expanding or contracting?  With Hubble we found out that whoa, not only is the universe expanding, but it's actually expanding much more rapidly than, than humans thought for millennia probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is, yeah--
Speaker 2: And I'm way out of my league when I talk about that.
Story_ID: 673711
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  Now, some of us have seen the pictures from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --shot by Hub- the Hubble--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Telescope [Hubble Space Telescope] and the, there's a sophisticated cam- maybe several cameras--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --aboard, I'm, I'm sure--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and the beautiful colors.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And are, are these the real co- true colors or?
Speaker 2: What, what you see are computer enhanced images of our universe.  So the colors are, you know, it's relative.  They're, they're relatively true.  They represent, many of them depending on the type of camera being used, what--if it's a, if it's a, a visual camera, say like the Wide Field Planetary Camera 3 that looks at things in the visual rai- image range, like, like a camera that you hold in your hand would take down here on earth.  So, so you're seeing colors relatively representative of true, the way they look.  You've got others, infrared imaging cameras, ultraviolent imaging cameras, they give you computer generated colors that want to highlight temperature or, or other types of factors relating to a planet or a star system or something else.  So it depends on the camera that's being used or, or the sensor that's being used to get the imagery as to what the colors really mean.  So some are true, or close to true, enhanced, and others just, they're not the way the human eye would see it at all, but they represent the way a, a heat--a thermal sensitive sensor would see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673712
Speaker 1: I know you don't--you didn't have access to something like the Hubble Telescope [Hubble Space Telescope] when you were in space as a pilot here, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: But does--I guess, what's the difference between what you see from the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the shuttle--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what we see from earth just looking at the sky?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, not a lot of difference, except stars are crisp pinpoints of light.  They don't, they don't twinkle like they do from earth.  And the reason they twinkle from earth is because you've got this atmosphere that, you know, goes up to, geez, actively ten thousand feet, and it's just moving around.  And, and the moving around is what causes the, the, the, the imagery that comes from the, the spectrum to be bent and everything, and it causes it to seem like it's twinkling to you.  The example I give to young children is: drop a coin in a, in a, in a spring or a river or a bathtub, and then stick your hand in the water to grab the coin.  And all of a sudden it looks like your hand has bent.  And that's because just, just that little visual, the, the light that's, that's coming to your eye, is changing as it goes through the medium of water.  And so it, it's bent; it's refracted, and it looks like it's somewhere where it really isn't.  The atmosphere does the same thing because it's just like water.  It's just few mol- fewer molecules tightly bound than, than you have in water.  So light gets bent as it comes down through the atmosphere.  In the space shuttle and in spacecraft today, you're completely outside our atmosphere, so there is no, none of this fluid, if you will, that causes the light to be bent.  So you see pretty much a pinpoint of light.  In terms of size, we're so low; we're so close to Earth.  You know, at six hundred nautical miles, that's pretty high for space flight, but that's nothing.  The moon is still 250,000 miles away.  Stars are still light years away.  So, in terms of size, it, it doesn't change or your ability to see what's on a planet.  The moon still looks, you know, like a big, bright thing there.  You gotta either take a set of binoculars, which, however, even with a set of handheld binoculars because you are not looking through the atmosphere, then you get a much better image of whatever you're looking at.  You can actually see characteristics of a planet or the moon through a set of handheld binoculars, gyro stabilized binoculars on the shuttle, than you do from down here on the ground because you're not going through the atmosphere.
Speaker 1: You know, this winter especially Venus has been--
Speaker 2: Oh, in- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --particularly bright.
Speaker 2: --incredible, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, from, from earth.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In fact, I thought it was a little moon one day, I said how did the moon shrink--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it was, Venus was so bright--
Speaker 2: The, the planets frequently surprise us, in that we think we're looking at stars because they, many of them, you know, Mars, Venus, they're incredibly bright because of the, the way that the sunlight is reflecting off them when it gets to our eyes.  And so we, we think we're looking at a star when we're just looking at a big planet.
Speaker 1: Do you really see--did--I, I, I'm, I'm, I'm sure that Mars is red from, reddish from--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: --space.
Speaker 2: That's the color we associate with Mars, and it's, it's surface is much like, like Earth, although it, it does have a reddish tint.
Speaker 1: Could you actually see that from--did you remember seeing that from space--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, you could see Mars, but it was a little dot, you know, from, from onboard the space shuttle.  What you could see surprisingly was, with a set of binoculars, you could see the moons of Jupiter going around the planet.  That, that was surprising to me.  That was somewhat startling, the fact that just with a set of handheld binoculars you could pick up the moons of Jupiter going, going around the planet because you are outside our atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And the moons of Mars.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they, they really look like lights from the, but not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, just look like little stars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 673713
Speaker 1: So this time in 1990 you were in space for five days?
Speaker 2: Five days.  I think it was short, short mission, six days, six, seven, eight, nine--so six days [sic. five days], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the first flight, you know, since the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] disaster.
Speaker 2: This was my first flight, but it wasn't the first flight (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't the first flight? Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we, we were, STS-31, we had had a number of flights because we, we resumed flight in late 1988.  So we had a number of flights in between the return to flight, which was STS-26, until we got to, to, to my flight STS-31.  They didn't always go in order, but, but they, they pretty much went from 26 through 31.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think you were telling us last time what the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the--
Speaker 1: --designation of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --STS.
Speaker 2: The STS was originally for Space Transportation System.  After Challenger and the, the realization that we were not gonna do the three prong Space Transportation System, which was a, a vehicle to--for routine access to space, that turned out to be the shuttle, going to an orbiting space station of some type and then using a third vehicle called an Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle to get us from low Earth orbit to lunar orbit and then eventually out to Mars and other planets, that was gonna be the third component of the Space Transportation System.  When NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] opted to just focus on shuttle, then it was just decided, okay, that, that now is gonna stand for Shuttle Transportation System.  The number was the--at--the system that we went back to after Challenger was just the number in the sequence of shuttle flights where that flight was, was designated that we were gonna fly it.  So, STS-1, 2, 3, 4, up through 12, were the first twelve shuttle missions.  Because the NASA administrator [James Beggs] at the time was something called a triskaides- he was a triskaidekaphobic, was afraid of the number thirteen, there was never an STS-13.  We actually changed the numbering system to avoid STS-13, and so we went with numbers like STS-61-C, which was my first flight.  The six was the fiscal year in which the flight was scheduled, the 1 was Kennedy Space Center [John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida], had we ever flown out of Vandenberg [Vandenberg Air Force Base, California] it would have been a 2.  So, 62 something would have been fiscal year '86 [1986], flown out of Vandenberg.  And then the C, the letter designation, was the, the sequence in which the flight was to be flown in a particular, a particular year.  So 61-C was gonna be the third flight in fiscal year '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Did--was, was it funding or technical know how that dialed back the Space Transportation System plan?
Speaker 2: Funding is always the, that's the final determinant.  So the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration authorized shuttle in 1972.  And within days of authorizing the Space Transportation System, the complexities of Washington, D.C., and the, and the bureaucracy called the NASA administrator and said, "Okay, just one minor change: we're only gonna fund one thing, so pick it, and we think it ought to be the shuttle because you can't do anything if you can't get to space."  And so, that was NASA's focus, became the space shuttle and getting it flown, and everything else kind of went--It, it wasn't canceled outright, but it was just said okay, we're gonna, we're gonna defer this until a later date for funding.  And that funding did not come for quite some time for the second phase, which was an orbiting space station.  And, and, and we eventually got there with the International Space Station, still have not gotten to the third phase, which is the, the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle or transfer vehicle.  We're working today--if you look at NASA's program, we have now introduced commercial entities.  So what we call the, the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, Buzz Aldrin refers to it as a cycler.  And that'll be the vehicle that will take people from low Earth orbit to lunar orbit and then from lunar orbit on to the moon.  That will be a transfer vehicle the way it was envisioned in the days of the Space Transportation System.  But that's, that's probably a decade or so away.
Story_ID: 673714
Speaker 1: In '91 [1991]--well, '92 [1992], you served as mission commander on the Space Shuttle Atlantis--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --STS-45--
Speaker 2: Forty-five, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Tell us about that mission.
Speaker 2: That was my first mission as a mission commander.  So now I'm moving from the right seat as the co-pilot to the left seat as the commander.  My responsibility was to take care of the--was to determine, make sure--to oversee the, the training process, to make sure the crew is adequately trained, but look after the safety of the vehicle and the successful completion of the mission.  To do that, I had to work with the flight director team.  The senior person on that team, on the whole flight team, was always the lead flight director.  So the flight director on the ground and the mission commander in space were the two people who made the ultimate decisions on what, you know, what was gonna happen over the course of a flight.  In our case, because we were heavily science oriented, it was NASA's [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] first mission to planet Earth, STS-45.  It had an acronym.  It was the at- Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science [ATLAS-1].  So it was the first Earth observing mission to be flown from the space shuttle.  We had thirteen total experiments in the payload bay.  Ten of them were Earth observing, looking at the atmosphere.  Three of them were solar experiments, looking out at our sun.  It was so scientifically intensive that I felt I needed some help.  And so I picked one of my crew members, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan [Kathryn D. Sullivan], who just left the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration with me.  She was the administrator of NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] for the last half of the Obama administration.  But Kathy, I designated as the payload commander, and it meant for issues pertaining to, to the science on the flight, the payload themselves, then she was the person who had prime responsibility, and I, I directed any questions or decisions about that to Kathy.  So she became the payload commander, and I took care of the overall mission itself.
Speaker 1: She's like the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We flew for nine days.
Speaker 1: --Mr. Spock [sic.] of the trip.
Speaker 2: She was like the Dr. Spock [Benjamin Spock] of the trip, although we had a really smart crew other than me.  You know, my co-pilot for that, for that particular mission was Brian Duffy.  Brian was an [U.S.] Air Force test pilot, who is just an incredible human being.  And then we had Kathy Sullivan.  I had flown with her on my previous flight.  She was one of the mission specialist, actually trained to do a spacewalk if we had a contingency occur with Hubble [Hubble Space Telescope], she and, and Captain Bruce McCandless [Bruce McCandless II].  So this was Kathy and my second flight together.  We also had Dr. Byron Lichtenberg, who was a payload specialist brought along to do a lot of the observing. Had a, a Brussel--a, a, an astronaut from the European Space Agency, Dirk Frimout, who was an engineer who had helped with a design of a number of the experiments that were in the payload bay.  And then we had Dr. Mike Foale [Michael Foale], an American--British born, naturalized American citizen who became one of our mission specialists on the flight.  So, so we had a full complement of seven Americans who flew with us.  And then Dave Leestma [David Leestma] was my, was my lead mission specialist who sat in the center seat as mission specialist number two or the flight engineer for the crew. So that was the makeup of our crew.
Speaker 1: So this was a international--a multinational effort--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  It, it was multi--and it was not my fir- the, the Hubble Space Telescope mission, was my first international mission, because Hubble was a, was the work of a conglomerate of multiple space agencies, multiple organizations from around the world.  But ATLAS, or STS-45, was truly an international mission because almost all of the experiments in the payload bay were provided by, by foreign partners.  There was one, one experience--two experiments as a matter of fact, that were done by the Japanese space agency [Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency].  Several were done by the European Space Agency, and then a few were done by American universities, as well as NASA.  So we--it was--and we had Dirk as a crew member, so we, we actually had an international crew member on the flight.
Story_ID: 673715
Speaker 1: Do you remember what some of the discoveries were in terms of experiments?
Speaker 2: We were actually looking at what was called the mesosphere, the middle atmosphere.  So we--some of the data that came from that flight helped, helped scientists understand much more clearly the makeup of our middle atmosphere where the weather is made.  The, most of the weather for Earth is generated in the, in the middle atmosphere.  It's not, not down low, close to the ground.  The rain falls through it.  The snow falls through it.  Ice falls through it.  But it's really generated in the mesosphere, so lots of discoveries concerning the makeup of the mesosphere, you know, what were the components there?  Was it all oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, or were there other things?  We actually had a couple of experiments that enabled us to create an artificial aurora.  We fired charged particles from the shuttle into Earth's atmosphere, and it, when they struck the molecules of the air in the atmosphere, caused it to glow.  It, it ionized the, the actual atmosphere of Earth in that one little spot, and it caused it to glow.  So we learned quite a bit about that.  We had cameras on board that took a lot of images of lightning so that people trying to understand the origins of lightning.  We actually saw--we recorded a lot of lightning that went cloud to cloud, not just, not just from the, from the sky to the ground, but a lot of lighting goes from cloud to cloud.  And we learned a lot about that.  The, the, the solar observing, the three instruments that we had there, helped us to learn a lot about our own sun.  Looking at solar what we call pulses of energy from the sun, just learned a lot about the, the makeup of the sun's outer--I, I'm not sure what, what scientists call it, but it's the gaseous outside of our sun.  So those were some of the things that we did.  And we also worked a number of--in the cabin we had an IMAX camera, big, large format camera that has become famous, IMAX movies today.  We had one out in the payload bay that we use, not only to take images of the deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope, but also to get images of Earth once Hubble was gone that were just breathtaking, you know, over the rest of the flight.  And then we had an IMAX in cabin camera that Kathy [Kathryn D. Sullivan] and I operated for the most part, where we were able to take large format images of the crew at work just doing normal, routine operations inside the cabin.  And that, that just sort of revolutionized the way that, that people on Earth could view the activities going on in the space shuttle.
Story_ID: 673716
Speaker 1: Now this is not your last mission (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I actually came--right after that mission I was brought here to Washington [D.C.] to become the assistant deputy administrator at NASA Headquarters [Washington, D.C.].  So, so I became the, the third ranking civil servant in the agency.  I, I was the, actually the, the second ranking civil servant because I was, I was the assistant to the, the deputy administrator.  And so we both worked for Dan Goldin [Daniel Goldin], who at the time was the newly named--he was named NASA administrator on the day before we landed on STS-45.  So I came back to Earth to be greeted by him when I was laying on my back on a gurney at the Kennedy Space Center [John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida], and he asked me to--told me to think about coming to Washington to work for him, so.  Against my better judgment I came to Washington once we finished all of our crew debriefs and everything.  And I stayed here in D.C. for almost a year working as the assistant deputy administrator.
Speaker 1: But they didn't forget about you and you were able--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --to go back to space--
Speaker 2: Thank god they didn't forget about me because I hated my year here in Washington.  I, I just didn't take to politics and, and the, and the bureaucracy.  My job really--we were trying to, we were trying to get funding for that second phase of the STS, of the Space Transportation System.  NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the nation had decided--at least the administration had decided, that okay, it's now time to, to develop a space station.  We, we had gone through fits and starts and everything, but we really wanted to put some earnest money down and finish, begin to build and complete a space station.  It wasn't the International Space Station at the time.  It was gonna be a U.S. only entity.  My primary job in coming here was to work the [U.S.] Congress and dominantly the Congressional Black Caucus, was to try to get support.  The Congressional Black Caucus at that time enjoyed quite a bit of influence, un- unlike today where it's, in many ways it's been marginalized.  But, but I, I worked with people like [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and, and went to try to, to earn their votes in, in support of the, of a, of a space station.
Speaker 1: Were they generally inclined to support--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --NASA? Yeah, I don't--
Speaker 2: As, as, as a general rule, and, and I'll, I learned a lot about, about what makes D.C. tick in one of the most incredible meetings I had in my, in my entire year up here.  And it was instructive for me because it was, it was supposed to be a fifteen minute with, fifteen minute meeting with Representative Lewis to try to gain his support.  And I sat down and, and we talked for an hour, mostly John, Congressman John Lewis talking to Charlie Bolden [HistoryMaker General Charles Bolden, Jr.] and educating me on the ways of Washington.  He spent most of that hour talking about the in--the, the absolutely essential value of the space program and what we did at NASA and why it was important and why he thought a space station was gonna be absolutely incredible.  But at the end of that hour, he looked at me and he, he said, "You know, I can tell by the expression on your face that you're feeling pretty good."  And I said, "Well congressman, I am actually, because you know, I, I just, I'm impressed by your knowledge of the space program, by your understanding of its critical importance, and, and so I feel good."  He said, "Well, let me correct one thing."  He said, "I'm not gonna vote for a space station."  He said, "You know, because NASA does not spend a dime in my congressional district.  And I come here, one, to represent the nation but also to represent my constituents.  And, and in and around Atlanta, Georgia, NASA doesn't have a single installation facility; they don't do anything," which was kind of not exactly accurate because we fund a lot of stuff at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and universities but not--we didn't have a facility making things.  And he said, "So, it'll pass.  It won't be by much, but it'll pass.  But, but I can't vote for it because I need to be a--you know, if I, if I spend money on the space station and not on things that are gonna be socially necessary for my constituents, I'll--I won't get reelected, and I won't be back here."  And, and I--you know, it was instructive to me to, to learn that he understood a couple of things.  He understood the incredible value of what NASA did and, and, and the need to spend money on research and development and science and technology.  But he also understood the Congress incredibly well.  He knew that it would be a really tight vote, but he had counted heads, and he knew that, that we would win approval.  We did by one vote.  So the, the space station was approved by one vote in the [U.S.] Senate that, you know, in the Senate that year.  And so John Lewis proved to be right on many counts, and he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is 1993--
Speaker 2: --still serves in the--
Speaker 1: --ninety-three [1993]?
Speaker 2: That was nineteen ninety--that was actually 1992--
Speaker 1: Two [1992]. Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I came back to Houston [Texas], or I went back to Houston, around Christmastime of 1992 and began training, you know, for my, for my mission [STS-60] that would become my final mission.
Story_ID: 673717
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, we just, we said something off camera we probably--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --should say on.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But you were talking about the support for Marcia Fudge--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was--
Speaker 1: --in Cleveland [Ohio]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --saying--
Speaker 1: --she's a congresswoman from Cleveland.
Speaker 2: --you know, I did not want to leave the impression that, that members of the Congressional Black Caucus in mass did not support NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  That was not the case at all.  If you look at someone like Marcia Fudge, Congresswoman Fudge, Congresswoman Lee [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee] from California, Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee from Houston, Texas, they all had NASA installations either in their district or adjacent to their district.  And so they were intimately knowledgeable and intimately involved in trying to make sure that funding got to their installations.  So they were very supportive of space station [International Space Station], of everything else that had to do with NASA.  And, and I mentioned the fact that Congresswoman Fudge was a big, was a big support of Julian Earls [HistoryMaker Julian Manly Earls], who eventually became the center director at then the Lewis flight research center [Lewis Research Center], which eventually became the Glenn Research Center [John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field, Cleveland, Ohio].  And, and I said Julian was a brilliant person, un- incredible speaker.  I learned very early on if you're gonna be on the program with Julian, do not speak after he does.  Always make sure that you speak first, otherwise you're just gonna be embarrassed by trying to follow Julian Earls to the podium.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a brilliant man.
Story_ID: 673718
Speaker 1: You train and start training in '92 [1992] for the Space Shuttle Discovery mission STS-60.
Speaker 2: Sixty.  That's exactly right.  And what brought me back to Houston was the fact that just before I, I was assigned to be the commander for that mission, I was talked to by the person who had actually brought me into the space program, Mr. George Abbey, was an, was an assistant, special assistant to the NASA administrator [Richard H. Truly] at the time.  And he came in one day and said, "Hey, we need for you to go back to Houston to fly another mission, and we need for you to command flight."  In mind I was--we had not, the, the crew for the Hubble Space Telescope--the first Hubble Space Telescope repair mission had not been named, and I was kind of hoping deep down inside that I would get to command that mission since I had left it up there broken.  I said, "Would that be Hubble?"  He said, "No, that, that crew's already been determined."  I said, "Okay, then what is it?"  He said, "Well, we've, we've got two Russian cosmonauts coming over with their families and a team of medical people and everything.  And we want to, we want to fly a mission to determine whether or not we can successfully work with the Russians in anticipation of sending American crew members to the Russian Space Station Mir, and we want you to command that mission."  And I remember telling, telling George, I said, "No way.  You know, I'm a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps].  I've trained all my life to kill them, and they've trained all their lives to kill me.  And I have no interest in flying with any Russian."  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really? Did you say that?
Speaker 2: I said that.  And, and George said, "Okay, look: calm down.  Two of them are here in town, and why don't you go have dinner tonight and at least try to get to know them, and then come back in in the morning and, and, and tell me after you've had a chance to talk to your wife [Alexis Walker Bolden] and think it over, and, and tell me what you want to do."  And I went to dinner that night with two Russian cosmonauts, Sergei Krikalev, who ended up flying, with whom I ended up flying, and I worked with, to the very last day of my tenure as the NASA administrator, and Vladimir Titov [Vladimir G. Titov].  Sergei was a young engineer, had already flown a number of times in space, was, was the most experienced space--living space flyer at that time, having served--having lived on the Russian Space Station Mir over the period of time that the Berlin Wall fell, that the Soviet Union disintegrated.  So, Sergei was a person who had left Earth as a citizen of the Soviet Union.  His hometown of Saint Petersburg was called Leningrad [Soviet Union; Russia] when he left.  When he returned to Earth, some four months later or however long it was, he landed and came back to his home country of Russia, and his hometown had re- regained its name of Saint Petersburg.  That all happened while he was in space.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So this is around 1988 that he--
Speaker 2: Eight-eight [sic. 1989] was when the wall came down.  And this was ninety--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], '90 [1990]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And this was, well, '88 [1988], '89 [1989]; this is '92 [1992] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, '88 [1988] and '89 [1989], right. 'Cause Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was still the president, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And so, well, actually, when I was named to command this mission, I want to say George Bush, because we had the National Space Council, and that was under [President] George Herbert Walker Bush and, and Vice President Dan Quayle chaired the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he came in in--
Speaker 2: --the, the space council.
Speaker 1: --eighty-eight [sic. 1989], served to '92 [sic. 1993].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So it was the tail end of, of that administration--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of George Bush, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and would be the beginning of the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  But I came--I met with them for dinner that night here in Washington [D.C.].  Sergei spoke fluent English.  Vladimir didn't speak a word of English, and so Sergei was sort of our interpreter for the evening.  Sergei was a civilian engineer who had become a flight controller and then later an, a cosmonaut.  Vladimir was a, or, or Sasha [ph.], as we call him, was a, a Russian colonel in the Russian Air Force, MiG-21 pilot [Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21], who had in fact trained to kill me.  But he spoke no English.  And, and the two of us--the three of us sat that night over dinner, and we talked mostly about families.  We all had kids.  Sergei had a, a young four year old daughter by the name of Olga [Olga Krikalev].  Vladimir had a son who was eight, by the name of Yuri [Yuri Titov], and a daughter, Marina [Marina Titov], who was seventeen going on eighteen and was already in Houston, Texas, enrolled in junior college.  And so at the end of that night where we talked about our visions of the future where people worked peacefully and, and we made a life where our kids could grow up together, I came back in the next morning and I said okay, I'm sold; I'll do it. And went back to Houston and we began to, to go through the process of moving, relocating Sergei and his family and Vladimir and his family from Moscow [Russia] to Houston, Texas, managed to get them into normal housing in the area.  They both were in a, in a regular house in two different parts of Houston.  So they, they went through the dramatic, radical change of living in Russian society very, you know, the way it was, to, to the democracy of America.  And, and, and we trained together until we, 'til we flew in space in 1994, in April of 1994.  But I, I gained a great deal of respect for the two of them.  We fell in love with their families.  And our families became very close, and we remain friends to this day.  Today, Vladimir has retired.  He, when he retired from the cosmonaut corps he became the vice president of Boeing Moscow [sic. Boeing Russia, Moscow, Russia] for a number of years.  Sergei has stayed with the space program.  And today, he is the director of the human space flight program for Roscosmos [Roscosmos State Corporation for Space Activities], for the Russian space agency.  So he and I have worked together even years after we flew together in space.
Story_ID: 673719
Speaker 1: I guess the Russian space program plays a, a similar role that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] played here in terms of pushing technology--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --forward and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --interest in STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education and that, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They, they're very much parallel to the way that NASA operate.  They're much more controlled, because they are still an instrument of the Russian government.  And, and President Putin [Vladimir Putin] pays particularly close attention to what's going on in Roscosmos [Roscosmos State Corporation for Space Activities], sort of handpicked and talks to the head of the Russian space agency all the time.  My counterpart was Igor Komarov, who was an industrialist, an automobile person when he was selected to head Roscosmos, a superb individual, another fluent English speaker.  And he and I continued to get along incredibly well for my last almost two years as the NASA administrator.  And I tell people he tried to keep the, the lid on the bottle over in Moscow [Russia], and I tried to keep the lid on the bottle here in, in Washington, D.C., because of the, the incredibly effective work between NASA and the Russian Space Agency when, when our two governments really struggled to get along.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I imagine it's a different, but a similar dy- dynamic--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of needing funding and how to get if from a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --government--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --even though it's a different dynamic there than it is here--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--yeah.  So did--in talking to them, did you discover that--did they have to struggle harder to get funded or, or--
Speaker 2: No, they did not.  You know, back then, funding for the space program, since it came pretty much from the, the Russian president, they got enough funding to do whatever the president wanted to do.  And that's still the case today, although their funding is starting to get tight because they're a number of other things that are, that are a little bit higher on the priority list for President Putin than, than the space program.  However, one of the things that, that we believe he is dedicated to is the International Space Station.  He considers it his crown jewel.  The president of the United States usually considers the, the International Space Station to be our crown jewel.  So, so we both lay claim to it, when in fact it's a, it's the result of a partnership of five different space entities around the world.
Story_ID: 673720
Speaker 1: So this mission [STS-60] was--what were some of the scientific discoveries--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was dominantly, believe it not, it was dominantly a medical research mission.  You know, we, we had a module in the payload bay that was called the space habitation module.  So it was--we went through a tunnel to get to the space hab module in the back end of the space shuttle's cargo bay.  We had been flying until that time what we call space laboratory missions, and they were a full module that sat almost entirely in the payload bay.  But we had essentially like a half module.  And in there we did some materials processing experiments, but we did a lot of medical science, looking at, at cardiovascular conditioning in, in space, looking at--we, most of the Ameri- in fact, all of the Americans were subject to a lot of sample taking, blood, urine, saliva, and everything, trying to see how the body changed over the course of the six days or so that we were in space, and, and taking data and then preserving it in the form of whether it was blood samples or urine samples that went into a cooler or saliva samples that were put into a--you put a kind of a cotton swab in your mouth and then collected the samples.  And they went into the cooler to preserve them until we could get them back to Earth and the scientist could in- could examine them for changes in your DNA, if any. Changes in, in the chemical makeup of the human body.  So it was mostly a biomedical experiment, a set of biomedical experiments.  The, the, the critical thing was we had a team of Russian medical doctors and scientists who were looking at the same kinds of things.  We had--there had been a set of protocols developed in coordination of the two teams.  So we had Russian doctors and scientists who also moved from Moscow [Russia] to Houston [Texas] for the two years that we were training and then flying and worked side by side.  That had never been done before, where we were exchanging data; we were making decisions in concert with each other as to which experiments would be flown; how we would treat the data and the like.  So it was, it was really a team as opposed to two different entities, Russian and American, looking at the same data and making different interpretations.  So it, it demonstrated that we could in fact not only as crew members, because Sergei [Sergei Krikalev] flew as a full fledge mission specialist on the flight.  He was not a payload specialist.  He was not a guest.  He was trained for critical operations on shuttle, helped to operate the Remote Manipulator System [Space Station Remote Manipulator System], the mechanical arm, was pretty expert on shuttle over the course of his training.  And then we had the--his backup was Vladimir Titov, who flew a year later on a mission [STS-63] that was very similar to what we flew in 1994.
Story_ID: 673721
Speaker 1: Was there anything in particular that was, that you learned about space flight from the Russian cosmonauts?
Speaker 2: Oh, how to do it.  You know, I had flown--this was my fourth flight in space.  But my longest flight prior to this had been the previous flight, STS-45, that was nine days.  Sergei [Sergei Krikalev] had lived and worked in space for almost two years.  Sergei had been on board Mir for four months at a time when we flew, so he was, he was the veteran.  And you watched him--I mean, even in training, you know, he, he knew instinctively things that we were gonna see over a longer period of time than we had any way of knowing because shuttle, up until that time, a long flight for the space shuttle was sixteen days.  That was really long.  A short flight for Sergei and the Russians was mat- was a matter of months aboard the, the, the Russian Space Station Mir.  So it was invaluable for us as crew members to be able to observe Sergei do very simple things.  How does he stabilize himself when he gets out of the seat?  I mean, and the guy was just, he just instinctively went into this stabilized position.  He moved effortlessly through the cabin.  You were gonna move effortlessly anyway because gravity is overcome.  You're going around Earth so fast that you appear to be floating.  What's actually happening is you're trying to fall back to Earth all the time, and, and centrifugal force won't let you, so you, you tend to float around the cabin.  Watching Sergei was absolutely incredible.  Sergei came with a Russian mindset.  If there's something wrong, fix it.  Don't spend a lot of time--don't waste a lot of time talking to the, the people in mission control on the ground because they probably can't help you.  His system, they were in touch with the ground a couple of times a day.  We had a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite system, so we were in touch with them around twenty-four hours a day.  We had little, short ten minute periods over the course of an orbit when we may not be in cul- control of the ground.  So in the U.S. system, most of the operations on board was very closely guarded and, and managed by the flight control team on the ground.  It drove Sergei crazy, because we had a--in fact, we discovered that we had a--when we first went in through the tunnel to open up the space head module in the back, there was a big, long air hose that provided breathing air from the cabin, from the pressurized part of the shuttle, back along the payload bay into the space habitation module.  When Sergei and, and Franklin Chang Diaz went out through the tunnel to open the hatch, when they got to the, to the hatch of the module, they looked down, and they noticed that, that air hose was crimped (gestures).  It was kind of squeezed down.  Somebody had stepped on it accidently in the processing of the vehicle.  So, they said you know, that's gonna put--it's gonna restrict air going into the module, and we need to fix that.  So we called down to the ground, and, and we said, "We've got a crimpled air hose leading into the module.  We'd like to make a repair on it."  And the ground said, "Standby," and, and we waited.  And Sergei said, "Why don't we just fix it?"  I said, "We can't because we have to get approval from the ground."  Days passed, not hours; days passed with no comment from the ground.  In I don't--it wasn't the last day, but it was about halfway through the flight Sergei and Franklin took our Super 8 video camera, and they were giving a tour of the shuttle and the tunnel going out to the space head model.  And then they were gonna go out, Sergei speaking in Russian, Franklin in Spanish because he was from Costa Rica.  And so they were giving this tour of, of the vehicle.  And as they got ready to go into the module, they took the camera and they looked down, and they showed the ground, this hose that was crimped.  And Houston--mission control [Mission Control Center, Houston, Texas] went, "Holy geez.  Why didn't you all tell us that?"  We said, "We did, like on day one."  And they, so they, in a, in within an hour or so they sent up a, a fix.  We looked at the fix, and, and we said you know, that'll never work.  That's gonna cut off all oxygen supply or air supply to the, to the module.  Sergei looked at me, and I said, "I know, Sergei."  I said, "I, I got it."  We went through a ten minute period of time where we lost communications with the ground.  I said let's fix it.  And so we went into the crew module, got the cover, a clear plastic cover from our Atlas, which was pretty big, rolled it up, you know, like kids roll up a thing and (gestures), you can blow through it and do stuff.  So we made it into a tube.  We went out, disconnected the air hose into the module, stuck the, the cover inside, and let it expand, so it stretched the tube out, reconnected it to the, to the space habitation module, and everything was fine.  And so when, when we got communications with the ground, we, we took the camera; we showed it to them.  We said, "Hey, we, we made a, a my- a minor fix, and we think everything's okay."  The ground said, "Okay, roger, you're, you're okay."  So I--you know, it--Sergei was, he was patient with us, and he allowed us to operate the way that Americans operate, and, but in the end we did it the way that he would have done it had he been on Mir.  So I, I learned an, an incredible amount from him.
Story_ID: 673722
Speaker 1: Well, you know the big contradiction here is that, you know, we typically think of the Russians as being, you know, as too much government control of everything and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Quite the contrary.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: On, on their, on their spacecraft, because they--and it was not a matter--it wasn't--it was a matter of necessity.  They didn't have, the ground didn't have access to the crew the way that American ground did.  They had access to us twenty-four hours a day.  It was a couple of times on orbit, sixteen orbits a day, so that meant max, maybe--you know, if, if they had contact every time, which they didn't, because there are generally three orbits a day where you go over the same area.  So that meant there were maybe six times a day that mission control in Moscow [Russia] could talk to the crew.  Other than that, the crew was on their own to do things.  The way we operate on the International Space Station today is very--is much more like the Russian system.  The crew is pretty much autonomous to do, to run the schedule the way that they see fit.  So they get a, they get guidance each morning, and then they are left to carry out the plan of the day, if you will.  So we've, we've adopted much more of the Russian system today on the International Space Station than the shuttle way of operating, where every fifteen minutes was closely control, and you had to follow the flight line--the flight plan and operate exactly the way that the ground told you.
Speaker 1: It makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, if you have, like, talented engineers--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --they, you know, engineers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --usually have--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The other thing we've done today with the space station is because you have constant communications if you need it, we have opened up the, the family of people who can talk to the crew.  It used to be only one person talk to a crew--talk to the crew, and it was the, the CAPCOM, the Capsule Communicator, a holdover from the, from the Mercury [Project Mercury], Gemini [Project Gemini] and Apollo [Project Apollo] days, where only an astronaut talked to the astronauts on board.  Today, we've got control centers around the world.  So if we're doing a German experiment, and there's the payload special- or the, the ex- the, the scientist whose experiment it is on the ground in the German control center [German Space Operations Center, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany] and wants to kind of walk the crew through it, because in six months you haven't had a chance to train on every experiments being done.  Some come up over the course of your six months, and you've never seen them before.  So you know basically how to do things.  So a crew today can get on a headset and talk to an, you know, an investigator on the ground, and that investigator kind of walks them through the experiment.  And that's, that's unlike anything we ever did before.  So we've actually opened up the ability of everybody to cooperate, made it more like a laboratory down here on Earth.
Story_ID: 673723
Speaker 1: Now, when you return from the mission, you--I, I know you went to Belgium, right?
Speaker 2: We went to, we had gone to Belgium before this flight--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because we had flown with Vlad- with--
Speaker 1: Is that Dirk?
Speaker 2: --Dirk Frimout.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So we went as the guest of the Belgian government.  We, we were the guest of the king [Albert II] and queen [Paola Ruffo di Calabria].  And so we had an opportunity to brief the, the, the--well, I'm not sure what the government is called, what the legislative branch is called in Belgium, but we met with their legislators and the, the, their cabinet that the king, although the, there was a prime minister who ran the country, the king in Belgium had quite a bit of influence on what happens.  So, so we were invited to address the king and the cabinet and, and show them our film and talk about the mission.  And we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, before the mission.
Speaker 2: This is, this was after we came back on STS--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --45 [STS-45], but before we flew STS-60.  And so we were able to provide at least some influence on the budget that was to be provided by the, by the, the, the, the Belgian government in Brussels [Belgium] by doing that visit.
Speaker 1: Were, were you ever invited to Russia to--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We went over to Russia about a month or so after the flight and visited the duma and met with Russian leaders; did not meet with the, with--at that time, (makes sounds) I forget.  You know, I think Yeltsin [Boris Yeltsin] was probably gone, but, but we had met--I had actually toured the vice premier, Chernomyrdin [Viktor Chernomyrdin], when he came to Houston [Texas] to visit with Sergei [Sergei Krikalev] and Vladimir [Vladimir Titov], and we had taken him in to the simulator.  But, but we met with, with members of the Russian government, not with the president or the prime minister at that time.
Story_ID: 673724
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997] you return to the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: I actually left the space program in the summer of '94 [1994], so I flew in the spring.  We left the day after my--we left Houston [Texas] the week after my daughter, who is the baby of the two of my kids [Anthony Bolden and Kelly Bolden], she graduated from high school, and, and, and we left Houston and went back to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy] in Annapolis, Maryland, where I served for one year as the deputy commandant of midshipman, so like being the vice dean of students at the Naval Academy.  We spent a year there.  I was selected for promotion of brigadier general at the end of that year and was promoted out of a job and got sent to the West Coast.  So, in the summer of 1995, I reported into the, the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing as the assistant wing commander, and that's where we stayed until I retired from the Marine Corps in 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: We didn't stay in California, but I mean, that was the be- that was the beginning of my full return to the operating forces of the Marine Corps, because I had stayed on active duty for my entire fourteen years in the Astronaut Office.  And I got promoted along with my contemporaries.  So I, I went there as a major in the summer of 1980, and I came out as a colonel in the summer of 1994 and, or actually the--yeah, the summer of 1994 and then worked with--kind of got the class of '95 [1995] through their graduation year and the class of '98 [1998] through their plebe year, and then we left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how--I, I know that it's a change of pace from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], but how was it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --different.  Was, was it difficult to go back to--
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was only--and in fact, it was only a change of pace in that all of the international work that I had been doing in NASA in my latter years, kind of, I had to step back because for the first year I was just focused on the life of midshipman at the Naval Academy.  So I had to get, get used to be in an academic environment, because the naval academy is a college.  Granted, it's a military college, but it's still--half the faculty there by design is civilian.  They have a faculty senate that runs things on the academic side.  My responsibility to the superintendent, who is the president, was to help the commandant with the care and feeding of the midshipman, to make sure that their conduct was good, to make sure that all of their military courses, their military science training was appropriate and was carried out correctly.  And then we left the academic to the academic dean and the, and the faculty senate.  So that was, it was a very good return for me to life in the Marine Corps because it was a physical year.  I'd, you know, I started going out, we brought in the plebe class of 1998, and I worked through their plebe summer with them.  I was out with them every morning at six o'clock doing PT, as we call it, physical training.  I, I think when I left the Naval Academy in the spring of--the beginning of the summer of 1995, I was probably in better shape than I had been in my life.  I was really slim and trim.  I looked good, felt good, and I was, I was a hard nose--I was ready to be a Marine again and went out to, to el- actually started out in El Toro [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro] in Orange County, California.  But we were in the process of closing that down.  So my wife [Alexis Walker Bolden] and I actually moved down as the senior marine at the Naval Air Station Miramar [Marine Corps Air Station Miramar], down in San Diego [California], and began preparations for the Marine Corps to take over that base from the [U.S.] Navy, so.
Story_ID: 673725
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], you become the deputy commanding general in the Pacific--now, when were you promoted to general?
Speaker 2: I was actually promoted, physically put on the rank, I was promoted, or I was selected in, in the spring of 1995 while still at the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  So that was what, that was what necessitated my transfer away from the Naval Academy because the, the deputy commandant of midshipman was a colonel's billet.  And, and the commandant was also a captain in the [U.S.] Navy or a colonel in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, so I couldn't outrank my boss, so I had to go.  And, and I went out and became the assistant wing commander at the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing.  My boss at that time was, was a two star general in the Marine Corps.  And, and the rank that I eventually attained a year later, I, I got pro- I physically got promoted to brigadier general.  So I served the first year as the assistant wing commander as a, what, what the [U.S.] Army calls promotable.  I was a colonel brigadier general promotable.  I was a selected brigadier general, but I still wore the rank of a colonel for my first year as the assistant wing commander at, at, down at Miramar [Naval Air Station Miramar; Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, San Diego, California].  And then I got selected to go up to become the deputy commanding general of the I Marine Expeditionary Force at Camp Pendleton [California].  That's the large operating entity of the Marine Corps.  The Marine Corps has three MEFs, Marine expeditionary forces, three MEFs around the world.  Sec- first MEF, I MEF is at Camp Pendleton, California, and covers all of the Pacific and Southeast Asia and most of the world; II MEF is headquartered at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune], North Carolina, back then covered mostly Europe and the Atlantic and South America; and then III MEF is a smaller Marine expeditionary force headquartered in Okla- Okahom- Oak--(makes sound) in Okinawa, Japan, and covered pretty much the Far East, but it was sourced with Marines from the other two stateside MEFs.  So I became the deputy commanding general of the I Marine Expeditionary Force, what was affectionately called the war fighting MEF of the Marine Corps.  And, and in that job, my work in the Astronaut Office [at National Aeronautics and Space Administration] proved to be incredibly beneficial because now most of my work became international in nature again, because we worked with our international partners in the militaries in the Middle East, militaries in Asia, and, and elsewhere in the world.  And, and so as the deputy commander, I spent most of that year living in Kuwait as the commander of I MEF forward and the commander of U.S. Marine Forces, Pacific forward and living in Kuwait City [Kuwait].
Speaker 1: So this was in '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: This was in '97 [1997]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --through 1998.  And in 1998, I got orders to go to--I was promoted to a full stu- two star, and I got orders to report to the U.S.--what we, what we call U.S. Forces Japan, headquartered outside of Tokyo [Japan] at Yokota Air Base.  And I became the deputy commander of all American forces in Japan, working for an [U.S.] Air Force three star general.  So that was a joint tour, where our staff had representatives from all four services, plus the [U.S.] Coast Guard.  And my primary duties there were to work with my counterpart in the Japanese military and the Japanese ministry of foreign affairs [Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan], so I, I became a diplomat.  My, my primary job was to co-chair the Japan-U.S. Joint Committee, which had responsibility for oversight of the Mutual Security Treaty from World War II [WWII], from the end of World War II.  So that, that was what governed the relationship between Japan and the U.S. does to this day.  I had oversight on what's called Host Nation Support, the largest amount of money given by any other nation in the world to the U.S.  The U.S. government didn't pay for anything to support U.S. forces in Japan.  The Japanese government, through Host Nation, support several billion dollars a year.  They built our bases.  They provided the, the security, the external security, for the base.  They did everything in terms of financial support for U.S. forces there, something that, that is very much misunderstood by most people in politics who have never had an opportunity to work in, in, in the [U.S.] military, you know, in the, in the political military structure of our country, so.  People who claim that other nations need to pay their fair share; Korea, Germany, Japan paid a significant amount to have U.S. forces housed there, and Japan still does to this day.
Story_ID: 673726
Speaker 1: I want to backtrack a little bit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ask, ask you what Operation Desert Thunder is--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Desert--
Speaker 1: I think, that, that's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Thunder is something that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It sounds like I ought to know, but I don't--
Speaker 2: No, you should not know.  And I, I, I find it--I always tell people, you know, when you, when you introduce me, please don't go, don't go back into history and stuff 'cause kids today don't have a clue, first of all, and, and their eyes roll back in their head.  But Desert Thunder, everybody remembers the war in--the first war in Iraq under, under [President] George Herbert Walker Bush.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was called Desert Storm [Gulf War], and that was--
Speaker 1: That's like '91 [1991]--
Speaker 2: That was '91 [1991], days, it lasted days.  And that was Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] as the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.  After we drove Saddam Hussein and his forces back into Iraq and, and decimated the Iraqi forces, there was a period of quiet, relative quiet, but, but Saddam Hussein began to, what we call, sabre rattle again.  And he began to threaten Kuwait and the, and the other nations in the region.  And so the decision was made that we would put a contingent of American forces in the region.  We had [U.S.] Army and [U.S.] Marine Corps units on the ground living in Kuwait.  And I, I commanded the Marine Corps unit that was headquartered out of Doha [Qatar], was an Army base in--outside of Kuwait City [Kuwait] for a year.  And, but that was called Operation Desert Thunder.  And, and I'm not sure who came up with the name, but it was supposed to be, you know, to, to show that the U.S. was there with they show a force that we could be like a--you know, this was after the storm; this was thunder.  And we could respond in any, any time with a force equally as devastating as it had been during Desert Thunder.  And, and Operation Desert--during Desert Storm--Operation Desert Thunder lasted a number years until we actually went into, into Iraq in 2001.  So, I stayed there as a commander of Marine forces under the ground component commander com- that was an Army three star, Tommy Franks at the time, who commanded the Army units.  I had the Marine Corps units.  There was the maritime component commander, commanded by a, a [U.S.] Navy three star, at the time I think it was Tom Fargo [Thomas B. Fargo], who was headquartered in Manama, Bahrain.  And that's where the Fifth Fleet was.  And then the air component commander was headquartered actually out of Shaw Air Force Base in South Carolina, but in country was headquartered I think down in, in Qatar or Oman or somewhere.  And so that was the air component.  We had three components, air component commander, ground component commander, maritime component commander.  And I worked for the ground component commander as his, one of his deputies, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, his sabre rattling, now did--so, so he was an irritant to the--
Speaker 2: He was just an irritant, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that basically--I, I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I know I've--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thought of him that way after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, when Operation Iraqi Freedom--
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: --was, was launched.  He seemed like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there was an overreaction to an irritating--
Speaker 2: But I don't want to--
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --downplay it.  He was a, he was an irritant, but he was also a very real threat at the time, because you know, he had fought against the Iranians and had used chemical weapons and the like and--
Speaker 1: Against the Kurds, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Against the Kurds and everything.  And so there was reason to believe that--everybody knew he was a maniac.  But would he go back and attack allies of the U.S. again?  Nobody thought he would, but nobody could be certain, and so you had to be prepared.  And it was, as a result of this sabre rattling, that we came into the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration and, and people were able to convince themselves that he, he represented a clear and present danger with nuclear weapons and the like.  And, and that eventually was proven not to be true, but at the time the administration, that, that was what they wanted to believe, and so that was what they got the nation to believe, and we ended up going to war in Iraq [Iraq War].
Story_ID: 673727
Speaker 1: In 2000, you served as commanding general in the 3rd Marine Air Wing in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Miramar [Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, California].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And 2002 you retired as a major general.
Speaker 2: I retired actually January of 2003.  And so I was the commanding general of the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing.  At the time it was the lar- and I think today it remains.  It's the largest Marine--the largest air wing in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  And again, the Marine Corps is divided into three components.  We have an air component, a ground component, and a logistics component.  And so I had the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing.  That was the air component for the I Marine Expeditionary Force, the war fighting force of the MEFs.  So when we went into Iraq--when we went into Afghanistan at first in the summer of 2001--no, it wasn't 2001.  It was summer of 2002.  We were actually--the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing supported the 1st Marine Division.  And we sent under present secretary of defense, Jim Mattis [James Mattis], we sent Task Force 58 into Afghanistan to battle the Taliban, took significant area, ground, in, in, in Afghanistan and set up housekeeping there and then moved from there to eventually in the spring of 2002 to, we moved into--yeah, I think it was spring of 2002--spring of 2003 we moved into Iraq, and that became the Iraq War.  So I had retired.  We had gone into Afghanistan, but we had not gone into, into Iraq when I retired in January of 2003.
Story_ID: 673728
Speaker 1: It's an area in America military history that kind of baffles me as to why we'd want to go into Iraq when we're--the--we're clearly on the trail of the person that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --blew down the twin towers [World Trade Center] of New York [New York] in, in Afghanistan.
Speaker 2: There was a lingering desire on the part of what we, we refer to as neocons, you know, to, to depose Saddam Hussein.  He, he--you use the term irritant, but he was, he was someone that was sort of a holdover from Desert Storm [Gulf War].  Everybody tried to convince President George Herbert Walker Bush that we should march to Baghdad [Iraq].  And we should decapitate the Iraqi government by taking out Saddam Hussein.  And President Bush decided no, that's, that's not what we came here for.  You know, we're gonna, we're gonna just step back and see if he'll calm down and, and be less of a tyrant.  Well, he wasn't much less of a tyrant, but he, but he was an irritant to us more than anything else.
Speaker 1: He was also, as I think time has showed, that he was--he held--he was like the, the glue that held together a, even though through terror--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a certain kind of order, even though--
Speaker 2: Well, we learn, we learn and then we forget.  History is interesting.  And I'm glad you all are doing The HistoryMakers because it, it at least gives people who are interested in history and understanding stuff--I tell people all the time, I tell young people all the time, I--when they ask what should you do to be an astronaut?  And I said gotta take a lot of math and science; take liberal arts; learn how to write, express yourself fluently; and then whatever you do, study history, because any, any group of people that is not wise or, or conversant on history is destined to repeat it.  We find ourselves today doing things that in the march in here on--for women [Women's March] in, in Washington [D.C.] a few weeks ago, some of the signs--I was out marching with my wife [Alexis Walker Bolden] and my daughter [Kelly Bolden], and some of the signs were absolutely incredible, with eighty, ninety year old women saying I can't believe I'm doing this stuff again, meaning we didn't learn anything.  So we're back to demonstrating against a lot of the things that we thought we had, we had done away with in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  But what we, what we forgot was a little bit of the history of Iraq and Afghanistan and how we--you know, who took down the twin towers and the like.  And we convinced ourselves that we had to go back and clean up in Iraq.  We had to depose Saddam Hussein because we just didn't do what we should have done in Desert Storm.  So I think that drove us to going back into Iraq more than, more than any other single thing.  That, that, the evidence is clear there, that he was an irritant and had--in, in, in, in the mind of some had to go.  Why he had to go was the question that we never--we don't agree on to this day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and as we sit here today it's a quagmire--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that it's hard to--
Speaker 2: Well, it's sort of like, you know, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], he, he came up with the, the China closet theory [sic. Pottery Barn rule], or I think that's what he called it, you break it, you fix it.  And he said unless you're--the, the Powell Doctrine was you either go in with overwhelming force, the way that we did in Desert Storm, you go in with overwhelming force with a mission in mind, and you do it and get it over with, or you don't go.  And so that's why I think you found people like--although Colin Powell as secretary of state was a key figure in getting people convinced that we should do it, I don't think he ever believed that, that, you know, this is--we're not gonna do it right.  We--if we're gonna do it, we need to go in with overwhelming force and, and take care of it.  And we went in with overwhelming force.  Everybody, we called it--forget what the term was.  It was some cute term.
Speaker 1: Iraqi Freedom [Operation Iraqi Freedom]? That was one, (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not the name of the, not the name of the war, but it was--
Speaker 1: Oh, the strategy.
Speaker 2: The strategy was gonna be, you know, just go in there and wipe them out real quick.  We didn't wipe them out, and we didn't do it quickly, and we're still there now sixteen years later, because what we chose not to do, we forgot history again.  The Taliban was able to move into Afghanistan because once we finished before, we withdrew all of our forces, and we left a void, and the Taliban moved in.  So you know, what, what we tried to do to a certain extent was to, was to leave sufficient forces in Iraq.  It turns out we, we probably didn't, and so, void was created, and bad things come about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Al Qaeda grows and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 673729
Speaker 1: But you were talking about a tyrant holding something together.  You know, as bad as the tyrant is that he holds--he's the glue that holds something together, you can look at Yugoslavia.  You know, the former Yugoslavia was the same way.  You had--I forget who it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Tito--
Speaker 1: Tito.
Speaker 2: Marshal Tito [Josip Broz Tito].
Speaker 1: Tito was the glue that held that region together.  When, when he was deposed, it exploded, and it split into all the factions that we see today, war between the, the Muslims and Christians and the like.  So we need to be careful, and we need to look at history before we go in and decide that we're gonna reshape a part of the world that we have very little knowledge of in the first place.  Our, our knowledge of the Middle East, and, and our knowledge of particularly the people of Iraq in that region, was abysmal.  Our intelligence, we had, we had--essentially had just taken away all of our ability to have ground intelligence gathering, and, and so we paid the price, yeah.
Story_ID: 673730
Speaker 1: So now, you achieved the rank in 2003 of major general--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  And I, and I--needless to say you're the highest ranking African American ever to serve in the Marines--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not really.  I--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --at the time I was one of--when I retired I was one of--Leo Williams [Leo V. Williams, III], Arnie Fields [Arnold Fields], and, and there were three of us--oh, oh, and Cliff Stanley [HistoryMaker Major General Clifford Stanley], so there were, there were four of us who were two stars.  At the time that was the highest rank that any African American had attained in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, next to--that's, that's not accurate either.  The highest ranking African American had been Frank Petersen [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.], who became a three star.
Speaker 1: Right, we interviewed Frank Petersen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But then we were four all at once.  So it was, it was the first time in the history of the Marine Corps that we had had four African American generals, let alone four two stars.  And, and we each retired in rapid succession over about the same period of time.  And, and it took the Marine Corps awhile to regain its composure and get back to the point where we now have several three stars but still lacking a four star.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, right, yeah, Frank Petersen was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he still remains a--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --highest ranking, right?
Speaker 2: --he was the first African American general officer, first to command a Marine Corps fighter squadron, person of color, and a first three star in the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 673731
Speaker 1: So at the time of your retirement, well George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] is president.  As you said the U.S. forces were--there, there are Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] in Afghanistan, but they hadn't launched--
Speaker 2: Hadn't launched into, into Iraq just yet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That would follow I think in April.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were in the throes of the war planning--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --for it, and, and, and, and then we went in in April.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so when you returned you became the president of the American PureTex Water Corporation [Houston, Texas], what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was a, a, a dark, a dark period in my life and in, in civil, you know, in business.  It, it, it was a bad decision to go do that.  It was--I, I, I fell victim to something that I tell young people all the time; if money is what's driving you, standby.  You know, money was what was driving me at that time.  I--this, this had the pretense of making me a millionaire.  We were gonna--the company itself was gonna establish some water wells in, in West Texas, West and Central Texas, and provide water to the City of Houston [Texas] and many of the cities in, in East Texas that, that really were, were suffering from shortages of water.  Great idea, great concept.  The guy who owned the company was a, was probably a shyster and a con man.  I, I forget how long I spent as the president of the company and never got paid, never got a dime for it, and, and nothing ever happened.  I think he ended up in jail.  I'm not really sure.  But, but after a while I got--my wife got smart and said look, we need to get out of here, so I left that.  So that was my, my first foray into, into business, and it was a dismal failure.  I was one of those--I think somebody said one in five companies that start up fail.  I, I--that was my first experience in, in, in, in business was a dismal failure.  So after that I left and went to work for a friend of mine who owned a language services company called TechTrans [TechTrans International].  To this day we provide--TechTrans provides language services for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], mainly at the Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas].  They provide interpreters and translators as well as logistic support for, for NASA in Houston as well as in Moscow [Russia].  And today, as a result of the work that I did there, we were able to diversify our, our, our portfolio from just being government, or NASA mainly, to doing a lot of civil language services kind of stuff, English as a second language, working with DOD [U.S. Department of Defense], working with, with other people other than NASA.  And the company is a very successful language services company today.
Story_ID: 673732
Speaker 1: And then after two years, my wife and I decided what the heck, let's just start a business on our own.  So we, we began a two person small consulting business.  So it was called Jack and Panther LLC [Houston, Texas], limited liability company.  And--
Speaker 2: Jack and, and what?
Speaker 1: Jack and Panther.  Her name--her nickname is Jackie [Alexis Walker Bolden].  My call sign in the [U.S.] Marine Corps was Panther.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we put the two together, and we became Jack and Panther, LLC.  And I worked; she ran it.  She said she didn't.  She says I never listened to her.  But, but we were somewhat successful.  You know, I had a, had a--I, I worked--I had a, a speaker's bureau that actually scheduled speaking engagements for me, motivational speaking and leadership talks and, but we focused in on aerospace, military affairs, and, and leadership.  And, and so I, I had contracts with companies like Boeing [The Boeing Company] or with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], headed up different independent study groups and the like for the National Research Council or participated on them.
Story_ID: 673733
Speaker 1: And that's what we did for the last two years before President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] tapped me to--as his nominee to be the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] administrator.  And I, I, I came up and went through congressional or senatorial hearing and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now were you surprised by--
Speaker 1: --was confirmed.
Speaker 2: --by that?
Speaker 1: Shocked.  I did not know President Obama.  I had not participated in the campaign at all.  I was, I was as I am today, very--well, I'm a little bit more active today than I was then.  But I was a nonpartisan.  You know, I was a watcher, not an activist.  And so having no connection with the Obama team at all, I was shocked to find that the president had decided to nominate me to--but I had a, I think I had a champion in Senator Bill Nelson, who had been my crew mate, you know, on, on my first flight, STS-61-C.  And I, I think Senator Nelson, who was a friend of President Obama's, I think he pushed my name.  And, and when nobody else met whatever criteria they had established, then I met with President Obama, had a discussion with him.  We did not talk about being NASA administrator, and I, so I left the meeting just mesmerized by having met him and incredibly impressed, went back home and told my wife [Alexis Walker Bolden], "Hey, that was great, you know, no big deal."  And several months later I got a call saying, "Hey, can you come back to Washington [D.C.]?  The president has decided he wants to nominate you to be the NASA administrator."  So I, I came back in the summer of 2009 and had my hearing.  I had--I tell people I had what was the last civil hearing for the Obama administration.  My [U.S.] Senate hearing, along with my deputy, then Lori Garver, we, we had our hearing on the morning of July 16th.  We were voted out of committee that afternoon.  We were voted by voice vote unanimously on the floor of the Senate that night.  And we were both sworn in and sitting at our desks on Friday the 17th.  So it took, it took exactly twenty-four hours for me to go through my hearing, my, my vote out of committee, my vote in the Senate, and my, and my confirmation and swearing in.  That was the last civil vote that, that President Obama got for any appointee.  The, the war broke out, and the Republican Party decided that he would not be successful no matter what.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they actually announced it.
Speaker 1: Oh, they, I mean they announced it.  You know, they announced it inauguration day that, that they would, they would make sure that he was a one term president, so.  I learned a lot about, a, again, about our political system and, and governance.
Story_ID: 673734
Speaker 1: Well it must feel good to know that, it, I mean politicians felt compelled to support you regardless, you know.
Speaker 2: Space has always enjoyed bipartisan support.  NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] has always enjoyed bipartisan support.  And it, and it was that fact that I, of which I was very well aware that caused me to, for a while, not be accepted by the O- by member--by some members in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] team because I was not political.  I, I, I always said I was the nonpolitical political in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], in the Obama team, because I believe that my job as the NASA administrator was to try to bring the two ends of Pennsylvania Avenue together.  I made that statement when I came in, and, and I lived that until I left.  Conditions got worse over the years, but I think NASA, when I left, still enjoyed bipartisan support pretty much.  You know, congressmen and women have their own little particular things that they--they want to get his amount of money into their district or this amount of money into a project.  But for the most part, they support NASA initiatives.  The, the difficulty for them then during my tenure was the president made some pretty bold announcements of things that were gonna be goals for NASA, putting a human on Mars in the 2030s, doing--taking--going to an asteroid and, and taking a part of it and moving it from its native orbit to orbit around the, the moon, advancing aeronautics such that we would--the nation would start to build X-planes, experimental airplanes again, advancing science in a way that was just revolutionary.  We flew five earth science missions in one year, in 2014.  That was unprecedented.  So, while NASA enjoyed the bipartisan support of the [U.S.] Congress, because these were Obama administration programs, they went through there--we went through our battles with them.  But, but still, I think Congress could not resist the temptation to support NASA and lay claim to it.  But, but it wasn't as easy as it should have been, had they stuck to bipartisan support and not, not tried to obstruct the actions of the president so, so vigorously.
Story_ID: 673735
Speaker 1: There's been a rhetoric over the, well, over the, the course of the bom- the Obama administration questioning climate change--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --scientific opinion.
Speaker 2: Ludicrous.
Speaker 1: And it's, it's, it's seems to have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --taken on a partisan tone, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It, it, it's purely pos- I mean, I think there are some on the other side of the aisle who may honestly believe that, that human beings don't have anything to do with the changing climate.  Those numbers are very small.  For the most part, there are very smart people on the other side of the aisle.  And again, it was we are not gonna allow President Bama- Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] to, to be able to claim success for anything.  And, and when you decide that that's the position you're gonna take, I think, you know, the highlight was, was not even talking to his [U.S.] Supreme Court nominee.  That was probably the--it, it came at the appropriate time, the end of his eight year term, but it was the height of the Republican tactic for the entire eight years that--almost eight years that I was here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  You know, and it was, it was frustrating at times and disappointing to know that, that people would put the nation in jeopardy for political gain, rather than do what they were sent to Washington to do.
Speaker 1: Were, were there any I guess science deniers questioning the work of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] during this period of time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No one ever questioned--
Speaker 1: --that, that didn't get any--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: People questioned the, the, the, the fact that we were doing work to support climate studies.  And, and so the tact that they took with us was that okay, NASA is building most of the Earth observing satellites.  NASA is providing most of the data for climate change studies, and so we should get NASA--that's not NASA's work.  Let's get NASA out of that.  Let's stop them from doing the gather--the data gathering, and maybe this thing will go away.  And yet they couldn't, and we didn't.  And so today we have provided NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] and, and the DOD [U.S. Department of Defense] with probably one of the best suites of Earth observing satellites that any nation has, still far short of what we need in terms of weather satellites but, but still pretty good.  We just launched a satellite called DSCOVR [Deep Space Climate Observatory] at the end of my term, built it, and, and launched it for NASA--for NOAA.  It provides incredible 3D imagery of, of our weather phenomenon, color, things that were just unheard of several years ago.  And NASA engineers and scientists developed sensors that would give us this incredible capability that the nation now has.
Story_ID: 673736
Speaker 1: Tell me now, what were some of your, your, your major goals and objectives when you, when you took office.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And have you been able to, to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I, I think, you know, we--each year I would sit down with my, mainly with my chief of staff, but, but with the leadership team and the agency, and we would, we would lay out several things that we wanted to do each year.  And, and most years we were able to accomplish those.  If you talk about big goals, one, the biggest thing was we wanted to create a work, a workplace, a work environment that promoted diversity and inclusion where everyone felt that they had a role to play in the decision making process.  And I think the evidence of that is the fact that over the last five years we have been selected as the, the number one place to work in the federal government of a, for a large agency for five consecutive years.  That's not a, that's not a small feat, but that's thanks to the incredible leadership mainly in the mid-level leadership range, crew--branch chiefs, division chiefs who, who really took to heart, the--what we said we wanted to do in terms of increasing the diversity in our workforce, but more importantly, en- ensuring that we had inclusion, an inclusive workforce where people sitting around the table felt that, that their word was something that would be heard and considered.  We may not go along with what they recommended, but at least everybody would feel that they had had an opportunity to express their opinions.  The other thing that we really worked on was trying to improve the, the status of STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] education in the country.  We sought to support the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  I think he wanted to produce a million engineers over the course of his term.  We didn't come close to that, but he had some pretty ambitious numbers for getting people into the fields of science and engineering.  And, and we, we kind of turned the, you know, we, we, we turned the curve up.  So we're doing better, but, but none of us are happy with, with our achievements in the area of STEM education.  But we were pretty good in, in doing that.  And then when you look at the four areas, the four operational areas for which NASA is responsible, human exploration, we now have, we safely phased out the shuttle.  And we're on the verge of having two American companies that, that will be able to launch American and partner astronauts from earth from the Kennedy Space Center [John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida] region area, the space coast of the United States, into space, and we won't be relying on the Russians to do that.  We already have flown Orion [Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle], a crew module, that's gonna take humans to deep space, to the moon, and then on to Mars.  So we've successfully flew that in December of 2014.  We have a, a heavy lift launch vehicle that is nearing completion of its development.  And we'll fly the first test flight on the combination of SLS [Space Launch System] and Orion in November of 2018 and then fly the first crude mission in 2021.  We're doing work in the area of earth science and planetary science and astrophysics that dwarfs the type of work that we did before.  We've got the James Webb Space Telescope that will launch in two years--less than two years, that as I said before will dwarf our discoveries from the Hubble Space Telescope.  We've got something called WFIRST [Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope], great astronomical or astrophysics experiment that will be flying after that.  In the area of aeronautics, we continue to support the area that provides the largest balance of trade item for the United States; that is aeronautics, aviation, and aviation components.  We work with American companies like Boeing [The Boeing Company], like Harris Corporation, like Lockheed Martin [Lockheed Martin Corporation], in the development of new aviation systems and new types of aircraft.  We have five X-planes that are on the drawing board.  One is already under construction, one that's called Maxwell, the X-57 [NASA X-57 Maxwell], an all electric hybrid airplane.  We're looking at a supersonic transport that we call low-boom supersonic [Lockheed Martin X-59 QueSST].  So it'll, it'll be able to break the speed of sound, break the sound barrier, go faster than the speed of sound, and yet not leave the boom, the sonic boom footprint on the ground, because of the way we designed the airplane.  And then on and on and on.  And then in technology development, which is the, one of the smallest, but one of the more critical mission areas, we continue to develop new technologies that are gonna make it possible for us to send humans to Mars in the 2030s, and, and yet, and also work with our civilian counterparts in, in the, in the what we call the commercial space sector, that has now allowed NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to, where things that we used to do, we've handed off to industry, taking cargo to the International Space Station, launch and, and transportation of it, soon taking humans, launch and transportation of them to places that commercial entities will do so that the government's out of that kind of work.  So, those represent achievements of the Obama administration while I was there.  And, and they also represent something that, that causes us to be just baffled by, by Republican positions that fought commercial crew almost my entire time, when that is the height of free enterprise and competition and everything that (air quotes) supposedly the Republican Party stood for, but because it was an Obama idea, they fought so hard for most of his terms.
Story_ID: 673737
Speaker 1: All right, so, now that's, that's quite a bit.  And what--I have to say this, that, that back--Nichelle--back in the days when [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols was recruiting--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, she was iconic--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a representative of a hope--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that black people will be here in the future--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that we, we will be doing things--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that stretched the bounds of human imagination--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and capacity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know, and when we came into NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to interview you a few years ago--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I felt that same kind of surge of feeling, seeing you as a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I will caution, however--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I tell people all the time, being the first doesn't count if there's not a second and third and anything else.  So, so although I was the first African American administrator of NASA, it won't count until there is a second and third and, and the like.
Speaker 1: Well, we interviewed one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We still need a woman--
Speaker 1: --one of your deputies, right?  Who was it?  What's his name?  We--I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: Well, I had--you're probably talking about the former center director from Glenn [John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field, Cleveland, Ohio], Woodrow Whitlow [HistoryMaker Woodrow Whitlow, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Yes, Whitlow. Right, exactly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --who, who was at Glenn, and, and you probably know very well living up that way.  But we had, we had a diverse leadership team and still do, but it, but it wasn't good enough.  You know, we--women represent 50 percent of the U.S. population, and we have never come close to having 50 percent of our leadership represented among women.  African Americans represent about 13.1 percent of the population.  We've come nowhere close to having that percentage of leaders, senior leaders in the agency.  I'm very happy with where we have come during the time that I was there, but I'm not satisfied by any stretch of the imagination.  If, if you want to say--the one thing that, that leaves me feeling incredibly proud and joyous, is our achievement as the best place to work in the federal government where our employees feel like they're empowered.  And they feel like, you know, their leadership cares about them and, and, and wanted to put them first.  My philosophy has always been take care of your people, and they'll take care of you; and that's what I've tried to impart upon all of the, the senior leadership in the agency.
Story_ID: 673738
Speaker 1: Where would you like to see NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] go in the next ten years?
Speaker 2: Oh, in the next ten years I'd like to have us routinely carrying human beings to space on American spacecraft, not just SpaceX and Boeing [The Boeing Company], but having added another company, Sierra Nevada [Sierra Nevada Corporation], Blue Origin [Blue Origin, LLC], you know, Jeff Bezos' company, but having multiple companies that can carry humans to space. Having completed or being almost complete with all five of the X-planes, the experimental airplanes that we have on the, on the drawing board and are in planning today that are just waiting for funding from the [U.S.] Congress. Having developed, finally developed the, the cutting edge technologies that we need to assure a safe, safe travel for humans to Mars and protection when they get--while they're in transit and when they get there, whether they're living under the surface on living on it. But also having brought about the beginning of what I call game changing propulsion, going from standard chemical propulsion of today to ion thrust engines or nuclear powered engines that will cut in half the eight month time required to get to Mars today.  So we should be able, in the next ten years--we won't have the engines available, but we should be on the threshold of actually going operational with either plasma thrust or an ion thrust engine or a nuclear powered engine that gets us to Mars in about four months or less.  So you know, that, that's my hope.
Story_ID: 673739
Speaker 1: Are you encouraged by the state of STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education in, in our schools--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm encouraged but worried.  You know, I'm worried because in many ways it appears that public education is under assault from the current administration.  It is through public education that, that, you know, the, the future leaders of the world developed.  They don't come out of private and homeschooling.  That, that's not to cut them short at all, but the vast majority of Americans are educated in public schools.  And, and that's, that's vital to the future of our nation.  I'm worried about how we look at immigrants and how we look at, at the melting pot, the concept of the melting pot that is America.  So there's a, there's a lot with which I'm encouraged, coming out of the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration.  There's a lot about which I'm worried over these first--as we record this first fourteen, fifteen, sixteen days of, of the Trump [President Donald John Trump] administration that speaks to trying to undo everything that was accomplished in the eight years of the Obama administration.  If that's the purpose, if that's your goal, is to undo and, and erase the name Obama from American heritage and legacy, then have at it, but we will pay the price.
Speaker 1: Now just last week there was an attempt to muzzle the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I don't know if NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was mentioned.
Speaker 2: No.  NASA has--and, and hopefully this will not air or be available any time soon, because NASA has successfully stayed under the radar.  I'm not sure people know what we do.  I'm, I'm not sure people will understand the incredible accomplishments of an international relations that is NASA.  We--I tell people all the time I think--and I won't say we're better than or we do more than, but in, in, in companionship and cooperation with the [U.S.] Department of Defense and the [U.S.] Department of State, NASA is among the, the strongest soft power assets that this country has.  We have more than eight hundred active international agreements today with more than 120 nations around the world.  I traveled to forty-one different countries over my eight year tenure as the NASA administrator, many of them more than once.  I've visited countries from Niger, which is the second poorest country in the world.  I traveled to every continent except Antarctica over the course of my time as the NASA administrator, and I feel that we have gained far more friends than ever before around the planet.  We, we've exerted leadership when it was needed.  And people still look to NASA for leadership when it comes to space exploration and aeronautics and science, contrary to what you hear on the, you know, on the street sometimes.  I, I'm very proud of that, because it's sort of like climate change.  I, I know it's true.  I don't need other people to tell me that.  I know about NASA's accomplishments and, and how great we are, how we make the America the greatest nation on the face of the earth, and I don't need anybody to tell me that.  I've lived it.  So when people talk to the contrary, I know they're full of crap.  And, and it, it bothers me that, that they can convince other people to believe that.  But, but I, I leave my office feeling really good about the job that we've done to keep us the greatest nation on this planet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems then there's always--seems to have always been the rhetorical ploy where people will say that our cities are suffering and yet--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the white man is on the moon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean Gil Scott-Heron--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had a song about that ['Whitey on the Moon'].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But do--how, how do people around the world--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in some of the poor countries feel about the space program?
Speaker 2: They're very excited.  They're, they're energized.  Everybody wants to be like us, everybody.  And that speaks to whether you're talking about the Russians, the Chinese, the Iranians.  Everybody wants to work with us.  I, I think one of the things that disappoints me about my time as the NASA administrator is that although I got it started, we were not able to carry through on Presidents Obam- President Obama's desire that we, that we find a way to begin to work with the Chinese in, in pushing forward human exploration.  That will come in time because it has to, otherwise we will have decided that, that human exploration of, of, you know, away from the planet is not important, and we will have walked away from it.  But it won't be successful until we've partnered with the Chinese, the Russians, and other space faring nations.
Speaker 1: So, so the space program of, of--the epitome of science today draws in an international community.
Speaker 2: No question.  If you look at the International Space Station and what it has done and continues to do, we're looking at fundamental physics on the station through an instrument called the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.  They're twenty some odd nations, two include Iran, China, Russia, you name it, that are participants with principal investigators trying to understand fundamental physics, trying to, to, to prove the existence of an, of antimatter and, and you know, all that kind of stuff, and, and they're on the verge of doing that.  We understand more about the human body and not just in space, but our work with understanding how to keep astronauts safe in space has made life better for people here on the planet.  NASA's vision is to, to reach for new heights, to revie- and I kind of paraphrase it--to reach for new heights, to reveal the unknown, so that all we do and know benefits humankind.  And so we do that every single day.  And I, I would always tell my NASA employees anytime anybody ask you where you come from, stick your chest out.  Tell them you work for NASA, and you're making the world better.  So, that's what we do.
Story_ID: 673740
Speaker 1: Now have you experienced, or do you know of any other people who have launched into space, any--do you know, do you know of any physical either benefits--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or, or deterioration that happens, you know over time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we're--
Speaker 1: --because it's been thirty years since you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: ---we're learning much from the one year mission that we flew with Scott Kelly and Mikhail Kornienko.  You know, we've had people in space for a long duration flight for sixteen years now.  We've lived and worked on the International Space Station without interruption.  There's--a kid that's sixteen years old today has not breathed a single breath when human beings have not been living and working together on the International Space Station, not one second.  We are learning every day more and more about how the human body functions in that different environment.  And we're learning a lot about human--the, the, the, the, the, if you will, the, the progress or the understanding of human DNA.  We're learning all of that kind of stuff in space, but it's applicable to people here on earth.  We, we learn about--we're studying ways to defeat cancer.  We're looking at, at things to fight a lot of the diseases that have plagued human beings down here on, on the planet because it's, sometimes it's easier or quicker to work within space.  So yeah, there are a lot of benefits that have come from human space flight.  And we've also learned that there are some, some detrimental aspects of it too, but we'll have to figure out ways to work around them, the effect of radiation on the human body.  We're not, we're not concerned now that it'll kill an astronaut in route to Mars or while they're there or on their way back.  But our concern, the thing that we don't understand is what long term impact will it have on the quality of life of somebody who's been exposed to, to that type of radiation that, that maybe has not been exposed to it here on the planet.
Story_ID: 673741
Speaker 1: Your career has been anomalous to a lot of people, having come from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Columbia, South Carolina and, and become the head of NA--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], a black man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you look back at your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nope, not a thing.  I wouldn't touch anything that I've done, good or bad.  I'd, I like the way I am.  I love having three beautiful granddaughters in, in Mikaley [Mikaley Bolden], Kyra [Kyra Bolden], and Talia [Talia Bolden], you know, sixteen, fourteen and ten respectively.  I, I wouldn't do anything at all different if I could because of the risk of taking that away from my life.  I'm, I'm--good and bad, I've enjoyed it.  I've suffered through it, but it's all been for, to get me where I am today.
Story_ID: 673742
Speaker 1: What is the message--and I know you speak probably for an hour, I mean at least a half hour--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --to kids and, all around the country.  What's your core message to them?
Speaker 2: My message is very simple to them.  I give them three terms, and, and it's, it, I tell them you know, I'm not gonna tell you anything new in this time I'm gonna spend with you.  But listen to your mom and dad when they tell you to study really hard.  And then we talk in detail about what kinds of things they need to study.  I, I tell them to work very hard, focus on what they're doing when they're in the classroom just as hard as they do when they're on a basketball court or on an ice rink or whatever else.  The same amount of work and practice that they put into their sports and their music and their theater should go into their academics, that's that they become the best that they can be there.  And the final thing that I tell them, which is probably more important, most important, is don't be afraid of failure.  Don't, don't let the fear of failing keep you from doing something or trying something that you want to do.  And I tell them that failure goes so far as to being afraid that somebody's gonna ostracize you or ridicule you because you happen to be black or because you happen to be gay or because you happen to be female.  I tell minorities and woman don't waste your time trying to explain to somebody why you're in a meeting or why you're in a room.  You're not gonna change their mind by talking to them.  Just do your job and do it incredibly well.  Do like Katherine Johnson [HistoryMaker Katherine G. Johnson] and the women in 'Hidden Figures.'  Just do your job, and you will eventually earn the respect of those around you, or you'll realize they're an idiot in the first place, and there's no hope for them.  So you just, that's my message, is maintain hope, always be optimistic, and do the best you can do, and things will work out.
Story_ID: 673743
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I really want to make sure that, that a young African American kid, boy or girl, understands that they can do anything they--same thing my mom [Ethel Martin Bolden] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.] told me when I was growing up in South Carolina in the, in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]: You can do anything you want to do if you're willing to work for it.  If you're willing to study hard and work hard and not let anybody convince you that you can't do something, you're gonna be okay.  Don't take yourself out of the game.  So I'm very hopeful that we'll find that more and more African Americans are turning to STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] related areas.  That's not--everybody doesn't have to do that.  Everybody doesn't have to go to college, but, but I--but one of the best ways to sort of optimize your chances of success are to get as much education as you can.  Go as far as, as humanly possible for you.  Don't focus on grades; focus on learning.  You know, get into some unusual things.  Decide you're gonna be a test pilot.  Decide you want to go into the [U.S.] military.  Decide you want to help other people.  You want to make life better for other people and that, you know, you're not as important as you think you are.  Robert Lightfoot [Robert M. Lightfoot, Jr.], who, who's heading the space agency [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] right now, is the senior civil servant.  He's the acting administrator.  But Robert taught me, and he, he tells our leadership team all the time, you know, take everything you do very seriously.  Never take yourself seriously.  It's a good lesson.
Story_ID: 673744
Speaker 1: Now, you alluded to your family.  Can you tell us, like, more about your family and--
Speaker 2: Oh, my mom [Ethel Martin Bolden] and dad were both career educators.  They're both passed now, but they both grew up in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, we got the story of your growing up I think.  But--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --your current family today--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, my family today?
Speaker 1: Are, are your, are your parents still alive?
Speaker 2: No.  My parents are dead.  My, my in-laws are dead, and they, all four of them, worked almost until their last day as career educators or, or connected to education even after they retired from the classroom.  My mother was a, a career librarian who worked at the elementary, junior high, high school level.  She established the first library for black students in Columbia, South Carolina, in the, you know, in the, in the mid-'40s [1940s] at an elementary school [Waverly Elementary School].  And she, at the time of her retirement, she had become the first black librarian in a formerly all-white school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina] when South Carolina it- integrated its schools in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s].  My father was, was my high school football coach.  He is legendary in the State of South Carolina.  There's a stadium [Bolden Stadium] named for him in my hometown of Columbia.  Everybody in the State of South Carolina who, who lived in the, in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] knows Coach Bolden [Charles Bolden, Sr.].  And so I, as people say, I come from good stock.  They were middle to middle upper--upper middle class.  They worked very hard, and they instilled in my brother [Warren Bolden] and me a desire to do well.  My--that's same thing that we did for our son [Anthony Bolden] and daughter [Kelly Bolden].  My son's now a, a colonel in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, stationed at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].  My daughter is--our daughter--is a plastic surgeon here in Washington [D.C.] at Howard University Hospital and at the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  And, and as I said our three granddaughters [Mikaley Bolden, Kyra Bolden and Talia Bolden] are just incredible.  They live out in Falls Church [Virginia].  So, we're very happy.
Story_ID: 673745
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about we need to touch on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  We--
Speaker 1: --we--
Speaker 2: --covered a lot of stuff.  You know, we even talked about things I didn't expect we'd talk about, but.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I came up with at least some new questions (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I, you know, I would go back to what, what we just talked about and the fact that, you know, it's something that, that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] talked about all the time in the campaign, and it's, it's this concept of hope.  No matter how bad, you know, no matter--I--there's something called Hoot's Law that I learned training for my first flight when I killed my crew, when I, I, I did something on my own, and I, I caused the simulator to fail and put us in the water (gestures), not literally, but you know, figuratively, and, and we died.  And Hoot [Robert L. Gibson] looked over at me at the time because he knew I had decided I was gonna do this thing all by myself.  He looked over and he said, "Hey, did I ever tell you Hoot's Law?"  I said, "No, Hoot, you didn't."  I said, "What is it?"  He said, "No matter how bad things are, you can always make them worse."  So I, I use that a lot of times to tell kids, failure is inevitable.  You're gonna fail somewhere along the way, but, but no matter how bad things get, don't you be the one that makes them worse because you're, you're, you're focused on gloom and doom.  Always keep your eye on, on the bright sunshine, the--be optimistic, have hope that tomorrow is gonna be better, and it will be if you make it that way.
Story_ID: 673746
Speaker 1: The last question we have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is this, and we ask it of everyone: sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, I would like to be remembered as a halfway decent dad and a great granddad if I can, a good husband, and a good son to my mom [Ethel Martin Bolden] and dad [Charles Bolden, Sr.], somebody who, who was an ordinary person that had, did extraordinary things.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thanks so very much.
