Story_ID: 23410
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sharon Janel Barnes, S-H-A-R-O-N, J-A-N-E-L, B-A-R-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 28th, 1955, Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, ma'am, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am an Associate HR Director, Human Resources Director for the Dow Chemical Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 16th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the Houston Dow Center in the Enclave Parkway, Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 23411
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we are always asked to ask people, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have several favorite foods, but my favorite is cake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Any type of dessert, but cake is it.  I have an enormous sweet tooth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color would be blue, even though I'm not wearing blue today, kind of blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Winter.  Cute boots and cute sweaters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That one's a tough one.  I would have to say Costa Rica.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Volcanoes and beaches.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Good stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, the last one is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I--my kids say I do.  I'm always saying, "Lord willing."  Didn't realize I did that.  And, "If you don't ask, you won't know."  And, "Have a super, fantastic day."
Story_ID: 23412
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Selna, S-E-L-N-A, Selna Mae, M-A-E, and McDonald, M-C-D-O-N-A-L-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's October 30th, 1924, and she was born in Sabine Pass, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-A-B-I-N-E, capital P, A-S-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace it?
Speaker 2: I don't know a whole lot, but I do know we have French and Indian in our background, and it would be the Caddo Indians, C-A-D-D-O, Indians, from what I understand.  And there's some French lineage as well on Mom's side, so most of her relatives were from the southwestern Louisiana area; Crowley, Jennings, Louisiana.  Like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Southwest Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather--my mom's mom [father]--was not--they really didn't know --they really didn't know his age.  I think he was born to a sharecropper and the sharecropper's family, and they really don't know what year he was born.
Speaker 1: Now this is your--
Speaker 2: My mother's father, my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And his name is?
Speaker 2: They called him Caddo Broadnax, C-A-D-D-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was Warren Charles Broadnax, W-A-R-R-E-N, Charles, B-R-O-A-D-N-A-X.
Speaker 1: Now, Caddo, is that the same as the Indiana tribe?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some people say Cato, Caddo.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: It (reigns indigenous?) to that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Are any still there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yep.  They're probably on reservations now, I think.  But I'm sure there are people that live, you know, out and about as citizens.  So there are still some in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any cultural carryovers from the Caddo group of Indians that are in the same--
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are.  It's none that we practice or that I practice.  But I'm sure--I'm sure there are.  They were hunters and really good with the water.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, is there any--are there any stories in your family that go all the way back to slavery or Emancipation or Juneteenth or any of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not--not really.  And I was trying to think back from my cousin, Vidella (ph. splg.).  She--Vidella Jones.  She actually lived to be 102.  And I couldn't really think of any stories or anything that, you know, of our people, you know, living in those times.  I do remember them having a lot of storms.  And this was before the hurricanes were even named.  And my mom would say that their land and their home was always getting flooded after, you know, when one of these big storms would come through.  And they'd come through, I think the latest that her mom had told her about was that Mama's Little Baby, and so, this big storm comes and they leave, have to try to get to higher ground.  They come back and the house is in, you know, three or four inches of mud and snakes everywhere.  And at that point, my grandmother was like, "I need to leave.  We need to go.  We need to live someplace else."  And that's when they moved into town and to Beaumont, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, floods basically drove them to Beaumont?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  To higher ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  All right.  So, I asked about stories passed down.  Now, is there a story behind your mother's name, Selna?
Speaker 2: Selna?
Speaker 1: Selna, yeah.
Speaker 2: Not really.  Her mother had heard the word named "Selma," and just took a different derivative and said "Selna."  She wanted it to be unique.  And I've never heard of another Selna.  Seen Selma.  But she's the only Selna that I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother--did she talk about what she wanted to be when she grew up or what her aspirations were?
Speaker 2: My mom always said that she wanted to get married when she's 13.  And I think everything's relative, so when she was growing up in the '30s [1930s], you know, I guess 13 seemed to be rather old.  And she did actually grow up.  She went to business school and became a secretary, the school's secretary.  So that was her occupation.  She used to tell us really unique stories about how she and her--one of her friends would make mud pies, and her brother, who was quite a bit older than she was, almost like 20 years older, would shoot birds for them.  Of course, you probably couldn't do that now.  And they'd actually cook and eat the, you know, birds.  And so--
Speaker 1: Are they--.  What kind of birds are we talking about? SHARON BARNES: She just said birds.  I don't think like little pheasants or little quail, but little birds that were eatable.  And she said they would clean them and dress them and make a little fires (sic).  And we loved for her to tell the stories about she and her friend.  And it just seemed like she had a lot of fun, just kind of play outside.  And that was--a lot of my childhood was, you know, a lot of outside play.  She talked a lot about fishing.  Her mother loved to fish, and she actually had that same love for fishing.  And so, anytime she was out on the water, that she was very happy.  And I've noticed that my siblings and I are the same way, we like to be close to water.  Not necessarily fishing.  My brother fishes.  But just something about the serenity of waters.  They're peaceful.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Now did your mother have a chance to finish high school and go to college?
Speaker 1: She finished high school.  She went Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], which was pretty much brand-new back in '45 [1945], '46 [1946].  She did go to Texas Southern for a few semesters, and then she came home and she finished business school in Beaumont, if I remember correctly.  Now, her brother was a high school chemistry teacher at the--what they call the Charlton Pollard High School.  It was a predominately, you know, black, segregated high school in Beaumont.  And she graduated from Charlton Pollard, CP.  And there were two high schools in Beaumont; it was Charlton Pollard and there was Hebert, on a different side of towns, town.  And so there was a little bit of rivalry between those two schools.   But you either went to CP or you went to Hebert.  And my uncle was actually a chemistry teacher at Heb--.  Excuse me.  At Charlton Pollard.  And I think maybe that's maybe where I got some of my love of science, was from him.  He did that job for a while, and then at that point, postal workers were making more money, so he went to the Post Office, and that's where he retired.
Speaker 2: Now, did your uncle go to--.  Where did he go to school, do you know?
Speaker 1: I'm not real sure.  That's a good question.  Oh, he went to Bishop.  I do know that.  He went to Bishop in--
Speaker 2: Bishop College.
Speaker 1: --in Dallas, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, Bishop wasn't--.  Wasn't Bishop closed at one time and then it reopened again?
Speaker 1: It closed.  Right now it's Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: But he and my sister Betty both went to--went to Bishop in Dallas.  Now Bishop may have been in Marshall at that time, too.  Marshall, Texas.  I think it may have moved to Dallas when he went.
Story_ID: 23413
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Jefferson McDonald.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November--oh, excuse, no.  May 22nd, 1928, and he was born in Silsbee, Texas, at home.
Speaker 1: Now, Silsbee, S-I-L?
Speaker 2: "S."
Speaker 1: S-B --
Speaker 2: B-E-E.
Speaker 1: E-E.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Silsbee, Texas.  All right.
Speaker 2: In Texas.
Speaker 1: And so, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I do know that they came from Alabama, and both my granddad and my grandmother.  We tried to do some tracing, some looking back to where they would have come from, and there was a connection to someone named William Madison McDonald, and they called him Gooseneck Bill.  We're not confirmed that they're related, but it's just, you know, odd that both of them were named William, both came from Alabama, both from a sharecropper's, you know, farm.  But we've not really been able to substantiate that.  But they came to East Texas and my granddad worked, I think, some on the Santa Fe Railroad, which my dad did that for quite a while, too, as a brakeman.  But as I understand it, Granddad was--how will I put this.  He was a professional gambler.  And so, he made his living traveling, come on the road, and his specialty was Three-Card Monte.  I guess the, I think, the switching game; switch the cards around.  That was his game.  And he was quite good at it, as I understand it.  And at one point, I think he decided to come off the road and go home and take care of his wife and, I think, eight or nine kids.
Speaker 1: Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: My granddad?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: William Arthur McDonald.
Speaker 1: William Arthur McDonald.
Speaker 2: And so, they settled in Grimes County once he did get to Texas, up near--not too far from College Station, Bryan; in that area.  Grimes County, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, did I ask you where your dad went to school or if he went to school?
Speaker 2: No.  Dad went to Prairie View (ph. splg.) [Prairie View A and M University, Prairie View, Texas].  And I think he was there for two years, and then he came back to work at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Prairie View.  It's Prairie View A&M University.  At that time, it was probably A&M, Agricultural and Mechanical College or something.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Right.  So, he went there for a little while?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  About two years I think.
Speaker 1: Or about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He graduated from Waldo Mathews High School in Silsbee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: W-A-L-D-O, M-A-T-H-E-W-S.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your father want to do?  Did he talk about his ambitions when he was young?
Speaker 2: Dad really wanted to follow in my grandfather's footsteps as far as the family business, the grocery store.  And so, he did some odd jobs, but he knew that he was going to come back and do the family business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They were at a dance, as I understand it, and Dad was introduced to my mother.  And I'm not sure if Mom cared for Dad at first, but he kind of grew on her.  And she was working at one of the elementary schools as the school secretary, and he would drop by to see her from time to time.  And then she said he kind of disappeared and then he'd kind of show up again.  And finally, one day he showed up and, you know, they started dating.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now this is about what time?
Speaker 2: This is probably '51 [1951], '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1951, '52 [1952], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So he ships off to Korea with her as his girlfriend.  And they get engaged someplace in there.  And then when he comes back they marry in 1953, November.
Story_ID: 23414
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their voices, their mannerisms, and dispositions, their interests, how they walk and look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Question.  I think I look like my dad with hair, but a lot of people say I look like my mom; got her eyes and nose.  So it was a pretty good combination, I think.  But personality-wise, I'd say it would be pretty balanced.  I never saw my dad in, you know, fits of rage or angers (sic).  I won't say he was passive either.  He was a quiet driver.  And my mom was very amiable, you know, she just got along with everybody; very loving, very sweet.  She loved babies.  Oh, she just loved babies.  And my dad loved kids.  You would always see a lot of kids around him at the store or, you know, kids really related well to him.  So, you know, they were very, very approachable, both of them were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you name your siblings for us and put herself in order?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The oldest is my sister Betty, and that was from my mom's first marriage.  And then would be me.  And then my younger sister Willane, W-I-L-L-A-N-E, and she's--Betty is 11 years older than I am, and Willane's four years younger.  And then right after Willane is my brother William.  And so, he's six years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's it.  So it's like--
Speaker 2: It's four of us.
Speaker 1: Four of you.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you describe where you grew up in Beaumont?
Speaker 2: Actually grew up in Silsbee.
Speaker 1: Silsbee?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah.  Born in Beaumont and actually lived in Silsbee.  And, growing up, moving into Silsbee, we lived in a (sic) upstairs garage apartment behind my grandfather and grandmother's house.  He was my paw-paw, and my grandmother, my dad's parents.  And it was a garage apartment; two bedrooms, a bathroom, the kitchen, a little dining area, and a living room.  And my granddad actually built that garage apartment for my dad and his new family.  And so, that's where we lived for--from, I guess, the time I was born until I was about four years old.  And I remember going up and down the steps and there being this kind of rail, and I was always being told, "Sharon, don't swing on the rail.  Don't swing on the rail.  Sharon, don't hang on the rail."  And, of course, I was always hanging on the rail.  And finally, one day I fell and I hit some concrete blocks on the bottom and I was knocked out, just cold.  And Mom thought I had died or whatever, and they rushed me to the doctor's office, and that--meeting him, Dr. W. J. Pastashki (ph. splg.), was really, I guess, my first recollection of the medical field or science.  And so, he and I became great friends.  And I would say he would be a mentor of sorts.  But it was from that first time I fell swinging on the rail.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I must have been about four, maybe almost five.
Speaker 1: Four?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, was there a name for the part of town you lived in?
Speaker 2: We just said 11th Street.  It was just--and the people knew that.  Some people called it the "Cuts."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or the "Quarters."  But it was 11th Street.
Speaker 1: So 11th Street was the main street going through there?
Speaker 2: It was the--I would say kind of the main drag for our side of the town, our side of town.  Of course, you know, there was another population of African-Americans that lived, what we called "Across Town."  And so, that was that group, and then it was kind of our group.  And my dad's and granddad's grocery store was on that same street.  And so, we lived a block and a half down from the grocery store.  And so, that was kind of the main drag, you know, people come, drive through there, you know, on the weekends, you know, watch the cars and people would look and hang out, you know, a mix of grown-ups.  So that's--so that was my first home, was behind my grand--my paw-paw and my grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  I guess you moved at some point, right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We actually moved.  There was a house next to my grandmother's house that a lady lived in named Miss Maggie.  And Miss Maggie used to like to smoke in bed.  And one night Miss Maggie was smoking in bed and her house caught on fire, and Miss Maggie didn't make it out.  And I remember my dad--I remember the night of the fire and it was, being a little cool, but there was this big blaze, and her, you know, her house was on fire.  And I'd never really seen a fire that big.  And I remember my dad trying to go in and get her.  And evidently he lost a house slipper in the house because we could never understand why he didn't have his other shoe on.  You know, "Daddy, it's night, it's outside, you need to have a shoe on."  And she actually passed away.  And so, they tore down Miss Maggie's house, and then they built our house.  So it was right next to my grandmother and Paw-Paw's.  So that's--that's where I grew up.  And I remember being at--
Speaker 1: About how old were you when you all moved into the new house?
Speaker 2: I was about five.
Speaker 1: About five.  Okay.  So this is all really quick.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do remember, you know, playing out in the yard, and I'd see this one man come by with a cow.  Every other day I saw him, and I thought he was actually going to the store so they could milk the cow and put milk in the bottles at the store that my dad sold.  Say, "No, the milk was from a dairy in a truck.  So not the cow."  But, yeah, we had a dirt street growing up.  It was not paved or anything, just ditches; still is I think.  But it's paved now, but still just ditches, no curbs.  But, it was an African-American community, neighborhood.  And I do remember my children asking, once we went to visit my mom--I guess they were about six or seven, and they asked me, say, "Mom, do white people live in Silsbee?"  I said, "Why do you ask that?"  "When we go to Nee-Nee (ph. splg.) and Paw-Paw's," --which is what they call my parents--"we never see any white people."  And, you know, in our neighborhood, you know, it was always integrated where they lived and they just kind of wondered, you know, it's odd to see only black people here.  So it was, you know, a typical Southern community, neighborhood.
Story_ID: 23415
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, we were talking about the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question in regards to the neighborhood:  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights, again, would be that cow (laughs).  That just sticks in my memory quite a bit.  We grew up, again, you know, I grew up next to my grandparents.  And my granddad actually had a playground built for us between our house and his house, because at that time, you know, African-American kids, black kids, couldn't go to the city park or the neighborhood, which I could not understand growing up.  I would see little kids over playing in the park and "Why can't I go there?"  "Well, you just can't, you know."  "Why?"  "Well, you know, because you're colored."  At that time we were colored.  And so my granddad built a playground between our house and his house and said, "This is someplace for my grandkids to play."  And so, we had a swing, and there was a merry-go-round, and a seesaw, and a couple other little climbing things.  And so, that was my--that was my life.  Kids would always come over and play in our yard.  So, I was very close to home all the time, and I had lots of company usually.  But, it was a--I had a great childhood thinking back now, that was just really good.  So those were the sights and the sounds.  I do remember my grandfather and he had the grocery stores, as I said.  And he would go and get supplies.  We didn't have the big, you know, McLane 18-wheelers to drive up.  He would have to go to the warehouse and actually pick up the groceries.  And so, some of my best memories were actually, you know, riding with him, riding shotgun with him in the pickup truck to the warehouse.  Sometimes I'd be in my jammies and house shoes still.  And, we'd pick up--we'd go get groceries for the store.  My other great trip that I enjoyed with him, going with him on, was to the dump.  I always liked going to the dump.  There were lots of cool things to see, and the birds and the smells.  I liked going with him to the dump.  So I was probably about four or five.  It was before I went to school.  And so, those would be the sights and sounds of my neighborhood in growing up.  Then, of course, going to the store was always fun.  I think that's where I get my sweet tooth from.  He had the hand-dipped ice cream, and so, I always enjoyed the ice cream.
Speaker 1: So, did you help out when you were little in the store?
Speaker 2: When I grew up I helped out.  You know, so that was a little bit of the expectation.  And mainly he wouldn't need help during the week, so I didn't have to work, you know, during school time.  But on Saturday nights, it would be rather busy.  He had a liquor store in conjunction with the grocery store.  And so, sometimes they would need help, either dipping ice cream, and he had a little deli in the back, or making sandwiches.  And so, we all grew up doing that.  And he had--it was--the floor was concrete.  And so, he'd have this, I guess, sawdust and some kind of oil, that we sprinkled on the floor every night, and we'd sweep up.  And so, you know, those were--those are memories I have of the store.  Lots of different characters that would come through, and some transient people that'll come.  They'd be there for a few months and kind of add flavor, and then they'd be gone.
Speaker 1: Was the store very large?
Speaker 2: It was quite large.  I would say, well, not a big supermarket-type, but I'd say maybe 2200 square feet, maybe.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty good size.
Speaker 2: And there was an adjacent barbershop, and there were two barbers there.  And next to that it was actually a barbeque restaurant.  And so, it was kind of a strip center-type thing that my granddad actually owned.  Above the store used to be the only black movie theater in Silsbee.  And once the movie theater went, they closed that, it was a dance hall.  And so, some Saturday nights they would have dances up there.  So, it was kind of a multi-purpose, all-for-one-type, type building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A very big part of growing up.  My mom actually was raised Catholic, and then my dad had always been either Church of God in Christ, and I guess they kind of got somewhere in the middle, and we went to the Baptist Church.  And so, I--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your family church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's called First Missionary Baptist Church, and I think they changed the name.  But it was--it was across town.  It was on Second Street.  And it was predominantly, you know, an African-American church.  And I sang in the little kids' choir, and then eventually grew up.  I wasn't really a singer then.  And I was an usher until I left to go to college.  But, yeah, church was a big part of growing up.  And, you know, of course, the bible school and the plays and, you know, the skits and things you do at church.  And my dad didn't really go to church that much.  He would go sometimes.  But he would, you know, be at the store working most times on Sunday.  He would leave his--you know, leave money for us to put in money, and I think as he got older he shared with us, you know, he just didn't feel right going to church knowing that he sold liquor, had a liquor store.  And once I left and came back--went to college and came back, he eventually joined church and became a very staunch believer and closed the liquor store.  And he left quite a bit--well, quite a legacy for himself at the church.  But, yeah, church was a big part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he didn't get involved until you were about--how old were you when he got in church?
Speaker 2: I was actually out of college.  So, yeah, I was 23, 24, 25 at that point.  And what really, I guess, surprised him was that they--when I was going out for my first job, you know, kind of living on my own, and the church had a shower for me, and they actually gave me a lot of, you know, housewares and things for me, to go and set up my first apartment, and he was just kind of amazed that people would do that, and that kind of bought him in, and just kind of found out that, you know, Christians are pretty amazing for the most part.  And so, I remember the day he actually joined church and, you know, talked--you know, we talked about, you know, coming in as humble as a child, he really looked like that, and very contrite and very convicted.  But, anyway, and so, I was glad I was able to see that.  But, yeah, he used to just kind of send his money to church, but--
Story_ID: 23416
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you like to do growing up?  I mean, were you interested in reading or sports?
Speaker 2: Not really sports, but I guess like most girls, I liked cheerleading.  I was a cheerleader in junior high.  But it was mainly reading and kind of taking care of my little brother and sister.  We used to have school in our den in the back, and so, I was the teacher and they were the students.  But I, you know, kind of elementary school, junior high, I was really into science because Mom said, you know, she'd bring a chicken home or fish and I'm poking at the eyes and wondering how things work and, you know, look at the bones.  And so, I really liked that.  In high school I still liked science, but I got a little more into, I guess, speech and prose and, you know, dramatics, and so, a little bit of that was my true interest, I guess.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My first elementary school was Frank Robinson Elementary, named after the baseball player.  Yeah, he was from the Beaumont-Silsbee area, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after integration, I went to Reed Turrentine, R-E-E-D, T-U-R-R-E-N-T-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Reed, R-E?
Speaker 2: R-E-E-D, two "E's."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Turrentine?
Speaker 2: Then Turrentine.
Speaker 1: T-U-R?
Speaker 2: T-U-R-R-E-N-T-I-N-E, Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 23417
Speaker 1: All right.  So, Frank Robinson Elementary School.  Now you were there through the whole--.
Speaker 2: First through third--third grade, and then at fourth grade, we had integration, and then I went to the school that was closest to my house and that was Reed Turrentine.
Speaker 1: Reed Turrentine.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back to Frank Robinson, because this raises--his name raises an issue--I mean, a feature, really, of your community.  I mean it's famous for athletes.  Like, you know, I've never heard of so many from any one community except for Omaha.  Omaha has a lot of (people?) too.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: But yeah.  So Frank Robinson is one, but who are some of the others?
Speaker 2: Jerry LeVias had a sister that lived in Silsbee, and I can't think of her first name now.  But I remember seeing her, Ruby LeVias, maybe.  But Jerry would come to Silsbee from time to time.  I think he had aunts or relatives there.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you know this from being from Beaumont?  Now Beaumont is close by, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's about 15 miles from (unclear).
Speaker 1: In this area, according to Mel Farr, the football player, who we interviewed back in 2002, is famous for athletes.  They call it the "Triangle" or something like that.
Speaker 2: "Golden Triangle."
Speaker 1: "Golden Triangle."  Right.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yep, yep.  "Golden Triangle."
Speaker 1: It's so many that it's--there's Ernie Ladd, I think.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Ben, yeah, and Ben Smith.
Speaker 1: Curly Crowe (ph. splg.).
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  The Globetrotters.
Speaker 1: Ed Brown, I think, is from there.  Who else? (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I can't think of--a lot of them are older than I am.
Speaker 1: I think Bubba Smith?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bubba Smith.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I can't think of a lot of them.  But those--those--that sounds familiar.  Yeah, Mel Farr.  I know that name too.
Speaker 1: He was a big star in college.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah.  And then Frank Robinson.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Frank Robinson.  So this--but there are legions more.  I started naming them and he can name all of them.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  Yeah, Mark Henry, the--he was an Olympian, maybe 12, 15, 15, 20 years ago, the bodybuilder, weightlifter.  Yep.
Speaker 1: There's plenty of them--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --down there.  Now, I don't know what it counts for, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know if it's the water or the pine trees.  James Hunter that actually played for the Denver Lions [Detroit Lions].  And James died about two years ago.  He was actually--we were schoolmates.  And so, I hated to hear that about him, but, yeah, he's from the same area.
Speaker 1: What sport was he in now?
Speaker 2: Football.
Speaker 1: Denver Lions.  I've never--
Speaker 2: No.  The Detroit Lions.
Speaker 1: Detroit Lions.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Excuse me. It wasn't the Denver Lions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I got it.
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  Detroit Lions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But, yeah, there were lots of them.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: They had lots of them.  I know it.  So at any rate, so Frank Robinson is one that I did not know was from Beaumont.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yep.  From the Beaumont area.
Story_ID: 23418
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in elementary school, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: It would have to be science.  I had a really good fifth-grade science teacher, Mr. Hillard Lewis.  And he was very inspirational and kind of brought science to life.  But that was probably my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of projects would you work on with Mr. Lewis?
Speaker 2: Solar system-type--that's where I really at that time--and we were really into the Space Age, you know, because of, you know, going to land on the moon.  And so, it was really the solar system was my favorite at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is about 1965 almost?
Speaker 2: This would be--
Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: --'67 [1967], '68 [1968], eightish?
Speaker 1: '67 [1967], '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Or '68 [1968].  Yeah, sixty--.  No, you're right, '66 [1966], '67 [1967] timeframe, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the space race days when the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yep.
Speaker 1: --U.S. was trying to beat Russia to the moon.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Yeah, and so, it was--.  Yeah, it was a time when science was, you know, very popular and, you know, you wanted to, you know, think about being with it.  It was not that, "Oh, I wanted to be an astronaut" or anything, but it was--it was very, very young.  Very young, interesting.  And then my--we took a family--.  My dad always wanted to take a two-week vacation.  Every summer we got in the car and went some place.  And about the same time we went to the meteor crater in Arizona, and so, this is kind of more than, you know, it's more of the space--space race.  And so, that was my interest at that point, it was outer space.
Speaker 1: Now, you got the--you have the Space Center in Houston.
Speaker 2: Right.  Johnson Space Center, yeah.
Speaker 1: John and--.  Well, Lyndon Johnson was president then, and yeah.  But it's now the Johnson--I don't know what they call it (unclear).
Speaker 2: I can't remember either now that you've mentioned it.  They renamed it J.S.C., you know, Johnson Space Center.  I can't remember what it was called.
Speaker 1: They have the big NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Space Center in Houston, you know.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Back in Clear Lake, yep.
Speaker 1: And everybody who says, you know, "Houston, we have a problem," you know, it's--
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  It correlates back to that.  They had a big problem.  Yeah, but that was one thing and, you know, even now, I have this deep love of travel.  And I think that was instilled by my dad because he believed in these--this kind of two-week, you know, we'd get on the road and we'd go.  And then my aunt, one of the two surviving aunts from my dad's side, still living, was a great--she was a world traveler to a great extent.  So, yeah.  So, you know, the vacations, you know, part of growing up were real important.  I think it's kind of help shape who I am now even.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any scientific heroes in the grade school days?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I do remember reading about Bessie Coleman at one point.  And she was, you know, a black female aviator.  But, you know, again, I guess because there were not that many role models.  It was nothing I aspired to go do, you know, to be, you know, an aviatrix or to be a pilot.  You know, it doesn't--it just didn't ring a bell.  And I think being from a smaller community, my role models were teachers and nurses and, you know, doctors.  And so.
Story_ID: 23419
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were there any particular teachers at Frank Robinson that, you know, were important as mentors or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, my first-grade teacher, Hattie Blackmon, you know, you always remember your first-grade teacher, just very, very important.  And then--B-L-A-C-K-M-O-N, Blackmon.  And then my third-grade teacher, Annie Buard, B-U-A-R-D, first name Annie; and she was actually my piano teacher too.  And, you know, she was one that made school fun, and she kept me from being bored.  Second grade and part of the latter part of first grade, I was pretty bored at school.  Yeah.  I think I remember them having a teacher--parent-teacher conference and the teacher said, "Oh, she's here, she's there, she's everywhere."  And it was just that I was bored out of my skull, really.  So.
Speaker 1: Now, why were you so bored?  Do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's easy, you know.
Speaker 1: Everything was too easy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was pretty easy, you know.  Only we just had done these numbers and things that they were for, and they wanted us to do them again, and I knew what they already were.  And, you know, one time I remember kind of slipping out of the room and I said, "I'm going to play on the playground or merry-go-round.  They're doing that stuff, I already did that."  So, yeah.  So it was boring, and it didn't really get interesting until I got to third grade with Ms. Buard.  And she, again, she made it interesting.  We started doing like, you know, music and dance at school, and so, it was a lot more fun.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know how to read before you went to school?
Speaker 2: I did.  I remember reading, learning to read the "Curious George" books.  And the one book is "Contented Little Pussycat."  So that was the book I learned to read on.  I must have been about four or five.  But, you know, at that point, my mom would work with me, and then my older sister was home and she was always reading, Betty.  And so, I always wanted to, you know, be like Betty, and so, you know, I would take up reading, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you read magazines and newspapers coming into the house?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  "Jet," because my dad sold "Jet" at the store, and "Ebony."  And so, I always had access to a "Jet" or an "Ebony."  And I remember the society pages of "Jet," and I always remember the beauty of the week.  You know, it's the first thing the guys would look at when they would come get a "Jet."  And I remember the, of course, everybody looks at the Top, you know, "Top Ten Songs" in the back.  But we always had "Jet" and we always had "Ebony."
Story_ID: 23420
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And so, I guess--so, you make the transition to Reed Turrentine.
Speaker 2: Turrentine.
Speaker 1: And what grade is this now?
Speaker 2: Fourth grade.  That was our first year for integration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you feel about that?  How did people feel about integration in those days?
Speaker 2: I actually looked forward to it.  I am a person that likes adventure.  So it just seemed like another adventure to me.  And, I'd never had any preconceived notions about, you know, not getting along.  My mother was a very open, a very generous person, and she never taught us that, you know, we were inferior to anyone else or anybody else was superior to us.  You know, she just didn't.  And so, I went, you know, with kind of eyes wide opened, and I'm going to meet new friends and go to a school I can, you know, I can walk home (laughs), you know, walk and forth and not a long way off.
Speaker 1: So it was closer to home?
Speaker 2: It's closer to home, yeah.  Yep.  Yeah.  So, you know, but then the only reason I didn't go there was because it was segregated.  And so I had really great teachers there, you know, just as I did at Robinson.  And I made some really good friends and, you know, people that I'm still friends with today.
Speaker 1: There was nothing traumatic about it for anybody, huh, I mean in terms of--?
Speaker 2: There was.  Some people did not care for it.  And I remember one afternoon walking home from school, these boys in this truck started, you know, kind of trying to run my sister and I down.  And I was a little older than she was, and so, I remember running, running, running, and they were, you know, coming after us in this truck.  And, you know, I was like, "I just can't let my sister get hurt."  And, you know, what can you do?  Two elementary school kids against a big pick-up truck?  And I remember, the girl was in my class and she was in there with her big brothers, and that was probably one of the scariest times in my life.  But we ran up on this lady's porch and knocked on the door, and they finally left us alone.  But they circled the block and, you know, revved their engine, and you know, like they're going to run us down.  But that's the only time that I can really remember, you know, being uncomfortable about being in a different setting.  And then, I guess this was the third day of school; I was, you know, talking to some of the girls, and so, this one girl comes over and she's (rubbing arm), rubs my arm, she looks at my hand (rubbing hand), said, "That doesn't come off."  I said, "What are you doing?"  Said, "My mama said your black was going to come off on me if I touched you.  That black doesn't come off."
Speaker 1: So, did you have any, I mean, doubts about its sincerity?
Speaker 2: I--No, I think she was sincere. I mean, we were kids, you know, fourth grade.  I mean, you know, I think she was--I think she was totally honest, you know.  She--very, you know, she did it in a non-pretentious--I mean, she was just trying to figure out.  I guess her folks told her not to associate with any of us because the black was going to rub off on them.  And, you know, to--you know, I remember that so clearly, but I just couldn't understand where she was coming from, because I'd never heard that before.
Speaker 1: Now, did--.  I know you were young at the time, but do you have any recollection of how the black teachers fared when the schools integrated?  Did they get jobs in the integrated system, too, or did just some of them?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them did.  And I remember my mom's boss, who was the principal of the segregated high school, you know, he went to be an assistant principal at the integrated school, Clarence Johns; you know, great man.  His wife was the homemaking teacher at the school, and she actually got a job as a home ec teacher at the integrated high school.  I think the head coach became, you know, like an assistant coach.  They--some of them got jobs, but they were at--maybe at a level lower.  But, you know, that's like with any merger.  You've got duplicational roles.  Somebody has to go, you know how it is.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, that's why I asked.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because I know that some probably didn't get anything and some did.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: So were there familiar faces there in Reed Turrentine when you--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None of the black teachers?
Speaker 2: They did not go to that school.  No.  Now, Mr. Lewis came, maybe the next year, because I had him in fifth grade.  He may have been there fourth grade, I didn't see him.  But I think some of the teachers went to the other elementary schools.  Now, did any of the white teachers go out to Robinson, I don't know if that happened or not.
Speaker 1: So were there any black teachers in Turrentine?
Speaker 2: Mr. Lewis, Hilliard Lewis.
Speaker 1: I mean, well, when you started, you said that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, when I started, no, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unless Mr. Hillard (ph. splg.) was there, and he was like in a different wing and I didn't see him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered.  So, you did pretty well at Reed Turrentine?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I had fun I mean.  Yeah, if I had issues, it would be with the other little black girls that didn't like me for whatever reason.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any issues for being like a teacher's pet or something?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I got along--got along really well with my homeroom teacher in fifth grade, Ms. Lola Reed.  Her husband actually owned the newspaper, the city, you know, the city newspaper, the newspaper of the city.  And she was--she was an excellent role model, and she really, I guess, encouraged me to read more to, you know, to expand my horizon more, and she's just--she's just a wonderful woman.  She actually came to my mom's funeral.  You know, I hadn't seen her for years but, you know, we always had that connection.  But she was an excellent role model.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have like real science classes at Reed Turrentine too?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Just the solar system.  You know, things that you can kind of do tabletop, you know, those types of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the solar system was our kind of big thing then, space race and all.
Speaker 1: Did you go to science fairs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Small town, we didn't have a whole lot of those, which, you know, was not, you know, things are detriment to a certain extent; very small town.  So we didn't have them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I was wondering if you had field trips to the Space Center or something like that.
Speaker 2: We had field trips later on, not in elementary, but junior high and high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it was the one field trip, I think, really turned around my logic, and I actually knew what I wanted to do with my profession when I went to a field to M.D. Anderson [MD Anderson Center, Houston, Texas] when I was in high school.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a hospital, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah, it's a teaching facility.
Speaker 1: Indiana.  And just for the record, who is M.D. Anderson now?  Who was he?
Speaker 2: He's a philanthroper (sic) from somewhere in Houston, and left a little money and that's all I know.  I should know more.
Speaker 1: Right.  It seems that his letters are M.D., you know, like doctor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, M.D., yeah.  But I don't think he was a physician.  He might have been.  I don't think he was.
Speaker 1: It makes you think that though, when you read it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  A good question.
Story_ID: 23421
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was junior high school in a separate place than--?
Speaker 2: We went to middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Middle school.
Speaker 2: There was a middle school.  I was there for a year in--
Speaker 1: Is that Reed Turrentine too?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That was O'Neill Middle School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is it "O"?
Speaker 2: "O," apostrophe N-E-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: "L," okay.
Speaker 2: N-E, yeah, O'Neill.
Speaker 1: O'Neill Elementary School.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, middle school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, middle school, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was just there for the sixth grade, then I went to Silsbee Junior High.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, O'Neill, was that a--were any teachers there that you remember that were--?
Speaker 2: Yeah--that year was pretty much a blur.  I don't remember any--any one teacher or anyone just kind of, you know, being someone that was, you know, someone that would make a great impact on my life.  I had one teacher that was, I think, was a little prejudiced maybe, because I didn't quite know--and I don't even remember name, but I don't even know how--I couldn't understand how I would sit, very first chair, very first row as you came in the door, and she never talked to me.  She always stood right to my side.  So if I turned around, I'd see her backside.  And she stood there that whole year.  She--and I think I was the only African-American in the class.  And, she talked to everybody else, but the whole year her backside was to my side.  If I turned, I'd see--
Speaker 1: Backside.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).  So, and I remember going home and talking to my mom about it, and so, she said, "Well, that's okay.  You just do the best that you can do in that room, and you just show her that you can do the work."  And I did.  But I just thought that was really strange as I look back now.
Speaker 1: Were your experiences after integration, I mean, were the teachers basically fair, if you did the work they would give you the grade that you earned?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think they maybe went above and beyond to make sure that I either understand or I would--felt included, because my fourth and fifth-grade teachers, and again, we kind of had that homeroom, you know, you were kind of with one teacher most of the time, and other people came in, other teachers came in.  And my fourth-grade teacher, Jackie Reed, you know, I mean, she was--she was phenomenal.  She actually had two of her kids in the same class, and she was great, you know, very encouraging, you know, just very supportive, as was Lola Reed in fifth grade.  Sixth grade, you know, we started changing classes, and had different teachers, and it's like that year was just a blur to me.  I just don't remember all of it.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--you were at O'Neill?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade only.
Speaker 1: Sixth grade only?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is nineteen what?  It would be sixth grade you would be--
Speaker 2: This is '67 [1967] maybe, '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].  Sixth grade, you would have been 11, I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Or '66 [1966].  1966, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: You were 11 in sixth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to school late.  You know how--they can't go to school until you're six here in Texas.  And so, I turned six--well, I was born, you know, after September 1, so I had to wait a whole year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's probably '67 [1967] then (unclear) (simultaneous) O'Neill.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yep.  Yep.  Because I was kind of behind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, that year was a blur, and that's puzzling to me, and I keep thinking, I'm wondering what--.  Is there any reason that you can think why this year was more of a blur?
Speaker 2: No.  And, you know, and I thought about that. Yeah, I remember that lady and I try to think of other teachers that I had.  I had some report cards from back then that--then try to go back and trigger names, and I couldn't find those report cards.  But that year just--.  I do remember going to a place called "Hodges Gardens" in Louisiana.  And it's, you know, botany, more or less, and I just fell in love with all the plants, and then we had gardeners talking to us about how they made hybrids, and I just thought that was really, really interesting.  So, that was the one field trip we took.  And I think we took a field trip to the zoo that year.  So anything to do with animals and plants and stuff, I was really into that.  But everything else is pretty much a blur, except it snowed that year, that spring.  It was kind of weird.
Speaker 1: Now, so, you were only there in the sixth grade.  Now, what happened after the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: I went to Junior High at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Silsbee Junior High.
Story_ID: 23422
Speaker 1: Okay.  So junior--oh, okay.  This is Silsbee--
Speaker 2: Junior High.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Junior High.
Speaker 2: That was in a different building, different location.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1968.
Speaker 2: Eightish, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the year that Dr. King was assassinated.  Now, what are your recollections of that around the school, and how did the school and the neighbors react?
Speaker 2: Well, it was more or less, you know, kind of my family.  My mom was very upset during this time, because--she was upset that, you know, her son may have to grow up and fight in a war.  She was a worrier.  And, she was upset that there was no one fighting, would be fighting for our rights, so to speak.  And kind of thought that things would revert back to, you know, pre-, you know, civil rights, where you couldn't stay in hotels and travel and do things that you like to do.  And so, she worried a lot, you know, what was going to become the fate of our race.  And she also worried that, you know, who else is going to pick up the banner, so to speak.  And so, it was, you know, mainly a little worry from home.  At school, you know, kids were upset.  But again, we were junior high, not really high school.  You know, the high school kids, I understand, were really mad.  But we, you know, we were upset.  It was a little--it was tragic.  That was--I remember when Kennedy was shot, I was in second-grade, I think, and I remember us going to the bathroom and some of the girls crying, "Oh, the Russians are going to come get us now," you know.  And so, it's kind of one of those, you know, it was marks and time, you know, can you remember kind of the day and place where you were and who you were with.  And it was--Mom was frightened.  And so, that made us a little apprehensive.  But after a day or so, they had a way, you know, that, you know, life goes on and, you know, we're going to take care of our business; and that's what we did.
Story_ID: 23423
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, Silsbee Junior High School.  Now, how were your grades during this time?  Are you like--is your interest in science reflected in your grades?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, I think.  Again, the science class were the ones that were, I think, most important to me and the ones I really enjoyed.  I was starting to get a little bit into the speech and drama thing about this time, and so, I was kind of interested in that.  But, you know, my time was still science, I guess, and spent, you know, with my brother and sister.  That was my world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, family.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, you go to Silsbee all the way through junior high after high school--through high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, mm-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you--were you a part of high school clubs or--?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: I think you said you were a cheerleader, right?
Speaker 2: But that was young.  That was too young.
Speaker 1: (unclear) That's okay.
Speaker 2: I was.  The other thing about '68 [1968], if I can go back for just a bit, I think that was really, I think, instrumental for me was that the HemisFair was held in San Antonio in 1968.  And I do remember going, and that was a big deal for me to see a lot of the concepts and, you know, how things will be in the future.  And so, you know, I like being considered as a, you know, futurist or someone that thinks kind of in the future, how things might be.  And so, that was--that again was, I guess, more confirmation that I would go into maybe science or technology.  I remember seeing concept cars.  I think one was the Aurora that was built by Oldsmobile.  And I was like, (What about?), wonder if I'll ever have a car like that one day."  And sure enough, I think the Aurora was actually a concept car that they actually did produce, and I remember seeing it at HemisFair.  My sister Betty, and her husband Walter, lived in San Antonio, and so, you know, it was just natural that, you know, they told us everything that was going on, and how they were refurbishing the Downtown area.  And so--
Speaker 1: Is that when they were building the Riverwalk?
Speaker 2: The Riverwalk, I think, it was redone then, and then the Tower of Texas--you know, Tower of Americas; so that was being built, and we actually went up in that big skyscraper.  So, that was, I think, another turning point that was more confirmation, that, yeah, I'm a science person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now, did you run for a class office or anything when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I did.  And you mentioned clubs, and I was in, I think, Future Homemakers of America, I was in the Speech and Drama Club, I was in the Latin Club.  I think the only club I probably wasn't in was Future Farmers and the Automotive Club.  I liked clubs.  And I was in JETS, Juniors in Engineering and Technology and Science.  And I did run for Student Body Officer.  It must have been my junior year, and I didn't win, but the teachers appointed me, so I was still on Student Council my junior and senior year.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And I was co-editor of my school newspaper two months (out of a year?).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you weren't elected, but you got appointed anyway.  Now, was there any resentment from the students?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Nope.
Story_ID: 23424
Speaker 1: You were appointed to Student Council.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah, I did try out for cheerleader, I guess, my freshman year in high school, and I thought I was pretty good, but I was pretty much crushed when I didn't win.  And I remember my math teacher telling me that, not to worry; that--and my mom kind of told me the same thing.  Said, "Anyone can do that, but, you know, it'll take special person to either be a scientist or researcher.  So just think about your studies."  And that was my math teacher.  I actually had him in junior high and in high school, Mr. Ronnie Nash.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ronnie Nash.
Speaker 2: And so, he was inspiration to me, as was my mom.  And then--
Speaker 1: Now, was this a black teacher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: White male.
Speaker 1: All right.  Just thought.
Speaker 2: And then the other teacher who was really a role model and mentor to me, and she's--Mr. Nash is still alive too--but her name was Sherry Woodard, and she was my biology teacher.  And that was--you know, she was a registered nurse and a school teacher.  And she was one of the first ones, you know, that said, "Hey, you've got a knack for this.  You should explore it."  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was actually the one that took me on the field trip to M.D. Anderson, where we actually went into a--it was a--I know now it was a cytology lab.  And they were actually taking--making thin slices of breast tissue where they had breast cancer in it.  And I remember seeing all these slides on these kind of (light?) readers, and you could actually see the cellular changes in this breast.  And so, I said, "I want to do something like this.  This is my calling."  This is what I thought at the time.
Story_ID: 23425
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now what do they do at Silsbee for the prom?
Speaker 2: For the prom?  (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did they have an integrated prom (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have them.  Yes, it was an integrated prom.  And, you know, it was just like any other junior-senior prom.  You know, freshman couldn't go, I don't think sophomores could go either, but we had them at the school cafeteria.  So it was not, you know--some of these places now, they rent out halls, and hotels, and ballrooms, and that kind of thing, but it's nothing like that.  We had them right there at the school cafeteria, had a little band or whatever.  But, yeah, we had proms.  There were dances.  Sadie Hawkins Dances.  I would go to those.  I went to prom.  Went to football games and, you know, basketball games.  Actually, my senior year I was the chaplain.  And so, I got to pray at them, you know, before every home football game.  And so, it was kind of cool.
Speaker 1: Oh, the team cleric?
Speaker 2: Well, I would go in the press box and pray, you know, for the stadium on the loud--P.A system.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't even know that that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep, yep.  We say it.  You know, it's the South.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was public high school, but they--the prayer was (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: What--were the teams--were your teams good?
Speaker 2: The basketball teams were very good.  We went to State, I think, maybe my freshman and sophomore years, maybe.  And then my junior-senior years, we actually went into the playoffs in football.  So, it was a little bit of a dynasty there from the coaching and the quarterback situation.  Coach McGallon had several sons that were actually pretty good quarterbacks, and--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: McGallon.  I think they used to call him like Bull McGallon (laughs), but--
Speaker 1: How do you spell McGallon?
Speaker 2: M-C-G-A-L-L-O-N.  McGallon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can't remember what his first name is now.  And his wife had a little catering business, and this was actually my first job that I had outside of working from home.  And I would work with her on the weekends.  She catered weddings.  And so, I would work with his wife.  But he had several sons, Bubba McGallon and Don McGallon, I think; and they were just, you know, great football players.  And so, we had a little bit of a--kind of a dynasty going on with the McGallon boys.  And so, we were pretty good in football and basketball.  Had a few good track players too, track runners.  But we stood on our own.
Story_ID: 23426
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what's--now, '69 [1969], you were in junior high school, I guess, when the moon landing took place.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That summer.
Speaker 1: Now, was that exciting for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember watching it, and it was in the summer and, you know, it was pretty exciting because it was all, you know, kind of a culmination of the solar system and, wow, you know, would they find, you know, a man on the moon or whatever; was it really green cheese.  You know, the kind of the stories you hear.  So that was very exciting.  But, again, we weren't in school when it happened, so, you know, we didn't have that kind of school flavor of, you know--we're kind of at home watching it.  It was a little anticlimactic I'd say.  And then I went to--I went to high school, I guess, that next, that fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were in high school from '70 [1970] to '74 [1974], right?
Speaker 2: Four, mm-hm.  Yep.
Speaker 1: And so, in 1974, that's the year the U.S. got out of Vietnam, I believe it was.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yep.
Speaker 1: You know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember a friend of mine wearing this kind of metal bracelet, and I finally one day I kind of wondered what was it and asked her.  So it was a missing in action, MIA bracelet.  And--that's Sabrina Birdwell, and so, you know, I thought it was very, you know--I think it made a statement that, you know, (you're?) not here, but we've not forgotten you either.  And my older sister actually lost a classmate in the war.  And so, that was pretty sad.  And so, actually when I did see the Vietnam War Memorial, I actually found his name and did the pencil rubbing of Freddy's name.  Yeah, I think he was from Silsbee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any big role in graduation at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No.  I wasn't the valedictorian or salutatorian or anything, but I did win a very prestigious, local scholarship, the "Edgar and Estelle O'Neill Award."  And that's who the school was named by, O'Neill, I guess, yep.  And that award is given--I think it was given every four years, maybe, if I remember correctly--and they would give it to one white and one African-American; and I was that year the African-American that got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 23427
Speaker 1: All right.  So, about the time you had graduated--so, you won a--this--
Speaker 2: O'Neill.
Speaker 1: --the O'Neill Scholarship.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: But had you decided on what school you were going to go to?
Speaker 2: I--at that time I did.  I knew I wanted to go to Baylor.  I only applied to two schools, Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas] and Texas A&M [Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas].  And, again, it's more kind of the environment that you're in.  I knew several kids that had gone to Texas A&M, and that was kind of, you know, if you don't go to A&M, you don't go anywhere.  Several students went to Lamar University in Beaumont, and I said, well, I want to go a little bit outside of the area and learn kind of a different way of life, so to speak.  And there was a man in town, and he just recently died this year, Mr. D.D. Shine, and he was kind of a local civic activist, council member, school board member; and he was just the nicest guy that you could know.  And no matter where you were or who you were with or who he might be with, he would recognize you and speak to you.  He was a white man.  And he actually told me about his daughter, Anna Beth, who was actually a cheerleader at our school, that she went to Baylor University, and he thought, you know, excellent school, he loved it and, you know, thought maybe I would be interested.  And sure enough, I looked into it and I fell in love with Baylor, and that's where I ended up going to.  I applied to both--like I said, Texas A&M and Baylor, because I liked both schools.  And the day that my parents actually took me to kind of be at the schools, we went A&M, and I don't know where all the students were, maybe in class, but it was very, very quiet that day, and not very many black students or African-American students, and--but nice, you know, nice facilities, you know, all the tradition, decor, and, you know the Aggie family; and, still a little partial to A&M.  Don't tell my Baylor people that.  But then we went, you know, just up the road, Highway 6 and went to Waco.  I guess it was between classes, and everybody was out on campus, and a lot of African-American students, relatively speaking.  But even, you know, the white students were, "Hi."  You know, didn't know you, "Hi," and we just spoke and just, you know, acknowledged that you were there.  And so, I said, I think this is the place I'm supposed to be.  And so, that's how I ended up at Baylor.
Speaker 1: Now, Baylor is not a state school, is it?
Speaker 2: No.  It's a private institute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My daddy found that out real soon (laughs) when he looked at the tuition.  So, yeah.  But I think high school prepared me--I probably could have had a little bit of better prep in chemistry, but I was well prepared as far as physics and biology, and even math to a certain extent.  Again, I felt like chemistry was probably my weakest.  But I think high school prepared me well for that.  So, yep.  So Baylor it was.
Story_ID: 23428
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were any special teachers at Baylor that you remember?
Speaker 2: Dr. A.G. Pinkus.  P-I-N-K-U-S.  Alvin Pinkus.  And Dr. Pinkus was my organic teacher, and this was nineteen--maybe 1976.  And I happened to find a lump in my breast at, I guess, the semester or so before.  And went home one holiday, talked to my mom, she took me to our family doctor, and said, "You probably need to have this looked at or taken out or whatever."  And so, I had a biopsy and it was benign.  And Dr. Pinkus was so nice.  He just bent over backwards to make sure I had all my homework, because I had the surgery in Waco.  But he made sure I had all of my homework and all the assignments.  And he just really treated me royally once I, you know, kind of confided in him and told him why I was going to miss class.  And so, he and I connected after that, and he--he was kind of a confirmed bachelor, so to speak, but he was always one that was very supportive of me, very encouraging in making sure that, you know, I kind of, you know, stayed in line.  My financial aid officer was also very instrumental in making sure that I had the funds for school.  When I first went to Baylor, the tuition was $35 a semester hour.  And I think now it's maybe $700 a semester hour.  I don't know.  When my daughter was there, it was about 500 an hour.  And, $35 an hour, that was quite a bit of money for, you know, in 1974.  So, Mr. W.J. Dube, D-U-B-E, was very instrumental in making sure that I had funding to stay in school.  And I didn't have to--I had, you know, work-study jobs, you know, where you could work a little bit and study the rest of the time.  But those two folks, I think, were very, very helpful in making sure that I was successful.  Dr. Wydner (ph. splg.) would be another person.  Dr. Eldridge (ph. splg.) would be someone else.  So, again, people that were very supportive of me.  Dr. Packard for physics.
Story_ID: 23429
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there a black student organization on campus at Baylor?
Speaker 2: There was and it was called "Agiza Funica, A-G-I-Z-A, capital F, U-N-C-I-A, I think.
Speaker 1: Funica.
Speaker 2: F-U-N.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I-K-A?
Speaker 2: I-K-A.  Maybe that was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: That would be an African spelling (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was supposed to been Swahili.  That's what someone said.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That would be a "K" then.  You know, because they don't use "Cs."
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now, what does it stand for?
Speaker 2: That's a good question (laughs).  I don't remember right now.  Maybe Unity.  "One for Unity, Unity for All" or something.  And it was recognized as a club, you know, on campus.  At that time, we didn't have any Greek sororities or fraternities on campus.  They had some local, you know, kind of local and related majority fraternities and sororities.  And at that time, we didn't really feel the need or see the need to, you know, charter our chapter.  Some of the young ladies that came after I left did so.  They chartered the first AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated] Chapter on campus, and my daughter actually pledged in that campus when she was at Baylor.  But, through Agiza, we--it was mainly social.  We did some community service, but not quite a bit.  We participated in what we call "Pigskin Review," and "Our University Sings"; it's kind of like a talent show for clubs and you get to win, you know, cash prizes, I think, or a trophy or something.  And so, we participated in singing and the "Pigskin Review."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I had a question, but now I forgot it.  But, well--oh, was--.  Now were you--how long had Baylor been integrated before you started?
Speaker 2: I went in '74 [1974], and I think the first student they took may have been '67 [1967] or '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: That's a pretty long time.
Speaker 2: So--.
Speaker 1: Well, not mine, some standards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No.  Yeah.  Because, you know, I think, and I hate to say, I think they were forced to a certain extent, because they would lose some of the federal funding giving of private schools (sic).  I think they were kind of forced to integrate.  You know, when you kind of think about--back now to some of the wins they had in football after integration and, you know, Bart Griffin, now.  You know, you just kind of think, wow, you can't believe it was like that.  But, yeah.  There--I did, and I did come quite--come up against quite a bit of discrimination at Baylor, I hate to say.  But, you know, it made me stronger.  You know, that which doesn't kill us makes us stronger.  I remember just moving in, it must have been my sophomore year, and I was, you know, kind of sweeping my dorm room and trying to get my stuff in there, and so, this--some lady comes up--again--again, this is not Baylor per se--some parent comes up, she says, "Oh, my daughter's room needs sweeping.  So when you get done here, do you mind going and sweeping her room please?"  And I like, "Ma'am, excuse me?"  "When you get done with that room, do you mind coming down and sweep my daughter's room?"  And I say, "Well, why should--?"  And she said, "You're the maid, are you?"  I'm like, "No, ma'am.  I'm a student here."  "Oh, okay."  Didn't say she's sorry or anything.  And so--
Speaker 1: Different worlds, huh?
Speaker 2: Very different world.  And so--but, you know, you don't--you don't let that get you down, you know, get all militant and everything.  Maybe I should have, I don't know.  But you just say, it's ignorance.  They don't know any better.  Some of the--and I would say, you know, we didn't have any contact with the board of trustees or anything, but, you could tell some of the professors and maybe some of the officials may have been a little miffed.  But, you know, hey, you just do your thing and keep trucking, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The chaplain there, Dr. W.J. Wimpy, was very instrumental in, you know, kind of bringing the cohesiveness there amongst the students and even the faculty.  I think he's deceased now, but Dr. Wimpy was, he was a pretty special guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good guy.
Story_ID: 23430
Speaker 1: Now, Texas is famous for quite a few stars on the right and the left.  I'm saying you got like the remnants of the Johnson administration, people like Bill Moyers and Barbara Jordan, Mickey Leland in Texas.  But you also have like, Tom DeLay and--
Speaker 2: Ann Richards was Democrat.  Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She went to Baylor also.
Speaker 1: Ann Richards?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: You got--it's a whole mix of people--different.  It seems like a lot of extreme, you know, either extremely left or extreme right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I guess back in '68 [1968], to digress a bit--is probably when I really looked at political affiliation, and maybe before '68 [1968] even, I just remember seeing George Wallace on T.V. and this--how do you just kind of spewed at the camera.  And I'm like, "This guy is supposed to represent the party I'm supposed to be affiliated with?  I don't know."  And so, I then started lying more with the Party of Lincoln, so to speak.  A lot of people want to say the GOP now, as it sits.  It's like the Party of Lincoln, but I think that's when I really start to draw lines closer to Republican.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you stay a Republican or did you--?
Speaker 2: Pretty much so.
Speaker 1: That doesn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've never voted a straight ticket in a way, but when I ran for office in Lake Jackson, the Republicans were the ones that gave me money to support my campaign; none of the Democrats ever did.  The County Chair, you know, came to talk to me.  The Democratic Chair never called me or anything.  So--but, you know, I just kind of remember how Wallace, again, and he's, you know, and I'm sure you find someone just the opposite, you know, of him in the Republican Party who would maybe spew some of the same sentiments.  But, at that time, that was just what I chose to do.  So, you know, my first--I remember the first argument my boyfriend, now my husband, and I ever had was around politics.  So we don't politics at home now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: The ironic is that Wallace left the Democratic side.
Speaker 2: I know (laughs).  Became a Republican.
Speaker 1: And so did all the rest of the so-called Dixiecrats , the Southern Democrats.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Except for the Texas ones, I think, were actually, you know, were more in line with F.D.R's philosophy.
Speaker 2: Pretty moderate.  Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Like Lyndon Johnson.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Sam Rayburn and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: So.  [Innocent?]  So.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I guess my dad was politically active.  He was an election judge for many, many years in our city.  He actually served on the Planning and Zoning Board in Silsbee for a couple of three decades, and he was much of the belief that, you know, he felt like we had really been blessed and, you know, to whom much is given, much is required.  And he always taught that you have to pay back, you have to give something back, and you can't get paid for everything that you do.  And so, volunteerism is very important to me.  And so--and I got that from my dad.  And, again, you know, I sometimes have to check myself to not to get too super extended.  But, again, he was a big person in volunteering and thought that, that we should too.  And so, I remember going to my first inauguration of--it was a gubernatorial inauguration.  I think it was Preston Smith, and I think we went to one for [Doc Briscoe?} as well.  And so, in a couple of years, he served as a delegate to the state party, and so, he--I think he was a little undercover politician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a Republican politician ?
Speaker 2: No.  It's Democratic.
Speaker 1: Democrat.  Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a--yeah, he's staunch--staunch Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he's a staunch Democrat, but you became a Republican and--interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  What is she?
Speaker 2: Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Democrat.  Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, but that's pretty much how they grew up, but they never told me I had to be a Democrat.  They said, you choose for yourself, you know.  And that's how they were with most--most things in life--in life.  You know, say, "You can--you're smart, you figure it out.  You can solve this problem."  And so, they left it to me to decide.
Story_ID: 23431
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now, what were your studies like here at Bay--I mean at Baylor?
Speaker 2: Well, I kind of got off to a rocky start, because I said, "Oh, I can take 18 hours.  I took, you know, six classes and a P.E. in high school, I could do the very same thing."  That was (laughs)--that was a disaster.  And so, I spent the other seven semesters trying t make up for that first semester when I didn't know diddly-squat about what was going on.  I led a pretty sheltered life.  I didn't, you know, get out a whole lot unless it was a school-related event.  And so, I had a lot of growing up to do that first semester.  And so, I grew up pretty fast.  But most of my studies, you know, the first two years are core, you know, English, history, you know, some math; you know, just kind of the basics that you would take, you know, philosophy; even took that.  One semester English, and then as I got into my junior year, I started getting in to more of my major, which was more of the chemistry and the biologies; the Core A anatomy, which I really, really loved, and some more of the, you know, those types of things that really peaked my interest and made you want to get up and go to class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have some pictures of some of the projects.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I mean, there's one where you had to strip the flesh off a hawk and reassemble his bones?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  Red tail hawk.  And, actually, there's an organization that takes, you know, carcasses of animals, you know, if they're happen to be run over and not too badly maimed.  And so, they--you know, different schools and entities will buy those, purchase those.  And so, to really understand the workings of, you know, a body, you really need to get down to the nitty-gritty.  So you learn much more from a cadaver or from a deceased specimen than you do actually from the living.  So, it was--it was Core A anatomy class, and so, our project in--and as other teams were in the class, was to actually take a specimen, you know, dress it, you know, take the feathers off, and the flesh, and the bones, and you had to bleach him and get him nice, and squeaky white and clean, and then reassemble them.  And so, either you either use, you know, photographs or drawings and, you know, you had to make sure all the metatarsal bones were the same and--because you got a grade on it.  And so, it was first--that was my first introduction to Super Glue as well.  It's kind of, I guess it's maybe the first year we were able to afford that.  And so, we got super glued to the bones several times; the teacher, and my lab partner and myself; Regina McKinney (ph. splg.).  And we--we got it made, and he actually sat in the museum.  Our--Dr. Brown, who's very meticulous about these types of things, actually liked our specimen and had it in the museum for quite a while on display, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You have a nice picture of an eye.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That was--that was in my other class.  I think, that was a--well, actually, a stretch for me was genetics.  And I remember, actually, we had to bring in these fruit flies, and we had to make sure that, you know, if we bred the red eyes with the white eyes, we'd get pink-eyed fruit flies.  And so, you know, all times of the night, sometimes you had to go and cull out, you know, take out certain portions of your fruit flies and make sure they had enough of this little meal stuff that they ate.  And so, I remember coming from, you know, parties and, you know, and having my boyfriend drop me off at the lab and going up and, you know, count--thinning out my fruit flies and a couple of them got in my hair and they got in my lab coat, and go back to my dorm, my dorm room is full of fruit flies (laughs).  And so, my dorm mother was very upset.  At that point, we had, like, warm body checks where they would actually come and see you every night, "Okay.  I'm just making sure you're here."  You know, boys couldn't come up to your dorm room and, you know, they'd check you off, "Yeah, you're in bed, you're in bed, you're bed."  And so, my dorm mother got upset, says, "You got all these bugs and flies in here.  You need to leave that stuff in your lab."  So.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, what you described is almost like--like black colleges and universities in those days, which were the--a model or a southern model, and it took a lot of the northern students, they were taken aback by the customs they faced--
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: --once entering college.  We had more freedom in high school than they had at, say Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  Right.  No, my dad loved that aspect, that there was, you know, a couple of dorm mothers there, and that every night we had a wing dean, you know, the guys (that they call?) residence assistants.  We had a wing dean, though, come and check, "Okay, where's your roommate?"  "She's in the shower."  "She needs to come see me."  And, you know, yeah, and if you weren't in by a certain time, they called your parents.  And so, I made sure I was in because I did not want my daddy coming up there and read me the riot act.  So, and, because when I left home, you know, it was like, "Don't forget your obligations," and "You got a job to go do, and it's your future."  And I remember that night we were outside my carport, he talked to me about that.  And so, I definitely didn't want them calling my daddy.  So, I was home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you--did you have a favorite course?
Speaker 2: It would have to be anatomy.  And even though, you know, I really bombed in genetics, I would say it was genetics after--when I--after I changed my major.  Before I changed my major I was a geology major.  And, you know, I said, "Well, you know, I really like the scientific piece," but, you know, once I got there, I said, "You know, I'm interested in kind of rocks and the formation."  I was always interested in dinosaurs and, you know, finding fossils.  And so, the first two semesters at Baylor, I was probably a geology major.  And so, we would take--go out on these field trips, and I was one of kind of the assistants, and, you know, kind of helping folks, you know, pick out the rocks and things.  And my professor there, another Dr. Brown, you know, was really adamant about me staying in geology when he figured, when I told him I was actually going to change my major and get into the biology and chemistry.  And so, he says, "You know, right now, there's probably one female Ph.D. in all the United States, you know, a geologist.  You know, your road is paved for you."  And, you know, at that point, you know, I had to really do some soul searching.  I said, "You know, I really--I'm really into the life sciences."  I really thought I wanted geology because it was different and I'd never heard of a--you know, people--never knew a real geologist before.  And, after that first two semesters, said, "Right now, I really need to go to back to what I really like," and that was the life sciences.  So, that's kind of where I ended up.  So, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, anyhow I really liked geology, but ending up, I really liked the genetics class and the Core A anatomy class.  Even in Core A, you know, they take certain specimens from our--from our--specimens, you know, we had to (cut up?) fetal pigs, and we had sharks, and these would be, you know, kind of the carcasses.  And then they'd go stick a pin in this one vein and put a number on it, so you had to tell what that vein was.  And so, we had--we call them practicums.  And so, there'd be maybe 50 or 75 different carcasses, you know, kind of laid out, and we'd go through, one by one and have to name what those pieces of the body were.  So, I always liked the practicums--the practicums.
Speaker 1: Now, how were your grades?
Speaker 2: It could have been better, could have been lots better.  I did my fair amount of partying.  I'd had a good time, and going to football games and, you know, meeting my husband and all that.  Could have been better, but--.
Speaker 1: So did you make the honor roll or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  No.  Baylor was very difficult.  You know, I was proud of my kids when both of them went off to school.  They made the Dean's List, I think, their first two or three semesters, different schools.  Then they pledged and it all went downhill.  But, no, I was never quite that gifted.  Baylor was very--Baylor still is--it was a very tough school.  But I did okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  Not quite 3.0, but I did okay.
Speaker 1: You learned the material, apparently, in-- (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I learned the material and I learned about life.  You know, and a lot of--for me was actually growing up, because I had lived a very sheltered--small town environment, but I grew up a lot too.  And I--and I guess, and I don't know, maybe some people would have said I was ADD or might still be ADD.  But I liked a lot of adventures and researching new and different things.  And so, probably times when I should have been buckling down, I was off looking for the next adventure, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 23432
Speaker 1: Now, so when it came time to graduate--oh, wow, I'm sorry.  You met your husband there too, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Mm-hm.  Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So then just--tell us about that?
Speaker 2: He was actually--well, I was actually a hostess for--for the recruiting team.  And so, again, you know, kind of my people touch.  And my roommate and I--well, actually Carol--Carol Davison and I, were actually asked to help with the recruiting, and that when football players would come to campus, you know, they needed pretty girls to, you know, maybe go out them or go to parties with them; that kind of thing.  And so, Carol and I signed up to do this.  And so, I met him, actually, at a recruiting party.  And I didn't like him at first, thought he was arrogant.  But once he got to school, we took some classes together and then we became friends.  And he was a little bit of a challenge.  You know, he said--he said, "I may be in likes.  I'll never be in love.  I'll be in like."  And so, I kind of took that as a challenge.  Like, "Okay, Dude.  I'm going to make you love me."  So, anyway, that was--that was kind of how I met him.  And so, there were several other girls that actually were, you know, kind of helped the football team with recruiting.  We got a bad name there too, because they thought we were doing things we really weren't.  But, I actually got to meet Billy Sims.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the great--
Speaker 2: And he was the Heisman Trophy--yep.  Yep, trophy--mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --Heisman Trophy, yeah.
Speaker 2: And Billy was really a nice guy.  And, I think, we maybe were pen pals there for a while.  And, you know, coaches were a little upset that he went to O.U., and not to Baylor.  But he's a really nice man.  And, you know, he had to look out for his future and things he wanted to do for his grandmother and all, so.  Trying to see who else famous did I meet like that.  It's probably Bill Simms was the only one.  Oh, Mike Singletary.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, my boyfriend at the time was actually recruiting him, and so I got to tag along with them for the Friday night trip, and then Saturday they went, do their own thing.  But that's how I met Mike--Mike Singletary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's right.  He's definitely from Baylor.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And a Chicago guy.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: I remember him from the '85 [1985] Bears.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  A very intense person.  Always has been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you succeeded in making your husband love you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I sure did.
Speaker 1: I mean, when he was pre-husband (laughs).
Speaker 2: (laughs).  I sure did.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And so, I was there '74 [1974] when we played the Cotton Bowl; hadn't been to the Cotton Bowl in like 50 years.  Coach [Grant Teaff?] was there at the time.  And so, that was actually my freshman year.  So we played the--played Penn State, the Nittany Lions and Coach Paterno.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's pre-scandal days.
Speaker 2: Pre-scandal, yep.  Yep, yep,yep, yep.
Story_ID: 23433
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, when you were on the verge of graduation from college, what were your prospects?  Were you thinking about going to graduate school or were you thinking about getting a job or what?
Speaker 2: I thought of medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought about dental school.  And then I went back to where I felt like my love was, and then talking with Dr. Pinkus, you know, I really had, from what he said, a "knack" for the practical, for the lab.  And so, yeah, I could have gone to graduate school but, you know, that was "X" amount of time more in school and cost, and--
Speaker 1: Were you married by then or were you--?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No, I was not married yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (unclear).
Speaker 2: And, you know, when you think about, you know, kind of where I was, I was still thinking about, "Oh, my dad as to pay for all of this."  And knowing that I had a brother and a sister about to come up, I said, "You know, I need to get off from them and get into the workplace.  So, and then, not thinking about fellowships and scholarships, kind of like some of the students do now, not--maybe not as--they may be there, but not as prevalent or maybe I didn't know about them.  And so, I said, I'm going to try to get something where I can get into the workplace and then kind of get off of my folks.  And then I went back to that cytology lab that I saw, you know, where they actually, you know, slice this breast into these very, very, you know, paper-thin slices so they could the diagnosis.  So I said, "I want to do something on a cellular level."  And so, that's when I signed up to go, what they call then, Medical Technology School.  So it's Clinical Laboratory Science School now, and I did an internship for a year.  So, I thought about dental school.  Dad wasn't too thrilled about that.  I guess maybe he was thinking about the cost.  Thought about medical school and almost applied to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and--oh, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And then just didn't quite do that.  But, anyway, it's the choice I made and I don't regret it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you interned at Clinical Laboratory Science--the clinical laboratory science program for Baptist Hospital?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yes, mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Of Southern Texas?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Southeast Texas.
Speaker 1: Southeast Texas.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  In Beaumont.  Yep.
Speaker 1: So you were--you're still at Baylor when you were doing this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I actually graduated.
Speaker 1: You graduated first (unclear) (simultaneous) do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could do that dual, where you go to med-tech school and, you know, and lab-science school, and then you get your degree afterwards.  So I kind of had a dual--dual degree.  I just got mine and then I finished up there.  So I was really in school five years.
Story_ID: 23434
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So your graduation from Baylor was in 1978?
Speaker 2: '78 [1978].  Mm-hm.  Did my graduate for internship in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: And then you--.  Okay.  1979.  Okay.  Then you went on to the VA--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Medical Center, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about that.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Actually, you know, I was looking for work at that point.  And, actually went in, I think I found the job in the newspaper in Waco.  So I moved back to Waco and interviewed with Larry Miller, who was a lab director there, and was hired on the spot.  Actually, he was impressed with my grades and with (kind of my practical?) knowledge of instrumentation, and worked there from '79 [1979] to '81 [1981].  And, enjoyable from the extent of the equipment that we had to work with.  You know, being the government, we had, you know, pre-state of the art equipment.  A little depressing because it was a psychiatric hospital and a lot of people were--the vets, you know, a lot of them just didn't get well, you know.  And no fault of the medical staff.  It was just, you know, just was what it was.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something that's always puzzled me.  I don't know what your opinion is about it, but do you think that the experiences of the war contributed a lot to them being so mentally ill or was it just a time for them to become mentally ill because of some sort of imbalance in their system?
Speaker 2: I think you could look at it both ways.  A lot of it was post-traumatic stress.  You know, after seeing some awfully thing--awful things in Vietnam.  There were a few World War II vets as well.  But a lot of that and I think a lot of it was drug use, too, because there were quite a few--we got quite good with chromatography for doing drug screens and drug testing.
Speaker 1: Now, what was that now?
Speaker 2: It's liquid chromatography, where you can actually, you know, take a urine specimen and you apply electrical current and it separates out the different bands according to, you know, the drug that they might be using.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah.  So we got pretty good at doing the drug testing, drug screens.  So, I think it was a little bit of both, you know.  Maybe the influence of the drugs and I think a lot of post-traumatic stress.  And some were actually wounded, and then they had some mental issues too.  So kind of sad but necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  We're going to pause right here again.
Story_ID: 23435
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 1981, you married Ronald Barnes.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  On Valentine's Day.
Speaker 1: And it's a good thing he didn't have to take your last name because he would be--
Speaker 2: Ronald McDonald (laughs).
Speaker 1: (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, we chatted about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he gets kidded about that, is that right?  Did anybody ever ask that?
Speaker 2: No.  Very nice.  He's too--he's too big to be--to be teased about anything (laughs).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  All right.  Is he a big person?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah.  He was an offensive lineman for Baylor.  Yeah, he played tackle and guard, and played center.  And we actually met through this kind of, this recruiting thing, you know, it was at his recruiting party.  And, first year we knew other we took a couple of classes together, I thought he was arrogant, you know, kind of a show-off.  But then, the next year he actually broke his leg in a practice right before the start of the--it was the Old Southern conference, right at the start of the season.  And being a benevolent person like I am (laughs), I actually went to the hospital and kind of sat with him, you know, being there by himself.  And so, it just kind of blossomed from there, and we just kind of started dating from there.  But, you know, he often comments, "Yeah, you know, I had to break my leg, and you had to slow me down for you to catch with me."  So, he may think I put a hit on him, I don't know.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now, he became a school principal, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's what he's doing right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was going to be a big season for him.  He was selected as a pre-season All-American Sophomore to watch, you know, great potential; and the injury.  You know, and at that time, you know, his leg healed up just fine, but, you know, back then, you know, if you had some type of injury like that, you know, none of the pros really wanted to touch you.  You know, like RG3 [Robert Griffin III], you know, messed up his knee, and back in the days, you know, you messed up your ACL or whatever, your career was over.  And so, it was a different, different place.  And so, you know, he did walk--free agent.  He was a free agent for a while after he finished school, but (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: He tried out some other teams?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah.  But was not drafted, I think, because of the injury.
Speaker 1: So did he ever play for anybody in the pros?
Speaker 2: He has tried out for the Saints, and was with them for about six months.  And, I think, pulled a muscle or whatever.  Says, "You know, I could be a pretty good school teacher.  I'm going to go teach school and coach."  So.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's a different world by professional sports (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But this is the business.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, in 1982 you gave birth to twins.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Boy and a girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Ronald Barnes II, and Ashley.
Speaker 2: Amber.
Speaker 1: Amber?  Okay.  We got the wrong name here.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Good thing I said something.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  Amber.
Speaker 1: Amber.  What's her middle name?
Speaker 2: Janel.  Same as mine.
Story_ID: 23436
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  All right.  And, meanwhile, this--during this period, now this is between the--were you working during this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left the VA [Waco Veteran's Administration Medical Center] in '81 [1981] after I got married, and actually moved down to the Freeport-Lake Jackson Area, you know, where I work now.  And, I was actually hired to work in the hospital laboratory there, doing drug testing and blood banking, and just general bench chemistries.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was it Lake Jackson Hospital?  Is that where --
Speaker 2: It was Community Hospital.
Speaker 1: Community Hospital in Lake Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it's Brazosport Regional Health Care Center now, but it was Community Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--well, then--well, tell us about the--.  You decided in '86 [1986] that you wanted to pursue your interest in becoming a full-time chemist, right?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: You mean when I went to work for Dow or?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was, again, you know, the adventurous; still am the adventurous type and had worked Brazosport, you know, almost seven years and really looking for a different opportunity.  I did want the lab director role.  I had applied for that and was told, "Well, you know, you women move around with your husbands when they're coaches and, you know, that might not be a good job for you."  (rolls eyes).  So, I said, "Well, you know, I probably need to find another job someplace."  So, I actually applied at Dow and called them every week until they hired me.  You know, just didn't hear a lot of them and, you know, I was ready to move and couldn't understand why they didn't want to hire me; my experience and my work ethic.  And so, I called them every week.  And, finally, I think they just got tired, "Will somebody please interview this woman and give her a job so she'll leave us alone."  So that's how I got to Dow.  And I actually came to work in their clinical lab and to work with the start-up of their drug testing program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that--this is an in-house drug testing program to--?
Speaker 2: Not the testing, per se.  We thought about the testing, but it's just easier to ship it all out and, you know, have it confirmed by G.C. [gas chromatography] Mass Spec [mass spectrometry]--by, you know, a certified lab.  But it was actually the setting up for the protocols as far as the chain of custody and, you know, the how and the where we would actually, you know, do the testing and, you know, the integrity of the specimen, and actually from that, drove me working on the patent that I got, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So.  All right.  So you--so you've become somewhat of a laboratory specialist--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --by, you know, practically by working in--
Speaker 2: In the lab.
Speaker 1: --in the lab.
Speaker 2: And that's and I was certified.  I took some tests and I was certified as a clinical laboratory scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So.  A lot of people don't know that you can do that.  And, you know--.  Okay.  Well, a lot of occupations I think that people don't, you know, conceive of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --through med school that can happen.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, in '91 [1991], you become the Special Chemistry Lab Supervisor for Dow.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  That's true.
Speaker 1: So this means you're the big shot in all the labs here (laughs)?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: There's many, many, many labs at Dow.  But, no, this was a clinical lab.  And so, we actually had some special equipment that I was trained on, that I was the expert on.  And so, that's--so I headed up that department.
Story_ID: 23437
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the same year that you had the patent, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, we applied--
Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We applied for the patent back in '89 [1989].  And I was--the Medical Director at the time came to me and she says, "You know, we really need to--we've heard that there's been some integrity issues with our specimens, and we really need a way to confirm that they're probably most likely from the person that we're trying to test.  And so, we need a way to figure out the temperature without actually sticking a thermometer into the specimen, because you can contaminate it; and if came up positive, then someone'll say, 'Well, you had whatever that was on that thermometer and stuck it in there.  So, I'm, you know, I'm not using drugs.'"  And so, he gave me the charge to solve the problem, and so, from some of my dealings with other people in the plant and kind of being, you know, the adventurous one and saying, "Well, what's that," and the curious one, I knew of a friend that was using an infrared thermometer to check the pressure on some steam lines that, you know, because the plant has jillions lines of steam and chemicals that run through them.  And so, I went to him and asked him, "So, you know, that will take the temperature of just about anything."  "Yeah, it will."  So, I say, "I want to use it to take the temperature of a cup of body fluid, urine, without actually having to go and poke a thermometer inside.  So he said, "Oh, yeah.  It should work for that," you know.  So he loaned one to me, and so, I take it back to the lab and try to figure out a range, because, you know, of course, you know, we're at 98.6 as far as body temperature but, you know, by the time you lose a fluid, you know, you're going to drop some degrees.  And so, I had to figure out the range of where it would be, you know, the least acceptable.  You know, where it would be the coldest.  You know, "Okay, this just didn't come out of you, must have come out of somebody else, and you just bought over here to us to test."  And then what would be the warmest it could be after leaving, you knowing, walking from a collection stall into a place where the temperature will be tested.  And so, that took lots of specimens from a lot of different people and, you know, to do the background work.  And so, we got it done, got this range that if it was too cold, if it was less than, you know, 91 degrees Fahrenheit, then it probably came from somewhere else, collected someplace else, and then bought to the facility.  If it was over--I can't remember the high number now.  I think if it was over 96 degrees, then they probably got it someplace and heated it up and tried to fool us, which is what happens sometimes.  And so, once we got that range, we were able to tell if it had been adulterated, you know, somebody had tampered with it and if it really, truly came from that person's body within that time period.  So, some kind of way somebody in the patent department heard about it, said, "Oh, this is a new application for this infrared thermometer and you guys ought to file a patent for it.  And we had it in a little carrying case so it could be portable and, you know, and, you know, and had exact--to the distance from the cup to the nozzle to take the temperature and it's consistent all the time.  And so, again, when the patent attorneys called me and said, "Hey, let me see your lab books and your background work, and let's write this up."  So it took two years for the filing process and all that.  And so, actually got the patent in '91 [1991], and I was named "Texas Inventor" that year.  And from that--from what I'm told, from that, the company sold the license for about $100,000 a few years after that.  But what I'm told, that is one of the basis for the little thermometers that you use to take the baby's temperatures. Same concept, infrared thermography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, my patent's been cited maybe about eight to ten times, I think, where people have actually cited my work and what they've done and put it into their patents, so.  It's pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a good idea that--now, is it paying off in terms of money?
Speaker 2: I got a silver dollar as the patent. The patent actually belonged to the company, so the company got, you know, they got 100K or whatever, which is fine.  You know, it was their equipment, their problem.
Speaker 1: Do the rights ever revert to you?
Speaker 2: I doubt it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That might not--might not be a bad idea (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You should probably monitor it.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: We interviewed a man who worked for Monsanto who invented the way of imprinting circuits on silicone, you know, that made a lot of the transistors to be possible, and he got paid eventually.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.  He's 95 now.  He finally got--I think it reverted to him when he was in his eighties.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: At any rate--.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: That's just--this is a big deal,  Now, were other people on the patent too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There were two other engineers, a carpenter, and another lab person.  And they actually came up--the two engineers were the ones that actually showed me the thermographer (sic)--thermographer (sic) in the first place, you know, because they were the ones using it on steam traps for nondestructive testing.  And I kind of knew these guys.  I kind of went nosing around in their business.  And then the carpenter and the other lab tech were the ones that designed the actual little stand that the cup sat in.  And so, the patent attorney said, "Well, it's really you and Aaron and"--I can't remember the carpenter's name now--. "It's really the three of you."  And I said, "Well, no."  I said, "You know, I really want to include the two guys that I actually got the technology from.  And so there were five of us.  Yeah.  Five of us on the patent, so.
Story_ID: 23438
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you know, now this is good.  It gives you a little reputation here at Dow (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's how I got the connection with NOBCCHE.  I think someone was actually doing a patent search and found my name and put the two together.  "That was one of my NOBCCHE folks who has the patent."
Speaker 1: Now, did you--.  Now, NOBCCHE stands for--
Speaker 2: The National Organization for the Professional Advancement for Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers. N-O-B-C-C-H-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, we've interviewed other members of NOBCCHE.  Now, NOBCCHE was actually founded in the 19--mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Mid-'70s [1970s]. Yep.
Speaker 1: Right.  And like a lot of the black professional organizations were founded.  And so did you start attending the meetings of NOBCCHE at this point?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't start attending NOBCCHE until probably the late '90s [1990s], early 2000 timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.   It says in 1992 you received certification as clinical laboratory director--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yep.
Speaker 1: --for the national certification--from the National Certification Agency at Baylor.
Speaker 2: Not--that's not associated with Baylor's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's not associated with Baylor at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a stand-alone entity.
Speaker 1: (unclear) a stand-alone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think they've since merged with American Society for Clinical Pathologists, ASCP.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think they merged with them by now.
Story_ID: 23439
Speaker 1: Okay.  Says here in '93 [1993] you served as laboratory director for Dow Chemical.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, does that make you in charge of all the labs (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  Just those clinical labs (laughs).
Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. (laughs).  Yeah, there's many, many labs at Dow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Too many to name.
Speaker 1: So you're a laboratory director?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was for anything [I'll?] do with the human testing.  That's what I had at that point.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you come with any other ideas to--that were patentable?
Speaker 2: I've got one in the works right now.  But I'm doing it on my terms, personal side, so.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, tell me about some of the highlights, because I don't know if (unclear) we have an outline here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm just going by my outline.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, if I skip over something, let me know of something big.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  1994 you become clinical lab director in the Occupational Health Department--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --here at Dow, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Same year you're named Outstanding Scouter for Dow--from Dow Chemical; is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had an explorer post with Dow, and one of the extra tangents was the medical post, the medical group.  And so, we would have field trips, and again, you know, try to influence kids to go into science and technology.  Again, we had this medical post that would actually go--we went to open-heart surgeries several times; we would go back to M.D. Anderson and look at the, you know, look in the slides in the labs there.  And, again, helping to expose students to science and technology.  And, again, trying to, you know, actually get any student, not just African-American, but any student to actually look into those disciplines for professions.  In one of our--one of students actually is a physician now; Dr. Rosalind Spells (ph. splg.), and she's in South Carolina.  And so, she was one of the ones that came to our medical post, Dow.  So I'm kind of proud of Rosalind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, it says here in '95 [1995] you worked as a QA/QC chemist.  Now what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Quality Control and Quality Assurance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it would be like QC/QA?
Speaker 2: QC, mm-hm.  QC/QA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We--actually, I worked myself out of a position in the lab.  We were getting to a point where we were paying quite a bit for service contracts with equipment and not just--not seeing the return on our investments, so to speak.  And so, we saw where we could actually outsource some of the work.  I know it's not a good term.  And so, I was actually helping to manage the lab in Louisiana.  You know, we're here in Texas.  And we actually found an entity that would take the samples.  We would collect them and then send them to this lab, because what we had started to do, we had people to collect--we closed the lab in Louisiana, our major plant there, and we actually have a corporate shuttle jet that goes back and forth between the two sites every day.  And so, they would send the blood on the airplane, we'd pick it up and then run--run--run it in our lab here.  And, you know, we just started looking at the cost, say we could do it a lot--a lot less expensive and actually outsourcing it.  And so, I pretty much worked myself out of a job, which was fine.  And, you know, I said, as long as I can be, you know, constructive and helping you, and instrumental in helping you find the entity that will actually take over the work, then I'm okay with it, and I'll just fine myself a job somewhere (laughs).  And I actually did.  And that's when I went into the Quality Control role.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the Texas Analytical and Environmental Lab?
Speaker 2: Yep.  That was--that's part of our R&D group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, that particular lab actually looks at the sampling from wastewater treatment plants and from some of the other plants across the site, just to make sure that, you know, there's not contaminants, that there's enough oxygen in the water and not too many solvents in the water.  So we were actually doing the testing for the different plants and for the wastewater treatment plant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1994 you became Dow Chemical and Company's training specialist for--it doesn't say for--well, a training specialist for what?  I mean, this is 1996.
Speaker 2: It was still under manufacturing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or the water lab.  It was still on the manufacturing side.  And so, I got to do some, what we call quality control, the quality environmental training with our training department, and then I was doing some in-house training as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were any of your children involved in the scouts (unclear) when you (unclear) (simultaneous).0
Speaker 2: They were young at that time.  And so, they would get carted along anytime I had an event, they'd be right there with me.  And so, I'm surprised they want to do anything, you know, community service, (when I was asked?), they did it all as the kids growing up.  But, yeah, they would be right there with me.  So, they got to see it all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  '97 [1997] you became the Dow Chemical's human resource partner auxiliary support for Research and Development., right?
Speaker 2: That was my first stint into HR.  It's probably '97 [1997], '98 [1998] timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, actually, one of my mentors had seen me doing some training, says, "You know, I think you'd be really good in HR."  I'm like, "Me?  In HR they fire people over there all the time.  I don't want to go there."  Say, "No, no, no.  They do other things."  You know, the limit that my knowledge was.  And so, I actually--we have an internal job posting system, and so, I actually posted on a job in HR and actually got the job.  And so, been there ever since, because I found my niche, so to speak.
Story_ID: 23440
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, describe your--you have described your approach to this as--and you would describe yourself as a--it says here, quote, "an anthropological behaviorist," unquote.  So, there's a science to--
Speaker 2: (laughs).
Speaker 1: --at some--to what you do as a--in HR.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's to study people, actually.  And so anthropology you know, the study of ancient people or like people--current people or people in general and their behaviors, and that's what I do now pretty much in HR.  Again, you know, sometimes HR is seen as the police or, you know--you know, the enforcer.  But it's really more of helping people to understand that, you know, that we all have behaviors that we don't like to repeat and to help people they need to modify their behavior to stay employed in our company.  And so, I study people and the behaviors that they have, and then, what can we do to modify that behavior.  And sometimes, you know, there are different degrees of what we use.  Sometimes, you know, just a stern talking to or coaching session is appropriate, and sometimes you actually have to separate the person from the company, because their behavior is too egregious or just not acceptable, you know, very inappropriate.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to have a consultation with a psychologist or something to be able to--or an anthropologist in terms of trying to, you know, designing what you--your approach to HR?
Speaker 2: Not really.  What I did, you know, they say as adults, we learn better from other adults.  And so, I actually got a couple of good coaches and mentors, and they walked me through it.  Plus, I went back and got my M.B.A to give me the practical terminology and applicability in the study of people when I got my human resources management M.B.A.  So (it took effect?]--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So, and when was---when did you get the human resources management position?
Speaker 2: I started studying that in 2003 and I finished in 2005.  But I had some very good teachers, mentors, when I first got into HR that, you know, practically taught me the ropes.
Speaker 1: What school did you go to?
Speaker 2: University of Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So that's 2005.  But, you were like going to school on the job?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, taking courses?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  So I'm just understanding now, you changed--it is a whole different (category now?).
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, yeah.  But it was an adventure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I love an adventure.  So, it was new, it was exciting, and I had people that were willing to support me.  You know, before I went--even went to work on my degree, the company would send me for courses and training.  And so, it was not like, you know, I just kind of walked into it with no real good support.  Typically, now they just hire people that have HR degrees.  So I'm kind of old school.  And a lot of it is common sense, too, that, you know, you just think about, you know, what my mom used to call "mother wit."   She always said my grandfather had great "mother wit," and he only went to third grade.  But he was able to open the grocery store and delivered groceries by a wheel barrel.  You know, he was kind of the first delivery man there.  But, she--you know, she said, he didn't have a lot of education.  He had really good "mother wit."  He wanted to make sure all his children had the opportunity to go to college.  I think they all went.  They all didn't finish, but they all went to some type of technical school or college.  When I look at my four siblings and myself, we all went to college, and three of the four have advanced degrees.  So, you know, for our--probably for our town, that may be a little unheard of for that time.  But anyway.
Speaker 1: I know people call "mother wit" now "social I.Q." and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: But, you know, and there are people that really seem to have it, and then some people, they (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Can't buy it.  Yep.  Yep.  You can't buy it.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us an example of some--of course, you can--I don't want you to give us the names.  I won't ask you that--but, like, of some incidents here that you had to deal with at Dow in terms of HR?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The good things would be, you know, the recognition that we give for people that, you know, do outstanding work.  We had one--one of our nurses that actually saved someone by doing the Heimlich method, you know, at--inside of a restaurant over in Galveston [Texas].  So, we were able to recognize her.  You know, those don't happen as often as we'd like.  But there are situations where we've had individuals who have deliberately or not have broken certain safety rules for really being unsafety (sic), because we want you to go home the same way you came to work that day.  And so, for whatever reason, if they disregard a safety rule and, you know, we find out about it, then there's got to be a balance of consequences.  And so, you know, we've had to work on a few issues like that.  You know, people who were caught places where they shouldn't be at certain times.  "You know, you should really be here watching your line of products coming through, but yet, you're over here asleep or in your car or not where you're supposed to be."  Then we have to--we have to take action on those types of things, because working in a chemical company is very different.  In a manufacturing facility, especially, it's very different from working at other places.  It's not like retail, it's not like, you know, the restaurant.  The things that we do and make can really have bad outcomes if, you know, the wrong mixtures are done or the wrong temperatures are applied.  And it not only affects our company, it could affect the community.  And, you know, people have seen quite a bit of that over time.  I won't name them.  Everybody knows who they--who know--what those are.  But, you know, you want to keep things inside the pipes, is what we call it.  When you think about a chemical plant, a chemical facility, it's really just kind of an over-scaled chemistry set.  And so, you know, we're mixing, you know, different chemicals at different temperatures and pressures, and if you're not careful, you know, you could have a misstep.  And so, again, you know, people manage the processes and if they're not engaged, then things can go very wrong very quickly.  And so, we need to make sure that people understand that there are expected behaviors and expected performance.  And so, we have to help enforce that.  And, again, it's not necessarily that we want to fire people and, you know, and, you know, make people's lives miserable.  But, you know, we all--we all have to be held accountable.  And so, we help to hold people accountable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you've been in human resources ever since, you said?
Speaker 2: The '97 [1997], '98 [1998] timeframe, yes.
Story_ID: 23441
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now in 2000 you ran for mayor of Lake Jackson, Texas.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Actually, it was 1996 is when I first ran for City Council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And ran (laughs)--kind of funny.  I beat my opponent by four votes, and he just could not believe that I beat him and asked for a recount.  And with the recount I still beat him.  I beat him by one, I think at that point.  I think they threw the other two ballots, three ballots out.  And still couldn't believe it.  But I ran unopposed with two-year terms.  So the first year I beat him, second year I ran unopposed.  And then, that was in '96 [1996] to '98 [1998], '98 [1998] to 2000.  Then 2000, I ran for mayor and I lost.  I ran a good, good, good, good campaign.  The campaign part I really never liked, the helping people that I really don't know part.  The serving part, I really do love that.  I think people have a greater touch with their local, you know civic leaders than they do, say with the president or even the governor, because you see them in the grocery store and, you know, "Hey, you know, you guys need to do something about, you know I've got dogs coming into my yard, dumping my trash over, tearing my trash bags open every, you know, Tuesday and Friday.  You guys need to do something about the dogs."  And so, I can go back to Animal Control.  "Hey, you know, so-and-so on Azalea is having issues with, you know, dogs in the trash," and so, it's a (really high touch?).  And you really, you know, you're really into the community.  You know, you get a phone call or people drop by your office, "Hey, you're on a council.  We're having this issue on whatever.  Help."  And so, you really do--you're really a public servant.  You're really serving the public.  Again, some of the other higher offices, you really--you're really a distance from the public.  But I really liked that part.  I don't like to campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you ran for mayor in 2000.  You didn't win that, but you were on City Council then.
Speaker 2: No, I came off of City Council.
Speaker 1: Oh, you came on in 2000.
Speaker 2: I gave up my seat.  Yeah, I was--I gave up my seat to run.  But that's okay.
Speaker 1: So did you ever go back?
Speaker 2: You know, I acted--I was acting mayor for about ten days.  I think it was in '99 [1999].  The actual mayor went on a Hawaiian vacation.  He was gone.  And so, I was mayor for about ten days in his absence, and actually ran a City Council meeting, so I was mayor.  I've kind of been there, done that, but--
Speaker 1: So this is--you were mayor, an acting mayor in what year?
Speaker 2: I think it was '99 [1999] when the--
Speaker 1: That's what I have.
Speaker 2: --yeah, the acting mayor actually went on vacation, and he was in Hawaii, so out of the state.  And, you know, as mayor pro-tem, and a vice-mayor, you know, I had to sit in his stead, and I actually, like I said, I ran a City Council meeting one night, and we didn't have any big snafus or things that happen that would (print wrong in the night?).  So it worked out well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  We're going to pause here again.
Story_ID: 23442
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you lost our father in 2000.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And you lost your mother in 2001.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And they were--well, tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: My dad [William Jefferson McDonald], in 2000 my dad actually--I talked to him right after New Year's Day, and he seemed a little upset, I guess, couldn't understand what was going on.  He was a little short with me.  Again, you know, he was not in a really good mood.  About two weeks later, we got a call that he had gone home and just hadn't come out for a couple of days.  And so, my cousin actually went in.  He had to break in the house and found him there and got him rushed to the hospital.  And he had started going into renal shutdown.  And so, he stayed there, got on dialysis, which he hated; took away his independence to a certain extent.  And he was on dialysis for about, I guess, for about eight months.  He got one of those superbugs, as they call them, and just--just resistant to any type of antibiotic, and he was gone in eight months.  So, I don't know if it was that they didn't clean his arm very good, you know, not placing blame or anything, but he did get an infection and then passed away.  And then Mom [Selna Mae McDonald] died about six months after that in 2001.  We--she'd actually had, I think, a stroke and maybe some Parkinson's, and so, she'd actually been in a nursing facility since '95 [1995].  And so, Dad was very, you know, diligent and he would go and see her every day, and took really good care of her.  But, you know, he couldn't--he tried for a while at home.  She started getting sick in '93 [1993], but it was just too much for him and, you know, still trying to run the grocery store.  And we tried to get them to move closer to us, but, you know, again, he was familiar with home and, you know, kind of his routine.  And so, she had stopped speaking, I think, probably in '93 [1993], '94 [1994] timeframe.  And so, it was either stroke and/or Parkinson's related.  And so, she, like I said, she passed away six months after he did.  So, they're together in heaven.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did he pass away before you ran for mayor or afterwards?
Speaker 2: He actually passed away after--no.  He passed away after I ran for mayor.  Yeah, because the Saturday we have the elections, the first Saturday in May of that year.  It was my daughter's debutante ball, and so, he was actually here for that.  And he--that was May, and so, he passed away in--that August.  What he--when I was asked to apply for one of these gubernatorial appointments, and he was aware of that and, you know, he'd ask me sometimes when I call, he was, you know, kind of sickly, he would ask, "Well, have you heard anything from the governor?  You heard anything from Governor Bush?"  I'd say, "Oh, nothing yet, Dad.  Nothing yet."  And so, he actually passed away that August, and I was appointed that November.  But he was looking forward to me serving--serving my state.  Again, got to give back, got to give back.  So even until the very end he was making sure that I was staying engaged, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yep.  He didn't get to see that happen.
Story_ID: 23443
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and--okay.  In 2003 you became the National Secretary for NOBCCHE.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That's correct.  Some of my colleagues in Freeport had actually asked me to run for president of the local chapter for NOBCCHE, and so I told them, sure, I would do it.  And so, I actually attended my first president's meeting in 2003 and met some of the officers there and got very acquainted with Dr. Markita Quarles (ph. splg.).  And she later asked me about--she was secretary at that point, and so, she said--had some aspirations about being president.  And so, she was looking for her successor for secretary and asked me would I mind running.  And so, me, being the volunteer extradinaire, and then being an adventuress, so to speak, I said, "Sure, I'll run."  And so, I ran in 2003.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, in 2004--oh, that same year, you were named Most Distinguished Alumnae for 2003 by Baylor University.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was asked to, or I was nominated by, I don't know if it was my daughter who--for the Black Alum Award, and so, I did the application, and I was actually selected that year, and actually got to meet Drayton McLane, who was at one point the owner of the Astros [Houston Astros], and he's a Baylor Alum.  He did his--I think he did his graduate work at Baylor.  And so, Drayton and I became friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--okay.  In 2004, you became Human Resource Business Partner and Consultant for Core Research and Development.  Was this--so this is here at--
Speaker 2: That's still at Dow.  Yeah, Core R&D.
Speaker 1: --here at Dow.  Okay.  All right.  So, now, the gubernatorial appointment finally came through in 2006, right?
Speaker 2: It came through, actually, in 2000.
Speaker 1: 2000?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And so, I think I attended my first training, maybe that was November--maybe January 2001.  And so, that was for the Texas Medical Board.  And what this actually--this group that I serve on, it's one of the district review committees, and we actually hear all the complaints that patients or other physicians or hospitals wage against physicians.  And so, it's a little bit of HR for doctors, because, you know, a lot of doctors are self-employed, you know, work for themselves.  And so, we're kind of the oversight for patients as their advocates, maybe (you know?), of some of the physicians.  Again, it's not one of these things where, you know, "we got you," you know, "we're going to make you pay."  But it's really to be, you know, modify the behavior, so if the doctor corrects the behavior that he or she may have had, that we're, you know, we're protecting the citizens of Texas and their health care.  When you look at our physicians, it's really a privilege to serve, for me, on this committee.  And it's also a privilege to practice medicine in the state of Texas.  And so, sometimes we have to impart that to our respondents.  But, this is my--this is my 12th year on this committee, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And how many members are on the committee?
Speaker 2: There are four district review committees, and they're--the number range--varies from who's appointed and who's not.  There is a full board that meets several times during the year.  And so, one of our committees actually serves the board.  And, again, I serve at the pleasure of the governor, because I, you know, I am appointed by the governor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I represent Harris County, Brazoria County, and Galveston County.  And Harris County, that's Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 2004, you were selected as one of the quote, Fifty Most Influential Blacks in Research, unquote, by Engineer.com.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).  Yep.  They--because I was still working with the R&D group here in Dow, and, you know, sometimes in that capacity you have influence on, you know, who may be hired or, you know, terminated and, you know, not any really customer intervention.  But, you know, the role that I play in HR can be very influential.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (That's true?) who nominated me for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Governor Rick Perry appointed you that same year, 2004, to serve as the Texas Health and Human Services--on the Texas Health and Human Services Council.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I still serve in that capacity.  He also, in 2006, he reappointed me to the--this review committee, but I'm still on that Health and Human Services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was reappointed, I think, last year.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, it says here one of your mentors here at Dow was Larry J. Washington.  And, now, who is he and what--let's see.  I'm not sure what they're saying about him in this context, but what--?
Speaker 2: He was actually the vice president of HR, Human Resources.  And he's retired now, but he's in Midland, Michigan, where headquarters actually, our headquarters are.  And so, yeah, he was the type of person that--man of few words.  But, you know, what words he did impart upon us were very--were excellent words and words to be--to be reckoned with.  And so, many times, you know, he's say, "Hey, call me and let me know how you're doing, and if you need help, you know, let me know.  If you need to run something by me, let me know."  And so, that's been--that was very beneficial.  I could trust--I could trust Larry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, what about Effie Dorsey (ph. splg.)?
Speaker 2: Effie Dorsey?  Yeah.  Effie just retired, and she was pretty much a peer, but she has very good insight to the workings of HR, and then just to people in general.  And I'll miss Effie.  I'm hoping we'll stay connected in her retirement, but she just retired a couple of months ago.  And, again, very--a good sounding board.  And I think everyone should have a mentor, at least one; maybe two.  But again, sometimes you need someone that can be very honest with you in a safe environment that can mirror reality for you.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So.  Well, just kind of (unclear)--now since, what are some of the highlights from 2005 to the present day?
Speaker 2: Wow.  Highlights.  I think, you know, getting my MBA and working with NOBCCHE, we've gotten--we got some great--we made some great strides in NOBCCHE now; financially, membership is growing; we're, you know, looking at being a, you know, the clearinghouse, so to speak, for technical entities, you know, for National Science Foundation or National Institutes of Health.  You know, again, we want to (build from?) NOBCCHE this eminent cadre of people of color in science and technology, so, you know, people come to us and say, "Okay, where can I find this resource?" or "Where can I find that resource?"  And I get great pleasure in that.  And then seeing some of our newer, younger people come up and say, "You know, I do want to go and do science and technology.  It's really interesting."  When I think about my two kids, you know, my son's an engineer; my daughter, I guess we call it, help HR professionals, and it's kind of human engineering to a certain extent; again, kind of making sure people go in the path or in modifying their behavior.  So, I was able to be accomplishments (sic), I think, get my reappointment to the medical--the review committee for the medical board; my reappointment for helping human services.  Again, I like helping people I don't really know.  And like, that gives me a lot of pleasure.
Story_ID: 23444
Speaker 1: Okay.  So right now, you're--what's your position today?  You're a?
Speaker 2: Associate HR Director.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For Dow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And so, I'm actually--we have several businesses within Dow, and I'm actually in the, what we call, Performance Plastics Division.  And I support a couple of vice presidents in kind of helping them with their strategic plans for moving forward with their groups.  And so, it's a global role, which I find very interesting because I have clients that are in Europe, and Latin America, and China, Mexico, Canada.  And so, you know, any one day I may talk to someone or interact with someone across the globe in this capacity.  So again, me being an adventurer, that really appeals to me.
Speaker 1: Do you get a chance to travel to some of these places?
Speaker 2: I have traveled, yep, to Europe, and actually was planning a trip to China.  And so, me and my little visa and my passport.  And so, that makes it even more interesting, to actually experience the culture that my colleagues work in.  So, yep.  So that makes it enjoyable, very enjoyable.
Story_ID: 23445
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, we always ask this question:  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: You know, I still, you know, I consider myself a futurist and, again, you know, looking out to how good the future can be and, you know, it's optimism wrapped in that.  We really need to get back to what the Bible says, "Love one another."  And I don't think our young people maybe value life as much as we do.  Life is fragile, it's a vapor; but a vapor.  And I don't think our young people value life, because I don't think they see the love and admiration that our older generation can give to them.  I think we need to go back to square one, and I think, you know, it's going to take a little bit of giving on both parts.  When I look at my company where we're by bimodal in population.  We've got, you know, this kind of older generation and this newer generation and, you know, a few people right in the middle.  And so, you know, there's a gap.  And so, even outside of the company, even in our communities, we've got to bridge this gap.  And our young folks have to be a little receptive.  They've got to see that, you know, "Hey, this really isn't working out.  We've got, you know, all my friends and so many of peeps are, you know, locked up or dead and, you know, it's me, you know, a few of us here."  And then when we get to our older generation, you know, we've got to open up some and say, "Hey, you know, those kids really need to be embraced.  And we need to bring, you know, those guys along."  So, it's kind of a--we both have a role to play, both kind of age populations there.  You know, I just see too many, too many killings and too much heartbreak, you know, when we watch the news, especially here in Houston.  We just don't care about each other.  We just don't love each other anymore.  And there's just no regard for life.  And so, I think, you know, the older generation is really going to have to help teach the younger generation.  The younger generation is going to have to realize and see that, "Hey, you know, this isn't working.  We need help.  And then we've got to come together."  All people need an education.  That one point, you know, you could--this is dating myself--you know, you could go and be a gas station attendant.  Well, we don't have that in most--I think, New Jersey's the only state now that has gas station attendants.  That's not really, maybe a profession you want to go and do right now.  I don't think kids realize how tough and difficult it can be without an education.  And, again, I'm not saying you have to go and get a master's or--you know, I'm not saying that.  I'm just saying in some places, you know, we have kids that aren't even getting high school diplomas.  But going into science and technology, to me, is very, very good job security, because, well, you know, we're always wanting to expand and reach and to better our situation, and you do that through science and technology.  You know, that's the basis of life when you look at, you know, just going back to the very cellular level of how we were all, you know, created.  You know, it's scientific.  Yeah, yeah, it could be spiritual and scientific too.  But we need to go back to loving one another.  And, you know, the older generation, it's got to take some risks.  And, you know, that's why I reach to kids as much as I can.  But kids have got to realize, too, and I'm using it as a general term and not to be derogatory towards kids, but--or young people, but they've got to be willing to reach out and accept our help.  But we need each other.
Story_ID: 23446
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how has it been for you as a woman working in human resources and in science, trying to raise a family?  You know, you're a black woman in a major white corporation, you know.  What have been some of these struggles, and have things gotten better over the years in terms of that, you know, trying to deal with all that?  Because I know it's not easy.
Speaker 2: The hard part, I think, comes when--when you want to do for your family; you know, make sure I'm there for my kids, and that's where the real struggle is, the real rub.  But as far as, say, you know, a black female working at Dow, I have always been able to find support.  I've never really run across anyone that would, I'd say, would be discriminatory towards me or treat me unfairly that I knew of.  There're probably some situations I couldn't see, "Yeah, you know, she doesn't like me because, you know, my color or whatever."  But it never quite got to that.  So, you know, I've seen where we're more open to talking about our differences, about diversity, but from my 25 years, I've not ever--I can't ever really pinpoint a time and say, "Well, that happen to me because, you know, they're discriminating against me."  I just can't say that.  We had kind of an investigation that was going on 10, 12 years ago, when we actually broke--kind of going rifling through some emails and actually pulling some.  And I, you know, looking for inappropriate-type material.  And of all those emails, I never saw one--and we went through 10,000 email accounts--I never saw account of any racial slurs or any racially-motivated photographs or emails or whatever.  And I was really proud of my company for that, because you can just think, you know, of somebody, you know, sharing, you know, different little stories or pictures; never saw it.  And I was so proud of my Dow colleagues at the time.  Not saying it doesn't happen, not saying it doesn't go on.  But we never saw evidence of that.  So, you know, if anything, my company has been very supportive of me.  If I wanted to travel, they'll do anything, because, you know, my dad would always say, "We got a whole, you know, you got the jet plane, and you can go anywhere you want."  You know, he was talking about to go or do or learn.  You know, they've been very supportive.  So, I hear some companies are very different and it's different for different people, I'm sure with different leaders.  But for me, I've quite a few leaders and been to several different departments and functions.  I've not ever seen that.  If anything, you know, my leaders have been very supportive of anything I want to do with taking my family or whatever or something.  It's been good for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They're very good for me.
Story_ID: 23447
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: The Dow or just the life or both (laughs)?
Speaker 1: Well, all of it.
Speaker 2: I guess my legacy for life would be, you know, my family, my kids.  And I'm hoping that, you know, I'm leaving generations that will, you know, make an impact.  But I'm hoping my legacy will be that I left it better than I found it, and that I gave when I didn't have to.  Because there were times when I know that I left my family to go work with NOBCCHE or to go to medical board or to go with Explorers, or go into--just trying to think of these other boards I was on.  You know, go to Fine Arts committee or Boys and Girls Club or, you know, Memorial Childcare; just some of the different entities, you know.  City Council meetings, you know, Republican Convention; you know, whatever I went to, you know, it's time away from home.  And, you know, I just appreciate the support my kids and my husband gave me, and my employer as well.  And so, yeah, there were times when I, you know, could have, should have been there; and, again, but I chose to try to leave it better than I found it; to try to make a difference, and then try to make it easier for someone else like me to be on council and then some day be mayor.  Now, this last election in Lake Jackson, they elected two African-American males.  And they're the first since I as on council in 2000.  So we went a whole 12 years with no African-American representation on council.  Now, the population in Lake Jackson is about 27, 28,000 people; and maybe four percent are African-Americans.  So, you know, it says a lot about the community to actually elect me back in '96 [1996].  But again, maybe nobody wanted to run.  I, you know, I kind of lost touch after a while.
Speaker 1: How many seats on City Council?
Speaker 2: They're six, including mayor.
Speaker 1: So, black people have two of the seats, you say, and they're only four percent of the population?  That's--we're over represented for once.
Speaker 2: For once.
Speaker 1: In some ways.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  Yep, for once.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, and then one guy was actually appointed, ran again and lost, and then ran this year and won.  And the other guy, was his first time running.  And so, I'm hoping that I leave--make things a little easier for the next person coming along.  And so that, you know, when my grandson, you know, hey, wants to run for mayor of, you know, New York City or Houston, and he won't have no--he will have no problem if people look at him for who he is and what he brings to the table, and then don't necessarily see his skin color.  So I'm hoping things are--I'm hoping I'm leaving things better than I found them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back, once again, at everything you've done, is there a major thing that you would do over again or wish you could change?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I wish I would change it, but I probably would study a little bit more in college, and I wish I had, maybe, a--maybe followed my heart a bit more.  Again, you know, I really love theatrics and drama, and I love science too, but that was, I would say, was probably kind of my first yearnings, and my mom [Selna Mae McDonald] kind of talked me out of it.  But, maybe I'll do a little bit more around theatricals, science, if that's possible.  But I don't have any real regrets.  Again, anything I would really change, I probably would study more in college to see, you know, if I'd get a different platform to jump from.  But, I've enjoyed every job that I've had.  In each one, you know, I've learned to build upon and I've grown.  And so, I think because of my varied background, I can speak to a lot of different things for people, because people come--you know, I have scientists now come to me and say, "Well, how did you make the transition?  You know, I can't see myself on the bench for ever and ever and ever," which at some point I look back now and say, "No, that wasn't for me either."  And so, I'm able to speak to a lot of different people because of my varied background.  But nothing I'd really change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you think that you were influential in your son becoming an engineer because you're in science, or our daughter becoming involved in HR because you're in HR?
Speaker 2: They were both going science for a while.  My daughter was actually thinking about being a perfusionist, actually the person that kind of works the heart-lung machine in open-heart surgery.  And for whatever reason, she changed her mind and said, "You know, I kind of want to dress up and go to work every day and not wear scrubs."  And so, I think that's when she decided to go into HR because she was really undecided after she decided not to go into science.  And I don't know about my son.  He always, you know, kind tagged along with me when I would do some of the explorer work, and he would watch this show called 'Mr. Wizard,' and then try and go back and emulate the experiments he saw there.  And one day, we could smell this latex, this rubber burning.  And so, he's watching Mr. Wizard, I go in his room and he's got this desk lamp and a balloon sitting on top of it; you know, and melting on the light bulb now.  Like, "What are you trying to do?"  "Well, Mr. Wizard had this experiment where he bought a pan of water and, you know, something hot, and he put a balloon on it, the balloon floated.  I thought I could do the same thing with this lamp."  You know, timeout now, you going to set the house on fire.  And so, I always had to kind of watch him to make sure he, you know, he wasn't tearing something apart or setting something on fire.  And so, he kind of had that inquisitive, you know, "let me solve this puzzle-type mentality" that I have.  And, actually, my husband really wanted to be an engineer as well.  But he went where he got the football scholarship at Baylor, and they didn't have an engineering program at that point.  So he kind has that analytical mind like my husband, and so, I think he was already predestined to be the engineer.
Story_ID: 23448
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're married to a husband who's an educator and he's a principal and such, and so you both have, like, real demanding careers that are, you know; and so you've done a lot really, here and raising your children, and staying married all this time.
Speaker 2: Yep.  It--with--I must have been really fortunate.  I had a good support base when my kids were growing up.  You know, between my husband and then his family was local, so I had--kind of had sitters if I had to travel.  And then my folks would come over here sometimes if I needed them to watch the kids.  So that's been really good.  He was the first African-American to work as a principal in the high school he was--previous to the one he's in.  So it was a first for him.  And so, now he's the head principal at his alma mater, the high school that he went to, and that's a first.  And so, you know--you know, we kind of do first things first-type things.  And so, I was the first to be elected to council in Lake Jackson and a couple other things.  But we stay pretty busy right now.  We got one grandson and one on the way.  And our kids, you know, left Lake Jackson, "I'm never coming back."  (laughs.)  You know how kids kind of just (say?), "I'm not coming back here."  Well, they're both back now, not necessarily in Lake Jackson, but working in the area.  And we live about three minutes from each other either way.  And so, that's a real blessing for me to have them close.  But we stay pretty busy.  We, you know, you have to make time, you know, to connect.  And so, again, I'm pretty big on travel.  Hubby was not as big on travel, but he's getting there, understanding that you do need a break.  You need to take time out to refresh and rejuvenate, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you before I ask my last question?  (unclear)
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.  We talked about Mom and we talked about Dad and grandparents.  I'll get home and say, "Oh, I should have told him about this."  I can't think of anything right now.  I appreciate the opportunity for one.  You know, if I can help somebody, you know, I have people call all the time now, "Hey, my son needs a job," or "Trying to find something for my nephew to do.  Can you help us?"  And so, sometimes I'll help them, you know, and say, "Hey, we've got this job, and I can't really pull any strings, but, you know, I have this job.  This is what they're looking for," or we'll do like a mock interview, you know, "Think about the questions that they'll ask and, you know, let's kind of walk through that.  How would you respond."  So, I do like, you know, helping people, you know, again, you know, get to some of their dreams and some of their aspirations.  So, you know, I'm hoping that I'm still being a servant to a certain extent.  I can't think of anything else right off the top of my head.
Story_ID: 23449
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a loving Christian woman who helped people wherever she could.  That'll be enough to be said.  You know, all the accolades, and the degrees, and the appointments, you know, that's fine; that's helping people.  But, you know, I just want people to say, "Well, she was a Christian woman, she was loving, and she always wanted to help people."  That could be the best thing anybody could say about me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: No.  Thank you.  I appreciate it.
Story_ID: 23450
Speaker 1: PHOTOS OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is me, Sharon Barnes, and this was a picture I took when I won the Betty Crocker Homemaker of the Year Award. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  About what year is that?
Speaker 1: 1973-ish. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Probably my life?), probably 17 (laughs).  This is my mother, Selna McDonald.  I think she's about 14.  This is my mother, Selna McDonald.  I think she's about 17 or 18. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Must have been a photo booth near.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is my father, W. J. McDonald.  Must have been about age eight.  And this is my little brother, my only brother, William McDonald.  He's a hospital administrator.  This is me, Sharon Barnes; Sharon McDonald at the time, junior high.  That's my mother again, high school secretary at Adams Elementary right before she married my dad.  There was an ad that was in the paper that my sister sent in, the second grade, Sharon Barnes.  This is me again, Sharon Barnes, receiving my high school diploma, 1974, Silsbee High School.  This is me again, Sharon Barnes, playing in the playground, the playground that my granddad built in Silsbee.  This is me again, Sharon Barnes, my sixth birthday party.  This is my father, William J. McDonald, in Korea, Private.  Another picture of my dad, Private William J. McDonald, Korea.  Oh, baby picture of me, six months old or so, Sharon Barnes.  It's myself, on the left is my cousin Donald Garret (ph. splg.), myself, Sharon Barnes in the middle and on the far right-side is Reginald Kyles.  These are my parents standing in front of our home in Silsbee, W. J. McDonald on the left, Selna McDonald on the right.  This is my graduation from Baylor University.  On the left is Bedella Jones (ph. splg.); in the middle is my father, W. J. McDonald; and myself, Sharon Barnes, on the right.  This is my best friend in college, Wanda Boohey (ph. splg.) on the left, and Sharon Barnes on the right.  This is a, I think his name was Oscar, our red tail hawk that Rideena McKinney (ph. splg.) and I assembled for Core A Anatomy at Baylor University.  This is my mother's father, Warren Caddo Broadnax, Beaumont, Texas.  This is a photo of my parent--my father's family, his sisters; on the far left is Alma Garrett; my father, William McDonald, second from the left; his sister Mildred in the middle, to the right of William; third from the right is Naomi Cross, his sister; and on the right is Mary Holden, his sister.  This is my mother, Selna McDonald.  Another picture of my mother, Selna McDonald, probably aged 22.  This is a picture of my oldest sister's father.  The woman in the middle is my grandmother, Betty Broadnax; my mother on the far right, Selna McDonald. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  The father's name?
Speaker 2: Ernest Muttawn (ph. splg.).  Yeah.  This is a picture of my mom, Selna McDonald, on the left, and my oldest sister, my role model, Betty Clemons, on the right.  This is a picture of me, Sharon Barnes, standing on--at the Tower of the Americas at HemisFair, 1968, San Antonio, Texas.  This is a picture of my mother, Selna McDonald, sometime in 1925.  This is a picture of my baby shower for the twins.  On the far left is my mother-in-law, Sylvia Edwards Barnes, myself, Sharon Barnes; to the left of me, the gentleman in the picture is my husband, Ronald Barnes; and mother on the far right, Selna McDonald.  This is a picture of me, Sharon Barnes, working at the Music Library.  It was the job, work-study job--work-study job I had at Baylor University.  The is a picture of me, Sharon Barnes, the year I ran for homecoming queen at Baylor University.
Speaker 1: Did you win?
Speaker 2: No (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my husband, one of the first years that he taught, Ronald Barnes.  He was a math teacher.  This is a picture of my--one of my twins.  This is Amber Janel Crawford--Barnes-Crawford. Amber Barnes-Crawford; she's married now; age two, I think.  This is the other twin, the oldest.  This is Ronald Barnes II, age two.  This is an article about me named to a state panel for Health and Human Services.  This is a photo of myself with my husband, Ronald Barnes, on the left; me on the right, on a cruise.  This is a photo, a company ad done with (pause)--this is a picture of a company ad for the blood drive.  On the left is Isabel Martinez, she's a lab technician; and myself in the middle, Sharon Barnes; and one of our real good donors, Al, on the right.  This is a picture of a book that I'm featured in written by Otha Sullivan.  This is the article that Otha Sullivan did on me.  You can bend the binder a little if you want.  This is me, Sharon Barnes.  Mae Jemison is right behind me.
Story_ID: 23451
Speaker 1: Now, you know where you are in the calendar?
Speaker 2: Ms. February (laughs).
Speaker 1: (unclear) first.  (unclear) Ms. February next (laughs).
Speaker 2: This is a calendar that the company provides for Black History Month or during Black History Month.
Speaker 1: January, February.
Speaker 2: And I was featured (pause).  I was featured for February for Black History Month, Sharon Barnes. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That one's for mayor.
Speaker 1: And this is an ad that was in the local newspaper when I was running for mayor of Lake Jackson.  This is a copy of an ad that was actually in the 1996 Corporate Annual Report.  So on the far left is my son, Ronnie; second from the left is my husband, Ronald; next over from Ronald to the right is my daughter, Amber; and I'm on the far right, Sharon Barnes. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Cool?).
Speaker 2: Yep.  This is a local internal journal that was done for our company, and I am featured inside showing some scientific experiments with some of the students.  Again, Sharon Barnes.  This was a publication done, a flyer done for a Republican town hall meeting, and I was one of the featured speakers, Sharon Barnes.  And again, this is our internal company publication, and I was being honored for my community service; Richard Rozales (ph. splg.) is on the left; I'm in the middle, Sharon Barnes; and Rosalind Jones is on the right.  This is actually my name tag for City Council in the event there was a hurricane and we had to come back in to town, I would have show that to get entrance into town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Thank you, very much, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
