Story_ID: 178478
Speaker 1: --[Racine Tucker-Hamilton is] the interviewer; [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer; and Scott Stearns is the observer.  Today is March 1st, 2004, and the location of this interview is 1203 Gerard Street, NW, Washington, D.C., the home of Dr. Paul Cooke.
Speaker 2: 20009 [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Thank you, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke.  And Dr. Cooke, if you would just for the record, please, tell me your name, your full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Paul Phillips Cooke, P-A-U-L, P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S, Cooke, C-O-O-K-E.  Phillips comes from my mother's family.  Cooke, I would say, from my father's family.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine, June 1917 [June 29, 1917].  I would be born 45 West and 38th Street, Harlem [New York, New York]; between, what is that, Lenox Avenue and 5th Avenue, I guess.
Speaker 1: And what's your occupation, Dr. Cooke?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a retired college president.  I could tell you some other jobs I had, but I generally say my occupation, I don't work anymore.  I'm a retired college president having been president of the District of Columbia Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] from 1966 to 1974--
Story_ID: 178479
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke.  Now, I have a couple of People magazine-ish type questions.  Can you tell me a little bit about what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I don't have any favorite foods, but I guess when I can, I had in Martinique one time, chateaubriand.  That's a big steak for two people.  I get it very rarely.  I do like lobster.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the favorite foods, they're so rare that I don't know whether I should call them favorite foods or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I have no preferred time, but I guess it would be fall, if there is any preference.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: No favorite color, but I think I have a gray suit on.  What color is this tie?  (Laughter)  It's supposed to match according to my youngest daughter [Katherine Cooke], the suit, so I have no favorite color.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have a favorite vacation, but I been to sixty-three countries in the world, and I'd say every one of them was worth going to.  My last two were Malaysia, the capital of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and Singapore.  One of my first ones was Canada: Nova Scotia [Canada], Quebec [Canada], Ontario [Canada], Prince Edward Island [Canada].  Early in the days of foreign countries, if one considers Canada a foreign country.
Speaker 1: Dr. Cooke, do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Favorite, what?
Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Except, obviously, I don't know that or what is that one I like.  (Unclear) That's a pretty good question.  It means, practically--probably, it means I don't know the answer to it.  If you say, It's a very good question, it means I have no idea what the answer is to it.
Story_ID: 178480
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your mother, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke.  What was her name and if you could please spell it for us, and also tell us where she was born?
Speaker 2: Well, that was Mamie Kathleen Phillips, born in Washington, D.C. around 1883, I think.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for us?
Speaker 2: Well, Mamie, is M-A-M-I-E.  It seems to me that one time I saw Mary in there, but it was Mamie that I knew most.  Kathleen, I think, was spelled with a K, K-A-T-H-L-E-E-N and Phillips, again as my middle name is P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.  Quite a large family, the Phillips family.
Speaker 1: Where did your mother grow up?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.  She went to high school here, went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] here.  I guess, that's her diploma on the wall over there.
Speaker 1: Dr. Phillips, tell me a little bit about your --
Speaker 2: Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: Paul Phillips Cooke, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I'm sorry, Dr. Cooke.  Tell me a little bit about your mother's background?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.  Although, I believe during the first World War I [WWI] years, my father [Louis Cooke] was a first-class machinist having been just charged to the United States Navy, went to work in New York [New York], so we were born, my brother [Louis Philip Cooke, Jr.] and I, were born in Harlem [New York, New York], so those are some of the days of my mother's life was in Harlem.  Before that, of course, it was Washington, D.C. where she was born and the high school she went to, the rather famous M Street High School [Washington, D.C.] and Howard University.  So that's part of the background of mother.  Is that enough?
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever share any stories with you about her childhood and about her growing up that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't, but her sister Marvelline was born in, I think, Alabama and came up as a little--as a baby, to Washington, D.C.  She was prolific in talking about Alabama and Washington, D.C. and slavery.  Some observations about slavery or free blacks, but mother didn't.  It's interesting, two different sisters came along together, more or less, but one did and one did not talking about life.
Speaker 1: Could you spell your aunt's name for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Marvelline is M-A-R-V-E-L-L-I-N-E.  Marvelline.  That was the one who was born in Alabama in the Chattahoochee River area (laughter) of Alabama.  The other side of Chattahoochee River, you know, being Georgia and her--that was her name and was born in 18--I think around 1874.  My mother around 1881, so they ran around together but they were some years apart--or did I say 1883, first?  So that's some of the background there.
Story_ID: 178481
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, what can you tell us about your grandparents on your mother's [Mamie Phillips Cooke] side?
Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's side Christopher Prince Phillips was born in Cherew, C-H-E-R-E-W, South Carolina.  Said to be from a Colonel Phillips who was white and Betsy [ph.] it was said always, this is anecdotal now, the Cherokee Indian (laughter) and my understanding, again, you say this when you really don't know, that Betsy is a Cherokee Indian, was then in slavery.  So my parents' mother, anyway, father--grandfather would have been born in slavery on my mother's side.  On my father's side, Francis Rudolph Cooke did very well.  He was not born in slavery.  He was born in 1849, was quite a good effective grocer in this city [Washington, D.C.].  He had stalls forty three and forty five in the center market in the city, which was torn down to make, now, the great building at Seventh and Pennsylvania Avenue, called National Archives and Records Service [sic, National Archives and Records Administration].  That's Francis Rudolph Cooke.  His wife was Isabella, who had--it is said, again anecdotal, Indian background.  What tribe, I don't--by the way, the tribe back there with my mother's mother, Laurie Welburn [ph.] Phillips was Creek Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes.  You know, the Choctaws, Chickasaws and so forth.
Story_ID: 178482
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember having a bicycle when we lived in Harlem [New York, New York] on 138th Street.  That's one of my earliest memory.  And there's a photograph of my standing beside my bicycle.  In Harlem, now, you never can tell the weather.  That photograph '45-something [1945], you really didn't know it and you really didn't remember it, so but anyway that's one of my earliest memories.
Speaker 1: Now, in addition to that memory of the bicycle, are there some other special memories that you have of growing up and if so, can you share them with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I would say my father [Louis Phillip Cooke] having been a first-class machinist in the Brooklyn Navy Yard [Brooklyn, New York, New York] found in 1921 World War [World War I, WWI] having ended several years.  My guess now, is a reduction in force, so he came back to his home, his wife's [Cooke's mother, Mamie Phillips Cooke] home, which is Washington, D.C.  So I remember coming back here or knowing about that and I think one of my earliest memories was when I was about seven, eight years old going to the funeral of my great-grandmother who was ninety-nine years old there when she died.  By the way, I just want to mention, that in nineteen--1847 she got what was known as her free paper.  The Cookes haven't been monumented or freed from slavery in 1826.  She was just barely born then.  And by 1847, she was twenty-one years and was getting what was called her free papers.  Now, my understanding on the free papers was that a woman would carry that around in Washington, D.C., this city, because if she didn't have it, she might be put back into slavery, so she got her free papers.  I have a copy of that somewhere, her free papers in 1847.
Speaker 1: And this is--
Speaker 2: She got married in '49 [1949] and to Francis Rudolph Cooke, and that's my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you referring to your great-grandmother or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I was referring, first, to my grandmother and then to my great-grandmother.  No, I was referring, first, to my great-grandmother and then to my grandmother.
Speaker 1: What was your great-grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Well, it was Maryanne Jackson Cooke is the name always came up--and it seems to me that in her free papers, she was Maryanne Jackson.  Having been married two years later to Francis Rudolph Cooke, and that was 1949--1849.  I keep getting these centuries mixed up.
Story_ID: 178483
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, if you will, tell me a little bit about your siblings, and if you could start first with your brother's name and the birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Louis Philip Cooke, Jr. was my brother, L-O-U-I-S, Philip, P-H-I-L-I-P, Cooke, C-O-O-K-E, Jr., born in 1919.  I'm Paul Phillips Cooke, I'm giving that.  I was born June 29, 1917.
Story_ID: 178484
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about the street that you lived on growing up and describing your block and your neighbors and your community?
Speaker 2: Well, after the Harlem [New York, New York] residence, it was primarily, I can remember 1810 Eleventh Street NW [Washington, D.C.].  That's Eleventh and S Street [Washington, D.C.].  If we went to--we were here now 1203 Gerard Street [Washington, D.C.].  If we went to the east, half a square, it would be Eleventh Street and then we go south on Eleventh Street a dozen blocks or so, we'd be at the house.  Now, that house looking into land records later and found was built in 1891 by Francis Rudolph Cooke.  That's my grandfather.  And so that was a relatively new house--well, it was a new house for him and relatively new for me this twenty-something years old.  Now, this house I'm in now, or have you asked me about that?
Speaker 1: No, sir.  Let's continue talking about a little about bit your childhood.  Tell me a little bit about the block on Eleventh Street--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it was adjacent to the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What the community was like?
Speaker 2: --YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on Twelfth Street [Washington, D.C.].  That was a rather well known YMCA built around 1910 or 1912 and him [Louis Phillip Cooke, Jr.] going into it when I'm about ten, twelve years old was a very good Y [YMCA].  So that's on Twelfth Street, one block west.  We're living on Eleventh Street, and you're asking me about my neighborhood.  Now, the rather well known U Street [Washington, D.C.] is one block farther north from T to U.  So from S Street to T Street, the two houses in which I lived and then from T to U is the next house we lived when I was still a youngster.  That was 1934 Eleventh Street, and U Street is three houses farther north.  You hear a lot about U Street in Washington, D.C. today.  Today it's, what's the new word, multi-cultural or multi-racial we use today.  You see, meaning, all people, black and white, live there now and having stores there on U street.  And indeed at one time, there was a white theater on U Street, too.  Have I pretty much answered that?
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up?  What was U Street like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, they had Lincoln Theater [Washington, D.C.], and I can remember that if you went in there in August with fifty cents, you'd buy a special ticket that will let you go in the subsequent Saturdays beginning in September during the year for half price if you showed your card, and you went to what was known as a serial and it was during the twelve o'clock in the day, not in the evening.  You couldn't use that in the evening.  That's one of the things I always remember about the Lincoln Theater.  In the next block west was the Booker T. Theater [Washington, D.C.].  And that had--no, on the next block is the Republic Theater [Washington, D.C.].  And that was built for blacks, and the next block was what was known as the Circle Theater [Washington, D.C.], and that was a white theater.  So U Street wasn't all that for black people.  Now, that became the Booker T. Theater, so there are three of them: Lincoln, Republic and Booker T. on U Street.  The whites continued to live farther west on Portner Street, P-O-R-T-N-E-R, and apartments at Fifteenth Street.   Kind of a mixed neighborhood, but it sort of today gets a reputation, Ms. Racine [Tucker Hamilton], of being largely a black street, but historically a lot, but today it's very much mixed.
Story_ID: 178485
Speaker 1: What about your elementary school.  Tell me a little bit about--
Speaker 2: Well, I started out in this city at [Lucretia] Mott [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.] near Howard University [Washington, D.C.], the new [Louis] Stokes Library [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] across from that torn down now, Mott School.  And then later I went to Cleveland School [Washington, D.C.] at Third and T Streets [Washington, D.C.].  It was near the famous Howard Theater [Washington, D.C.], by the way.  And then from there to Garrison School [Washington, D.C.] at Twelfth and S Streets [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Could you spell the last name--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Or in between there, there was a Garnet [-Patterson] School [Washington, D.C.].  An old Garnet, and the old Garnet, for Henry Highland Garnet or famous Negro leader and [James] Patterson.  I think Patterson was a white--maybe, a congressional member of [United States] Congress from Ohio.  Well, anyway, they were torn down and built a brand new Garnet-Patterson Junior High [School, later Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.], which is still standing today.  So that school has been there six years.  It's right across the street from Masonic Temple [Washington, D.C.], which was started out in the '20s [1920s] also.  Been there ever since today, and this is, what, 2004 still a viable building.  Although, they didn't put (laughter) an elevator until the building until quite late.  For other than that, you were walking up a long flight of stairs.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who influenced you while you were in elementary school?  If so, do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: I remember Miss Schooler, S-C-H-O-O-L-E-R.  She was very good.  There was a--in the junior high school, I remember a Mr. Scott, Ralph E. Scott [ph.], very good in history.  I remember Scott said, "Now, you fellows belong to a club called the collegiate buddies and you certainly are not in college, you were in junior high school."  And we'd argue with each other, "I don't see how you can call yourself buddies," but so far, collegiate buddies.  That was Ralph E. Scott.  Those were two of the teachers I remember.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about Mrs. Schooler?
Speaker 2: She was a good teacher, and by the way, what our President [George W.] Bush, may be saying about--what is he saying about--school and religion.  Every day we read from the Bible then, without her having us read sections from the Bible.  Now, these are 1920s.  You see, I always remember that considering what President Bush is talking about today and church schools.  I remember that much.  I'm trying to tie into some extent what was then and what is now.  That's one example I gave you of Miss Schooler.
Story_ID: 178486
Speaker 1: What type of student were you [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke?
Speaker 2: Very good in elementary and very good in junior high school, the Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [later Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.], the new one.  Very solid student in the first two years at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.] and the last year at Dunbar, I made the honors roll.  So I had no trouble getting into then my first year at Miner Teachers College [later University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] when I was in the class.  Section A it was called.  We had had six sections, by the way, from A to F.  F were those who had done the poorest on the entrance, or the exam given at the entrance which was in English.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your elementary--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --years.  And did you have any dreams and aspirations as a young boy?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember any.  Don't remember any aspirations.  No dreams (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about--
Speaker 2: Going to the YMCA [Young Men Christian's Association], though, I learned to play basketball.  I learned, I guess, we were playing checkers.  We had a pretty good time in the YMCA on Twelfth Street [Washington, D.C.], but I don't know that that is answering the question precisely.
Speaker 1: What about as a young baseball player, did you ever dream or have aspirations of, you know, pursuing a career in baseball?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, but I was the first baseman Dunbar High School in 1933 season, and then in 1941, and I'm not sure how I came to be doing this now.  I played first base semi-pro ball in the stadium outside of Alexandria, Virginia, a stadium that was only by the way segregated only for the blacks.  It wasn't too good a stadium, but it was a baseball stadium.  I played first base all that summer.  My wife [Rose Clifford Cooke] came to see me once.  We had been married in August of '40 [1940], and this is the summer of '41 [1941], so there's an example of sports in high school, and then eight years later, semi-pro baseball.  As I repeat, I made fifteen dollars a whole season, but fifteen dollars wasn't bad then compared to what fifteen dollars and what it's worth today.  Wouldn't even buy my baseball glove today--
Story_ID: 178487
Speaker 1: Going back to when you were a young boy, did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We were always--St. Augustine's Church [Washington, D.C.] on Fifteenth Street between L and M [Streets, Washington, D.C.], and that's where I made First Holy Communion.  I had been baptized in New York [New York] in St. Mark's Church [New York, New York], First Holy Communion there in it St. Augustine's, and that's church was torn down.  That's where Washington Post building is, the main building of Washington Post is today.  They moved on up farther north on Fifteenth Street [Washington, D.C.], between R and S and that was torn down and then they moved up and worked with St. Paul's Church which was known then primarily as a white church.  It was St. Paul's and Augusta, and then finally today, it's St. Augustine's.  That's at Fifteenth and V streets [Washington, D.C.].  So that's some showing how movement would be going north out of the center of the city, and it's changing again now.  Today it's a different thing, again, today.  As people are moving back into the city, and the present mayor [Anthony A. Williams], while we have what might be a combination of retail stores and apartments all in the same.  It's a changing city.
Speaker 1: What are some of your memories of church?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember my son [Paul Cooke] at Sacred Heart School [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: As a young boy, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke?
Speaker 2: As I remember?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Nothing.  Church at St. Augustine's, except I have a vague memory of me having my First Holy Communion.  Other than that--well, I do remember a little bit of Sunday school there at Fifteenth and--the church at 15th and L and M [Washington, D.C.], which I repeat was torn down for Washington Post's newspaper.  But other than that, I have no memories of it.
Story_ID: 178488
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about junior high school.  Who were your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, you see that photograph on the wall?  Why that is Robert Scurlock.  Now that's the son of the famous photographer now on exhibit in The Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.], Addison N. Scurlock.  It was Addison N. who is now in Stamford, Connecticut.  There was George Colon [ph.].  He's living in Voie [ph.], and then there are two or three others no longer living.  Well, one of them was Dr. James Cown, C-O-W-N, who became a medical doctor.  And also, I think, in the Republican administration, he must have been--well, I don't know who that would have been.  He was an assistant secretary of health, I think.  So those are some of my friends then.  And I'm telling you some of the positions they held later in life.
Speaker 1: What was it like in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Good school, brand new school; Garnet-Patterson [Junior High School, later Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.], learned Spanish, couldn't do anything with it today, but we all took either French or Spanish.  I took Spanish along with English and did very well in junior high school.  I think it's now photographed of our whole class when we graduated from Garnet Patterson in June 1930, and then most of us went on to Garnet.  Some went to Armstrong High School [Washington, D.C.] and a few probably to Cardoza High School [Washington, D.C.], the business--known then as a business school; business high school.
Story_ID: 177174
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, let's talk a little bit about your high school years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me which high school you attended and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I attended [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.] having gone there from Garnet-Patterson Junior High [later Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: What was life like at Dunbar?
Speaker 2: It was a life of activity, because I was in the Drill Cadet Corps.  That's a uniform outfit.  I was also on the baseball team, so with on one hand here's a sports, on the other hand here's a drill.  I guess, a third were the studies which I was not great of in the early years, but my senior year I did very well in; both of my studies.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the ceremony at Arlington National--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --[Arlington National] Cemetery [Arlington County, Virginia], yes.  It was a very interesting cemetery and very memorial.  Now, laying a wreath or on the grave of unknown soldier [Tomb of the Unknown Soldier] was a commanding officer of the twenty-fifth regiment, Colonel Nailor [ph.]; Rip Nailor, we'd call them.  He was at Armstrong High School [Washington, D.C.], by the way.  The commanding officer of the twenty-fourth regiment, Richard F. Ware [ph.], Colonel Ware--lieutenant colonel, was standing to the side and the commanding officer of the whole brigade was from Dunbar High School, by the way.  His name was Kelsey, Kelsey and Roy Fall.  Incidentally, he went on Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  I think Richard Ware went on to the Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and I went on to Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]; but that was quite a day of memorial--Arlington Memorial Cemetery, laying the wreath on the unknown soldiers to the gravesite.  I been there since, by the way, years later with a veteran.  We were both in the World Veterans Federation, and he came from Ghana, I believe, and wanted to lay a wreath and together we did it.  That must have been in the '60s [1960s].  It may have been even in 1965.  I think I met him in the meeting in the World Veterans Federation in 1963, but I'm rolling beyond your time period now, I think.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to that ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That would have been '33 [1933].  May of '33 [1933] with the colonel, lieutenant colonel and the 25th Regiment from Armstrong and the Lieutenant Colonel from the 24th Regiment from Dunbar and the commanding officer of the whole brigade from Dunbar.  That was '33 [1933], and I'm Captain Cooke of Company F standing somewhere in the background with other captains.  Incidentally, one of the other captains was Captain Frederick C. Young of Armstrong, and he won the drill that year.  The drill is what was then a competitive day, big day, school closed.  Everybody came to Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.], torn down by the way, for Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.] later.  But Griffith Stadium would be the site of the competitive drills, and that's the year that Frederick C. Young won for Armstrong [High School, Washington, D.C.].  Dunbar did not win, nor did Cardoza [High School, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 177175
Speaker 1: Let's move to the following year.  You had some excitement there.  You went to Chicago [Illinois] with your brother [Louis Philip Cooke, Jr.].  Can you tell me about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did I went to the World's Fair in Chicago.  My brother and I took the train.  I think, my father [Louis Phillip Cooke] thought we could--both father and mother [Mamie Phillips Cooke] thought that we could do that together, and we did.  We were in 1934 at the Chicago World's Fair.  I think that fair ran for two years; maybe '33 [1933] and '34 [1934], but we were there 1934.  By the way, we stayed with my father's youngest brother, E. Leo Cooke.  My father was Louis Phillip Cooke.  And they were about half a dozen older ones.  My father used to say, by the way, every time a new one was born, one of them would go into the [U.S.] Navy.  That's how he went into the Navy and was discharged as an able-bodied seaman in 1907.  Marrying my mother, he and my mother, Mamie Kathleen Phillips, were born in 1909.
Speaker 1: What was the World's Fair like?  What do you remember from that?
Speaker 2: Very little, I must say.  Very little, except there's a whole lot to look at and a whole lot to eat. (Laughter) Some specials, I guess, pavilions; but other than that, I can't remember much about the World's Fair in Chicago.  It was on Lake Michigan, by the way, on the water.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: What about the trip there?
Speaker 2: The trip was train there and back.  No sleepers, of course, then.  I think the train was a Pennsylvania train, which meant we have gone from here to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then from Philadelphia to Chicago, or we may have gone from here to somewhere in West Virginia and then onto Chicago.  I have a vague--only a vague memory of that.  Although, years later my wife and I would take a train around 1941 or '42 [1942] to Chicago, also.
Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about some of your--
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  I was going to say, we weren't flying very much then.  My first flight, though, was when I was in the [U.S.] Army in 1945.  I managed to fly then.  I don't know whether they'd call hustling for free rides, sitting on the floor playing while the pilot got his training (laughter).
Story_ID: 177176
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, we talked a little bit about some of your teachers who influenced you in elementary school and junior high school.  But what about high school [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.]?  Were there any teachers who influenced you in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember one or two of them.  One was Davis [ph.] in history, very good.  One of mine was very good, although, I didn't take him but he had always had a good reputation, was a teacher in Latin.  There was one in history, Mr. Goodlow [ph.], I thought was pretty good; finished Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], by the way.  And many of those teachers did finish the Ivy League schools.
Speaker 1: How did they influence--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--how getting scholarships to go there, you see, and I think a common encouragement of many of those black teachers in [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.] and other high schools to come up to their Ivy League schools.  I went, though, to Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] where my mother [Mamie Phillips Cooke] had gone to, Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 177177
Speaker 1: When did you know you wanted to go college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew all along I was going to college, but as far as the choice of the college came during the days of recession.  When were--this whole city [Washington, D.C.], whole country was bad off after the drop in sales and scholar--all sorts of life after the '29 [1929] drop.  Now, I knew I was going to Miner [Teachers College, later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], I think, in my last year at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], '33 [1933].  I may have rationalized I wanted to be a teacher, but I may have known then we didn't have the money to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Although, three years later, we did have the money and we sent my brother [Louis Phillip Cooke, Jr.].  My brother was sent to Howard University.
Speaker 1: So what were you thinking in high school that you wanted to do and that you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think--my last year, I thought about going to architecture.  Never got anywhere near other than thinking about it.  Then the second choice was teaching, and that, again, may have been a rationalization.  We didn't have no money to go to Howard for architecture, so I'm going to Miner as a teacher.
Story_ID: 177178
Speaker 1: What was your experience like at Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, great.  Playing football and basketball was good, getting good grades.  I finished cum laude after four years at Miner, good teachers there.  Incidentally, back to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.] and teachers.  You asked me about some of my good teachers.  I'm supposed to have said one time that--well we had some lousy teachers at Dunbar, too, which drew a great laugh when I said that, but there weren't some--there was some teachers at Dunbar, I thought, were poor teachers.  They didn't teach much, you see.  You didn't learn much, and there were several of those at Dunbar High School, too.  Whatever the reputation may be of the great Dunbar High School.
Speaker 1: And speaking of the reputation of the great Dunbar High School, it was considered to be the premier high school in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Well, it seems to be that some--well, it was true it was considered, and there was some reason, maybe too, consider it.  That I can remember one man, young man, later on--I came to remember him because of his (unclear) fraternity, came all the way from Lincoln, Nebraska to go to four years at Dunbar High School because he thought he would get a better high school education.  Well, his parents did, at Dunbar than he would have gotten--I think it was Omaha [Nebraska] or Lincoln [Nebraska]; one of those.  And then he went on back to Nebraska.  His wife was going on, wife to be, was going on to Idaho.  Now, we had too many blacks in Nebraska, and Kansas, Idaho and Montana.  But her people were in Idaho, and--but anyway, the two of them when they were married came on and lived in Washington, D.C.  Now, others--one of the famous physics professors at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was named Herman [Russell] Branson.  He came from Virginia to go to Dunbar High School.  There were others who came from New Jersey.  I remember one woman who was in my class as a freshman, came from Coatesville, Pennsylvania to go to Dunbar--to go to Miner Teachers College.  So between Dunbar and Miner Teachers College and Howard University, there was a great reputation.  Presumably, the reputation was earned, presumably.  But whether it was earned or not, people thought it was good, and they was coming to Dunbar High School, those coming to Howard University, and those coming to Miner Teachers College.
Speaker 1: Now, while at Miner Teachers College, did you pledge any fraternities?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  While I was Miner, I pledged Kappa but it was at the Howard University, Xi Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity], and they admitted me to the one at Howard University, and then we had about five other Miner Teachers men to go to the Xi Chapter of Howard University and then finally, we got a chapter of our own, Beta Kappa Chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity] in Miner Teachers College.  So it's a little history of it, that, too, with respect to fraternities.  Now, Lambda Beta Iota [ph.] was the first Chapter at Miner Teachers College of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  Then there was a chapter, Beta Lambda, I believe, maybe the same year, of Delta Sigma Theta.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to pledge Kappa?
Speaker 2: When my mother [Mamie Phillips Cooke] and father [Louis Phillip Cooke] lived on Eleventh Street [Washington, D.C.], I gave you an address, 1826 and then later 1934, we always had one bedroom for mother and father, one bedroom for the two boys [Dr. Paul Cooke and his brother, Louis Phillip Cooke, Jr.], and there was another bedroom so my mother would often would rent to Howard University students.  And all of those who came and lived in the house, were Kappa men for some reason or accident.  Incidental, I don't know.  But that's what made me know of Kappa as early as 1924.  Maybe 1926.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I knew of Kappa, so when I got to 1935 and of the age where I might have been a pledge for a fraternity, it was nothing for me to figure but Kappa Alpha Psi.
Story_ID: 177179
Speaker 1: So after you graduated from Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well--I put that well there as I think about what is the first one.  Well, I just put all of it together.  I got a master's [degree] at New York University [New York, New York] around 1941.  I got a master's--that was in education.  A master's in English at Catholic University of America [Washington, D.C.], that was '43 [1943].  I got the doctor's [doctorate] degree, I think, in [Teachers College] Columbia University [New York, New York] in '47 [1947], but in between there, Mr. [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt asked me to join his [U.S.] Army.  So, in other words, I was drafted, so I spent some time in the Army before being honorably, I'm glad to say, discharged and later I finished that doctor's degree at Columbia University in '47 [1947].  In between there, I took a couple of courses at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in education and transferred them to my degree at New York University.  I did a little post-graduate, post-doctoral work.  A couple of courses, I think, I took at American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: What was your--
Speaker 2: So that covered all of those universities as I was, looked like to me, I was roaming around, and I understood later that one of the registrar's, maybe at New York University, formed Howard and Catholic University.  Asked was this fellow actually in classes in your universities, and they found out I was legally there, he was registered, took courses there, passed them all.  So the man at New York University was satisfied.  But I was going to three of 'em almost at the same time.
Story_ID: 177180
Speaker 1: What was your experience like in the [U.S.] Army and what years were you in the Army?
Speaker 2: Well, I was drafted.  Mr. [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt sent me this letter, now, so I was drafted in April of 1945.  I was in the Sheppard's Air Force base in Wichita Falls, Texas.  That's where I did my first training, and that's when he first told me--I first knew, by the way, that my eye sight was not good.  I think the recruiter said, "Sergeant--I mean, Cooke, private, you can't be a pilot, you can't be a navigator, you can't be a barber there because of your vision is not good enough."  Well, I said, "Well, how about administration?"  And that's when I was told, "They don't have any color boys in that now."  So that's how I ended up going to--from Sheppard Air Force Base to MacDill Field.  So the engineer aviation unit training center, EARTC; something like that, at MacDill Field in Tampa, Florida.  And that's where I stayed until I was discharged.  That's where I was promoted, by the way, to Corporal Cooke, which I was glad to get at times, at that time.  Incidentally, there's a story I always like to mention.  I was in the--one of the World's Veterans Federation meeting, I think, it was in Croatia or it may have been Ljubljana, Slovenia.  One of those former Yugoslavic Republics.  And I said, "Mr. Chairman, now, you have over here the general from Nepal," who was there, "and the lieutenant general from Japan," he was there; "and you have the general from Pakistan," he was there.  "But when you introduce me, sir, you introduce me as Corporal Cooke," and I got a big roar from everybody there 'cause there was a whole lot of other sergeants and corporals looking at all these generals, you see.  We want to make sure that we were recognized like the generals were.  So that's the story of being in one of these World Veterans Federation meetings.
Story_ID: 177181
Speaker 1: Now, after you completed your doctoral work [at Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what did you do next?  When did you get married (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was at Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  I had been appointed there in 1944, you see.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back a little bit, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: Right.  Go on.
Speaker 1: And let's talk about when you met your wife, Rose [Rose Clifford Cooke].  And you were all married in 1940, so let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, when I saw her and she saw me, we decided we were great for each other, so we got married and she just died last June, until we saw sixty-three years together, four children.  We did very well, I think.  I thought--we both thought we did quite well.  Although, or kind of interesting, our color of skin.  She's good brown skin, I'm light skin, every now and then we'd get separated overseas I'd have to say, "Sir, that is my wife and we are together."  And she said, one time they thought that she was the chambermaid for me (laughter).  All sorts of stories you get when race--color is different around the world.  At least, I've run into that.  But, anyway, we did very well with the four children.  She finished Miner Teachers College in 1937, had been a school teacher in a private school called the Garden of Nursery--the Garden of Nursery, yeah, I think, or the Nursery Garden or something like that.  It was a preschool, so she already had experience before she became a regular school teacher.  But after regular school teaching, she was taking maternity leave for these four children that we had.
Story_ID: 177182
Speaker 1: Tell me about your children.  Can you tell me their names, and sp--
Speaker 2: Well, the first one was Kelsey Cooke [Meyersburg] named for my good friend who was a brigade--the commanding officer of the brigade named Kelsey Fuller.  By the way, he went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], got a degree from Northwestern, did very well there; and we named her for him, Kelsey.
Speaker 1: What year was Kelsey born? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the way, he left and went on the stage.  He was in 'Carmen,' [Georges Bizet] the black version of the opera, 'Carmen.'  He was in 'Carmen Jones,' and then he was in as a baritone, I think, in the Delta Rhythm Boys.  That was a group came along.  You ever hear of the Delta Rhythm Boys?  They were a singing group.  They did very well all over the world, by the way.  So he got the name--gave the name of the first one.  The next one was my son, Paul Clifford Cooke.  Clifford coming from my wife's maiden name, Rose Clifford [Cooke].  She's from West Virginia, by the way.  Done quite a bit of study of the Cliffords in West Virginia.  Her grandfather, by the way, had become a judge in West Virginia in the 1800s.  That's unheard of thing for a black judge then.  And, incidentally, he saw the white schools getting eight months service for the children and the West Virginia at that part was going to give black children only four months of schooling.  He broke that up as a judge and as a lawyer.  So that's part of her West Virginia background.  We met, were married and we had--I got up to my second child, which is Paul Clifford Cooke.  I was giving you the reason why Clifford was his middle name.  Now, the third one is Ann E. Cooke, who may be coming here any minute now from where she's living not far from here; and the fourth one was Katherine Cooke [Katherine Cooke Mundle].  Now, Katherine Cooke, born in 1958 had been--has had a very interesting career.  She did the Congressional Black Caucus Fashion Show for three years, doing at the Washington Hilton Hotel [Washington, D.C.], and she'd bring down her whole crew that set up the runway and the walkway, I think they call it, for the models that come out.  Her electricians, her carpenters, her--those who help to put clothes on the models and all.  So she did that for three years.  That was a pretty good tied in with the Congressional Black Caucus, which was meeting the same time and that's when we had--I guess we must have had twenty-five, thirty black congressmen, including some from Chicago [Illinois].  But it was before the day from your--when your senator--senator, what's the name?  Woman?
Speaker 1: [HM] Carol Mosley Braun.
Speaker 2: Yeah, before her day, you see.  This was back then.  So that's Katherine Cooke.  So those are the four children we had.
Story_ID: 177183
Speaker 1: So in the midst of being a parent and what other things were going on in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm president of the District of Columbia Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] after being twenty-two years going from an instructor to assistant professor, to associate professor, to a full professor, to an acting dean one time.  I become president, September 1st, 1966.  And from '66 [1966] to '74 [1974], I was president of the District of Columbia Teachers College and then retired.  Does that answer your question?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  So, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let me see if I'm anywhere near--now, I got it.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your experience as the president of a university?
Speaker 2: Well, my great experience was being able to set up a whole lot of, I think, there's one of the major ones.  Courses all over the City of Washington [D.C.], so the teachers in service could get their in-service education in a school near them in the evening after school, maybe from 3:30 to 6:00.  That was one of the things I did.  Another thing, I think, I did is call the police to get the building back from the students.  This is a time after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had been killed, and students all over the United States--although, the white students at Columbia University [New York, New York] took over that dormitory.  The students at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] took over the building at [University of California,] Berkeley [Berkeley, California].  I was trying to think of what happened at midwest--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what happened--
Speaker 2: What happened in Miner [Teachers College, later University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], I had to get the police after students at Miner Teachers College.  So you ask me, one of my greatest experiences at Miner--well, not only setting up these classes in service, but to call the police at times to get the building back from the students.  Now, the third thing, I would recognize always rather treasure at the District of Columbia's Teachers College during the eight years I was president.  Enrollment went from 1,250 to more than 4,000.  We were attracting students to come to the Teachers College to become teachers, including those we had to call the police about.  Now--
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: What was that like, when the students had taken over the building?
Speaker 2: Well, I was standing in the alley.  My son used to call me the alley president at times, because I could go out my back door where we are right now, 1203 Gerard Street [Washington, D.C.], go down the alley and then come in the back door of the Wilson, which was one of the four buildings of the college.  And the Wilson building is where my office was, the president's office, I mean.  So at any rate, it meant when I went to the door, it was locked.  I couldn't go in.  By the way, by coincidence, we had a visitor and professor to upgrade our student's major in French.  We'd brought all the way from France.  I don't know whether she was from Bordeaux [France], or from Nice [France], or from Burgundy [France].  I know she wasn't from Paris [France].  But here she's standing out in the cold, too, relative cold 'cause the building been taken over by the students.  So I have to call the mayor.  Do I send--do I get the police to go in and get these students out of here.  Where--they came out singing, incidentally, we shall overcome.  So that was one of the instances of having deal with the police.  So I have three, I have mentioned.  One, courses all over the city for teachers in service; number two, calling the police for the students; number three, the enrollment going up from 1,250 to more than 4,000.  Incidentally, though, I believe part of the reason why we were getting students in college, because that was a time of Vietnam [War], in part.  And men would rather go to college than go to Vietnam and, generally, if you were in college, you wouldn't be necessarily pulled in to go to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You still had the draft.  We don't have that today.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 178400
Speaker 1: We kind of left off a little bit late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in?  Can you tell me a little bit--
Speaker 2: Well, there's where the National Theater [Washington, D.C.] comes in-late '40s [1940s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: You want to know now?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Black people couldn't go into the National Theater [Washington, D.C.], so among the interested Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] students and faculty had--what can we do about it?  So we picketed.  Saturday night was known as Miner Teachers College night and they were picketed in front of the National Theater on east--what is now known as Pennsylvania Avenue was the East Street between 13th and 14th [Washington, D.C.].  What actually ended these discrimination or exclusion of blacks by the theater was not, though, the picketing we did. Although, we did a good job, I'd say, Was the fact that actors' equity would send no plays, no dramas, no staff, no crew to National Theater as long as it's segregated?  But it did open its doors in 1952 to everybody, and the first play then was that by Ethel Merman in 'Call me Madam.'
Story_ID: 178401
Speaker 1: Was that your first experience with civil disobedience [picketing the National Theater, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948], yeah, I guess, that was among the first.  Later was to come, 1951 was not civil disobedience, but going to the court again and this is the deaf children situation.  Black deaf children were being sent to Overlea [Maryland] a suburb of Baltimore, Maryland.  Whereas, the white deaf children were kept in the city, went to Kendall Green and part of that Gallaudet College [later, Gallaudet University, Washington, D.C.].  The American Veteran's Committee said, "This cannot be tolerated."  We brought the parents of the deaf children into the American Veterans Committee clubhouse, said, "Can we serve you by taking the steps to end this practice of sending your children to Baltimore [Maryland]?"  They all agreed to our being for a strong forum, I guess.  And the Miller case [Miller v. Board of Education of District of Columbia, 1952] was filed eventually, because Louise Miller had her son in--was deaf.  What we had to do, by the way, is to exhaust.  Lawyers always tell you the administrators reminisce, which meant we had to go the [U.S.] Congress, we had to the superintendent of schools, we had to the commissioner of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] and we went directly to Gallaudet itself, and each instance take these deaf children here and for one reason or another they wouldn't, so then we go to court.  Judge David Pine immediately says, "You can't do that."  The 1938 [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, 1938] said, with respect to a man in Missouri who wanted get a law degree, but he wasn't going to be sent to University of Wisconsin [Law School, Madison, Wisconsin], or a University of Michigan [Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], or University of Minnesota [Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  He had to be given that law degree in the State of Illinois--the State of Missouri, I mean.  And so that lead the way for the judge in the deaf children case.  Judge David Pine would say, "Can't send those children to Maryland.  You got to educate them the same place you educate the white children."  And so they were brought in.  So that was another instance of the reverence and my participation, like the National Theater [Washington, D.C.].  Here this time, it's the veterans together to end the practice of racial exclusion.  That was '51 [1951], the deaf children case.
Speaker 1: What do you remember?  Do you remember any of those children?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember, now, this little boy around the clubhouse, the ABC Clubhouse, with his grandmother, who was saying, got to help him.  I can remember a man named Luke Richardson who was telling how his daughter suffered when it was very cold to have to come home on the bus at the end of the week.  I remember those incidental aspects of the background or foundation for going to court to end the practices.  Incidentally, when we got the black children back to Washington, D.C. in Kendall Green, the Gallaudet College, they segregated them.  So we said, we're not going to have that segregation here, you're going to have these children in the same classrooms with the whites.  Well, they had hired black teachers to teach the black children, and so we said--and then they fired the black teachers.  It just shows the degree of the term today is racism.  And so we got to go to work again, the veterans had to go to work again and say, no, you're growing to higher these black teachers right along teaching black and whites together, and we managed to get that done at Gallaudet.  Race was a big factor going all the way back.  By the way, the congress of the United States in 1905 had passed a law that would send these children to Maryland.  So for a long time, that had been taking place.
Story_ID: 178402
Speaker 1: Incidentally, one other aspect of going back to those days is--are you familiar with the Thompson restaurant case [District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co., Inc., 1953]?
Speaker 2: Tell me about it.
Speaker 1: Thompson Restaurant case was one where the exclusion of people on the account of race from restaurants.  The American Veterans Committee didn't have much of a big role in this at all.  Had some part of it, but it was a group led by a woman named Ida Fox and another woman, both white by the way, working with blacks to start the case against the restaurant.  Now, what solved that case for the Supreme Court was legislation passed in this city in 1872, '73 [1873], which says, "All," quote, "well behaved, respectable persons, shall be served."  [U.S.] Supreme Court is your law.  Why had the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] not paid any attention to that law?  Why, because in 1900 or 1901, they'd written a new code of laws and they either conveniently or accidentally left out the 1872, '73 [1873] laws, and in their code of laws the substantiated racial segregation.  Supreme Court waved it all away.  So that in the Thompson restaurant case and together with the black deaf children [Miller v. Board of Education of District of Columbia, 1952], we are seeing how law works or the courts work to end racial discrimination.  All of this is before the famous Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], which ended the segregation in the schools.  So we had the deaf children, the restaurants and then the schools through Brown verses Board of Education.
Speaker 2: Why was this something that the Veterans organization became involved in?
Speaker 1: I think they became involved in it because their motto was, citizens first, veterans second.  Number two, that where some of the veteran organizations would have a white women's auxiliary, we said all together without respect to race, or color, or gender.  And so the chairman who is writing the letters with respect to the deaf children, was a woman named Florence Newman.  She was chairman of the chapter.  So we were there showing that gender didn't make any difference if you were Abe or a woman.  She was as good as a black or white men or veterans, so she chaired the chapter and wrote all the letters that did what was called the administrative part of the deaf children case before you go into court.  Now, in the court, were two white lawyers.  One named Phinia Sindri [ph.], one named Chester Shaw [ph.] and a black lawyer named John Douglas Fauntleroy.  Now, incidentally, he became later a judge.  Died, some, ten years ago now.  Well, he died in 1989, so that's fifteen years ago.  He died.  But he was the lawyer in the case to go to court where the other two lawyers were ones who prepared the briefs and all, so what we were saying, women can work together with the men and race is not a factor, color is not a factor.
Story_ID: 178403
Speaker 1: The Worldwide Veterans Foundation is an organization that you have been very active in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about when you represented the organization (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I first went to World Federation meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark in 1963.  And the last time I was with World Veterans Federation when they had the meeting in Singapore, so I was there in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 9/11 [September 11th, 2001].  You wouldn't know what 9/11 means?  That means when the planes went into the towers [World Trade Center] in, what, 2001 or 2002 and knocked down the two towers in New York [New York].  So, in other words, I'm saying, for thirty-five, forty years I been a part of the World Veterans Federation.
Speaker 1: So that was in 1963 and--
Speaker 2: Went all the way to, what is it, 2001 or 2002 when the planes went into the towers in New York City, whichever date it is (laughter).
Story_ID: 178404
Speaker 1: Now, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, if you will, let's go a few years later in 1968.  Tell me a little bit about the race riots here in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated, 14th Street [Washington, D.C.]--now, we are right now in 1203 Gerard Street, so 14th Street is just two blocks west.  Things looked so bad.  There was fire, we could see smoke coming on, that my wife [Rose Clifford Cooke] and I and all four children had our bags packed.  We thought we were going to have to leave 1203 Gerard Street.  Who should call us and say, "Look, if you need a place to live, come on out," and this was a Jewish fellow of ADL, Anti-Defamation League, come on--I said, "Look, we got six of us."  "I don't care how many you have, come out to the house.  We'll put you up."  But at any rate, that's an aspect of what was taking place in the fires on Fourteenth Street.  They were also taken place on Seventh Street, but only where we are now, four blocks east of here and about ten blocks south here near below Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  The fires were taking on stores on Seventh Street and the same thing in the 600 block of Eighth Street NE.  So the city after that was in a fire in three different areas before the police finally came, the fire department finally came, and military troops at one time had to come in here in this city at the time after Martin Luther King was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Did your family leave?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't leave.  We were able to go back in the house, because they began to put out the fire.  And I can remember, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]  coming up looking toward--he was a attorney general--no, he was the cabinet secretary of justice, and his brother [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was president--had been, you know, president, but he was assassinated sometime before, but Bobby Kennedy was still around.  Now, of course, as you know, Bobby Kennedy himself was assassinated later around 1968, I think.  So all of this is kind of taking place (laughter) in those days.  By the way, Walter Washington was mayor at that time.  I remember standing with Walter at Fourteenth and Euclid Street [Washington, D.C.].  That's two blocks of Fourteenth and then two blocks south of where were we are today, talking about this whole situation of needing the police, where do we use the police, where to use the [U.S.] military.  And it was he whom I called when I had to get the students, a few years later, get the students out of--preventing people from going in the college during the time when it was the students, who were the problem not this time people setting houses on fire and thing like that.  Incidentally, one group of students I remember came marching into the house--into this building right here, was known as the Wilson building, of the [Miner] Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  I would say this must have been about 1972 also, and he was a short fellow.  He had his hat pulled around backwards, he held up his billy club says, "Stop," and everybody in the line behind him stopped.  They had been at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and he leaned over and he said, "Mr. President, I'm going to get these bastards out of here just as fast as I can, don't worry."  So then you begin to understand at times we see, it's a game.  You think it's serious, but part of it is a game.  They got to make a show of students doing this, so then they just marched on out of the college and went right into this yard behind us and then on into Harvard Street [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 178405
Speaker 1: So after you left what's now known as the University of the District of Columbia [formerly, Miner Teachers College, Washington, D.C.], what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked with the World Peace Through Law with a program called, Access to Law, for the poor in Africa.  We had money from the state department [U.S. Department of State], and we went to Africa when I said, we, it was Judge William S.--William Sylvester Turk Thompson.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: Well, William Turk--because he was called a young turk when he was a young fellow.  When he was a judge, they still talk about Turk, T-U-R-K, Thompson, normal spelling, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N.  He and I--he was the leader, and I was the executive officer for this Access to Law for the poor in Africa and we went to half a dozen countries starting with the (unclear) and winding up on the east coast of Africa at Kenya talking about if people who are well off can have barristers, and attorneys, and the solicitors, what do you do for people who don't have that kind of money?  And our presentation was access to law for the poor in Africa may well be done with paralegals or legal assistants, and that's what we presented. I could remember in Liberia, which is having a little trouble right now (laughter).  In Liberia, we met with the chief justice several other justices, several law professors and one or two law students talking about that very principle; fine legal assistance or paralegals, so that the poor people can have legal assistance, as well as wealth.  Then we went from Senegal, we went from Liberia.  I think we went to Senegal.  We also went to Cote d'Ivoire--Ivory Coast--we went to Ghana, and then to Nigeria, legals in Nigeria, and then along the east to Nairobi and Kenya.
Speaker 1: How successful were you in your (unclear) there?
Speaker 2: Well, to tell the truth, we don't how well in success--we were successful in presenting it, how well we were in following up, I don't know.  I thought we did not do as effective of a job of following up later, but it was always promised that it would be done.  For example, in I think, it was in Ghana, it wouldn't been a law, but the head of the--one way up in the government, I don't know whether it's the executive part, or the judicial part, or the legislative part, and this is interesting.  We will issue a decree requiring this to be done.  So we were doing the United States, we'd have a lawyer, you see.  They would have a decree to do it.  They hadn't moved--however, they moved there today, hard to say.  Very difficult to say what's in Haiti today, you see.  I mean, what's in the country that used to be southern Rhodesia.  What's going on there with dictators?  We don't know exactly what's going on in Africa now.  Too many people with AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome], of course, and too many poor people; too many people who need something to eat, and clothing, and shelter still in Africa.
Story_ID: 178406
Speaker 1: What did you go onto do after that, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke?  How long were you with World Peace Through Law (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about five years with them.
Speaker 1: So after 1979--
Speaker 2: After that, I spent a short time with a college [Beacon College, Washington, D.C.], without a campus, but I enlisted all the libraries that the students could do their work in, including, by the way, Howard University Founder's Library [Washington, D.C.] and the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center library [Washington, D.C.].  That was one thing I did for a while with this particular college.  I don't think it succeeded.  It didn't have the money to succeed.  I'm not sure it attracted the students.  But that's one of the ways we are trying to see today with Strayer College in this city, can you do something what we'd call today on the internet.  How much study can you do on the internet today without going to a former classroom?
Speaker 1: What was the college where you were?
Speaker 2: I was trying to think of the name myself.  I can't remember the name now.
Speaker 1: Beacon College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Beacon College.  Yeah, you got it my record, Beacon College, yes.  I don't think Beacon was successful.
Speaker 1: Do you think that it was just an idea that had come--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Before its time.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--before its time?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's too early.  Too early.  It would work today, though.  Beacon College would work today.
Speaker 1: And after Beacon--
Speaker 2: By the way, I still see the academic dean of Beacon College.  We were in the same club together called the Torch Club, and we were together just this past Tuesday, by the way, for a dinner and a speaker; and incidentally, the speaker told us the very able job being job in Arlington, Virginia right now in the NAACP, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.  I got a very good photograph of my being with them in a case we were pushing in 1951, and here in 2004, I'm hearing about the NAACP again.  I'm a life member, by the way, NAACP and I also have a plaque from them for service through the NAACP.  The life, I think, I think in 1976; something like that.  But the service to NAACP was in the '60s [1960s], and the photograph I'm talking about is 1951.  That's a long period of time where I've had one kind or another association with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Story_ID: 178407
Speaker 1: Throughout your career, you've been very active in the field of law.  Did you ever consider pursuing a law degree?
Speaker 2: Well, when I didn't get promoted at Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] from instructor to assistant professor when I was qualified for it, I said, Maybe I'm in the wrong field.  So I went to Georgetown Law School [Washington, D.C.], which is downtown near the capital in the area not too far from the United States Capitol and got an application to go to law school.  And the next week, that's why--I guess, coincidence, they didn't know I'd gone to Georgetown to get the application for a law degree, I was promoted to assistant professor, and then from then on by 1954, I was a full professor.  And later on, I was academic dean in the '60s [1960s] and then in '66 [1966], I was president.  So to answer your question, I never went any further with law, no.
Speaker 1: After Beacon College [Washington, D.C.], what do you do, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what I did.
Speaker 1: Were you--
Speaker 2: What I did after Beacon College, except to write.  I've always done a lot of writing, a lot of speaking.  I guess the number of papers I've written go up in the hundreds.  The number of talks I've made go up in the hundreds, too.  I spent more time, I guess, speaking.  For right now, I'm supposed to be speaking to the Howard University School of Medicine [Washington, D.C.] on the black deaf children.  That's March 5th or March 15th.  I got to check my daughter, who's upstairs here now.  I get to get my schedule straight, but I do end up more going somewhere to speak.  In February, I spoke during black history at the Mary McLeod Bethune Museum [sic, Council House, Washington, D.C.] on looking back to what Washington was like just before the Brown versus Board of Education [ of Topeka, 1954].  That was what I was asked to speak about, which I can do reasonably well because I was living it at that time.
Story_ID: 178408
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, tell me a little bit about how you feel about the way that you've lived your life and of all the things that you've done, of all the accomplishments, what's been the most important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I've had a pretty easy life.  Much of the time, I never was without a job.  I never had to worry about getting a job.  All these years, I look back and all these (unclear), always had a job.  That was never a problem.  I was always able to feed the family. I taught during the summer for twelve years at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I knew every year they were going to ask me to come over and teach during the summer, so I never had a probably of eating, sleeping, drinking (laughter), and always had cars, always had clothes, until, of course, last February when my good grandson [Joshua Cooke] takes the steps, as you know, have been reported in the paper.  What he did and where he is in prison right now paying for it.
Story_ID: 178409
Speaker 1: Would you tell me a little bit about that [murder of his son and daughter-in-law]?
Speaker 2: No, you can hear my daughters, I got enough of that reading the Washington Post story.  Peter Perl got a good story on--if you don't have it, I'll give you the whole story to read.
Speaker 1: But you did lose your son [Paul Cooke]?
Speaker 2: I lost my son, yes.
Speaker 1: And you--
Speaker 2: And my daughter-in-law [Margaret Cooke], you see.  But my daughters can tell you a good story if you want it.  The one who's here.  Is Annie here now?
Speaker 1: Do you talk to your grandson, Joshua [Cooke]?
Speaker 2: If he calls me from prison.
Speaker 1: Have you been to visit him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us--do you want to talk a little bit about what impact that had on your family?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, it affected my wife [Rose Clifford Cooke].  I think it brought her to an earlier death than she would have last June 2nd had that not happen.
Speaker 1: And what happened, just for the record, is that your grandson killed his parents?
Speaker 2: Well you have the record.
Speaker 1: Your son and his wife--
Speaker 2: You have the record yourself.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: You say you have that record from Peter Perl's story.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how do you think your family is coping now?  Has it gotten a little bit easier to deal with?
Speaker 2: I think a little easier.  As time moves on, I think memories become less sharp and less bothersome than they were.  I don't say time heals all, but it helps some.  But, I think, to answer your question, again.  I think it did affect my wife, that she would lose her son and daughter-in-law.
Speaker 1: Have you forgiven your grandson?
Speaker 2: I don't have any reason to.  I have not considered that.  I've been--not my responsibility to forgive him--
Story_ID: 178410
Speaker 1: What do you hope your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I don't have any reason to want it to be anything.  That's up to people to write it.  They determine it.  Not mine.
Speaker 1: But is there anything that--
Speaker 2: They can look at the record and they can come and determine for themselves what they consider the legacy.  As a new term, like, intercultural, and racism, and ethnic cultural.  The new one now is legacy.
Story_ID: 178411
Speaker 1: So, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, we're on the first photo.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me when I was about seven months old, and I guess, then in New York City [New York, New York].  Was it, Anne [Cooke], four months of seven?
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me when I was seven months old in New York City in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here, again, I'm in New York City and learned to ride my bicycle when I lived at 45 West 138th Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: You were old at this time?
Speaker 1: Four years old now in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Dr. Cooke?
Speaker 1: Here we are graduating from Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [later, Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson, Washington, D.C.] after finishing the ninth grade there.  Here's John Mahoney, the shortest one of the three of us; Addison Scurlock, and I'm the third one.  All wearing our graduation clothes; dark blue coat and special trousers of white--not dark, but some extra special goods trousers.
Speaker 2: Actually, Dr. Cooke, this is one with--you were with a few more boys.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not the one with the shirt, with the jacket then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  The jacket and the white trousers.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Bobby Skurloff [ph.], John Arthur Lightfoot [ph.], George--
Speaker 2: And they all have different--I thought they were.  That's after Gettysburg.  That's a different one.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: Everybody does not wear dark trousers and white trousers.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Yes, white trousers and a dark jacket.
Speaker 2: For each of those people?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  That's correct.  Except for one.
Speaker 2: Is this a field trip to Gettysburg [National Military Park, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Well--who was that, Anne?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Thomas Churchill [ph.], Addison Ran [ph.], John Arthur Lightfoot [ph.], Bobby Skurloff [ph.], George Guy Cohen [ph.].
Speaker 1: Anne, could you just--
Speaker 2: No others, huh?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  No, this is Dunbar Patterson, May 1930, Garnet Patterson.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, we are not at Gettysburg.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  1930 senior class field trip.
Speaker 2: That's a field trip?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  And you all have on the white pants and the dark jackets.
Speaker 2: Now, is that different from the one, Anne, where the three of us; Ran, John Mahoney and Cooke.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  That's different.  That's correct.  There's seven boys in this one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Anne, could you point out, Dr. Cooke, for us.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:   Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: All right.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Am I to say all the names to all of them?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  It's up to you.  I, you know.
Speaker 1: Dr. Cooke, this is the [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.] baseball team.  Can you tell us about that one?
Speaker 2: I played first base for the Dunbar High School baseball team.  So this is probably May 1933, and just last year, the great newspaper man, Afro-American Sam Lacey, died at age 99.  And I can remember his saying to me now, "Cooke, you don't keep the same foot on first base all the time.  If the ball goes to the third base or shortstop, you got your left foot on first base.  But if it went to second base or near first, but you can't reach it, you got your right foot on first base."  So I learned something from Sam Lacey when I played first base for Dunbar in 1933.  That too long?
Speaker 1: No, that's great.
Speaker 2: You might get a good picture of Sam Lacey from the Afro-American, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eight years after I played first base at Dunbar High School, I was playing again first base for the Georgetown Athletic Club.  We played semi-pro ball in a stadium only for colored in Alexandria [Virginia], near to Washington but they were on the other side of the (unclear) River and I can remember one afternoon where Rose [Clifford Cooke] went to, my wife, went to see me play baseball there in--for the Georgetown Athletic Club.  Incidentally, all of our uniforms were very first-class, and the whole team uniforms were put together by a Georgetown--this is by a Georgetown, Washington, D.C. merchant who was Jewish.  And he had enough interest to put this team together to play baseball.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Dr. Cooke.  And I will tell you when, but the next picture is just the team photo of Georgetown Athletic Club.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dr. Cooke?
Speaker 2: Now, here is a team photograph of the Georgetown Athletic Club baseball team.  Incidentally, semi-pro.  I made fifteen dollars the whole summer.  But fifteen dollars then is a lot different from fifteen dollars today.  Rose, my wife, went to see me play one time.  I do not think she was enchanted by the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: The next one is in the [U.S.] Army.  It's you and your Army buddies.  There are two, four, six, seven of you all.  Can you start talking?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: We're playing--
Speaker 1: No.  Your Army buddies.
Speaker 2: Here's a photograph of all of us who were in the Engineer Aviation Unit Training Center at MacDill Field, Tampa, Florida back in 1945, '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great.  Thank you, Dr. Cooke.  Now, this next one is you when you first became president of-
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  No.  No.  This is when he first came to--he was the new teacher on the block at Miner Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Very young picture, daddy.  You're sitting at a desk.
Speaker 1: Dr. Cooke, can you tell us about this?
Speaker 2: After a summer of teaching illiterate soldiers at Harlemburg Signal Depot, Baltimore, Maryland, I got, I was pleased to say, an appointment as an instructor in the faculty in English at Miner Teachers College November 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dr. Cooke, the next one is some of your AVC [American Veteran's Committee] activity.  And this is a picture of you, Andy Rice and let's see you are all--what side?  It's the PPC and the American Veteran's Committee, Andy Rice--
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  And there's a white woman, daddy.
Speaker 1: Florence Newman [ph.], you think?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  It may be Florence Newman who did the deaf children.  And then on the far right, that's not Jack (unclear), and it's not Metward Evers [ph.], but it's a black man.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his name is down in the record somewhere.  He taught at the--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  (Simultaneous)--far right, okay.  It's Andy Rice, then another man, then you, then--
Speaker 1: Now, who's on the left?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  I'm sorry.  Andy Rice is on the far left, then you--I mean, then a white fellow, then you, then a white man and then another white fellow; but I can't place where it is.
Speaker 1: Well, we--the only two I can do--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Are you and Andy Rice.
Speaker 1: I'm sure is Andy Rice.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  And Newman.  I believe that is Newman and you can pull in your deaf children case.  I don't know.  Maybe that was a meeting of that.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, do you have--
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  I don't have a date.
Speaker 1: We can--
Speaker 2: I can ask the question, where are we meeting on the (unclear) of the deaf children.  I can say something like that.
Speaker 1: Or you can say, it's part of your AV-
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  American Veteran's Committee.
Speaker 1: Sir, about what timeframe would this have been?  If you don't know, the exact year was.
Speaker 2: It would the--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: --Forty-eight [1948] to '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  This is the World Veteran's Federation.
Speaker 2: They went to Europe.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  This is '63 [1963] Copenhagen [Denmark].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  This is his first trip.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Dr. Cooke, this is your first trip to Copenhagen in 1963--
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  As part of the World Veteran's Federation Day.  This is General Fabee [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, from Nigeria.  Lagos, Nigeria.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  And Stan Allen in the picture?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  This says [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, but this is Ralph Bunche.  You may want to use that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I certainly want to use the Ralph Bunche one.
Speaker 1: Yes, definitely.
Speaker 2: That's Stan Allen, too, Anne, and Frank Wild?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Let me see.
Speaker 2: Dr. Cooke, we are rolling, now, on this one.  If you can give us the World Veteran's Federation, 1963 Copenhagen caption.  The narration for that.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now, is that the one that (unclear) is in?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell us about that one, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: Just the two of us?
Speaker 1: No, it's a group photo.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: There's eight people standing on steps, sir, in the sunlight and one person has on African garb, one person has military garb.
Speaker 2: Is anyone laying the reef?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  No.  No.  This is just you all opposing out front, daddy.  On the steps.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Let's do this.  Anne, can you read what it says for that.  Read what you have written down for that one.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Just what you said, "Paul Phillips Cooke, Stan Allen, General Fabiyi attending the World Veteran's Federation, 10th General Assembly in Copenhagen, 1963."
Speaker 1: Can you spell Fabiyi?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  F-A-B-I-Y-I.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the Ralph Bunche one, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Stan Allen, daddy, is in it.  I believe, Hugh Wiel is in it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hugh Wiel, and he's sitting beside me and Bunche.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And signing the Credo, C-R-E-D-O, of the World Veteran's Federation.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Okay.  You have to repeat that once the gentleman is ready.
Speaker 1: I think we got it.  So we got it.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: All of those captions are really good.  Only one I would add to it, would be adding something not necessary.  I do like the idea that I'm sitting beside Bunche.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  All I have, is Ralph Bunche Autographs WVF, World Veteran's Federation, CREDO, 1963.
Speaker 2: That's it, all right.  Now, all I'm trying to do is get the couple of names in it.  Beside him is Paul P. Cooke.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  No.  On the far left, are you.  Then there's someone leaning over his shoulder.
Speaker 2: That is Wiel.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  That's Hugh Wiel.
Speaker 2: Hugh Wiel--
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Then, you are--
Speaker 2: Judge Hugh Wiel.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Judge Hugh Wiel.
Speaker 2: United States Federal Judge Hugh Wiel.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Okay.  Then is Bunche.  Then you are actually sitting next to Bunche, and Hugh Wiel is leaning over between the two of you.
Speaker 2: Between the two of us, right.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Then there's Andy Rice.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  And then--I'm sorry, Stan Allen.
Speaker 2: Stan Allen.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  And I don't know who the far right man is.
Speaker 2: Frank Wild [ph.].
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Frank E.J. Wild.
Speaker 2: Frank E. G. Wild.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  With a pipe in his--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And all the preceding narrative references this photo here, which we already have a clean frame of.  Now, we're moving to the photo that's in frame at the moment.  And that's when you first became president of Miner Teachers College.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  No.  District of Columbia Teachers College.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  District of Columbia Teachers College.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The year of the teachers college?
Speaker 2: '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Very good.  Thank you, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: I went to work September 1st, '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 178412
Speaker 1: The next one, [HM] Dr. [Paul] Cooke, is of you, [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, your wife [Rose Clifford Cooke] and Lady Bird Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good one.  At the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a good one, Anne.  You've seen that before haven't you, Anne?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Yes.
Speaker 2: Rose always liked that, and I said, "Rose, you certainly were grinning and"-
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Hold off, daddy.  Hold on.  Hold on.  Keep that thought.
Speaker 2: I'm recording this one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's recording.  So he's fine.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Oh, okay.  She said, what, daddy?
Speaker 1: I said, "Rose, you showed all your teeth as you grin at Lady Bird."  And she would say, "I did."  She was pleased meeting Lady Bird.
Speaker 2: What was the year and occasion, here, sir?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  That was '64 [1964], daddy, when--
Speaker 1: No, I would say '65 [1965], but go ahead.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  The Memorial Day, and they would invite the chairman and the officers of the American Veteran's Committee as part of Memorial Day celebration.
Speaker 1: Well, it would be '64 [1964] or '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] is safe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It does say that on back, it says, '64 [1964], so if we can trust the label.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.  Very good.  Okay.  What else we got?  What's next, Anne?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  I have this for the scholarship and the lecture series.
Speaker 2: All right.  This is for your scholarship and lecture series-
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  This is 1998 to receive the scholarship award at that time.
Speaker 2: Right.  The Paul Phillips Cooke Scholarship.
Speaker 1: I think that's enough, Anne.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  No, I want this one.
Speaker 1: Oh, is this your mother?
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: I was just going to ask you if we can get one of the two of them together.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  All right.  Daddy, you want to talk about your scholarship program.
Speaker 1: Created at the University of the District of Columbia in 1986, call it the Paul Phillips Cooke Scholarship program, continuous today in March 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Great.  Thank you, Dr. Cooke.  Now, this next one, Dr. Cooke, is one of you and your wife, and Anne thinks it was in 1998.  You have, what looks like a tux and she has on, like, a beaded jacket.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  It's a '98 [1998] Valentine party, I believe.
Speaker 1: In your house, in your home upstairs.  Go ahead and give us a brief description for that photo.
Speaker 2: What do you got there?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  You were going to the Hellian Valentine party, there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Photograph as they were going to the Hellian, H-E-L-L-I-A-N, Valentine Dinner Dance are Rose Clifford [Cooke] and Paul Phillips Cooke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Three periods, probably--or, you've got the date?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  1998.
Speaker 2: Is it on the back?
Speaker 1: In 1998.
Speaker 2: Photo 105.
Speaker 1: Period.
Speaker 2: Now, the next one, Dr. Cooke, is of your parents.  They're sitting side by side.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Upstairs, daddy, on the first floor under the stairs.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My mother [Mamie Phillips Cooke] and father [Louis Phillip Cooke].
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: By themselves?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  And that'll do it, Anne.
Speaker 2: Mamie Kate, and who's on the left?  It doesn't make any difference?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Yeah, your father.
Speaker 2: Louis Phillip and Mamie Kathleen [Phillips] Cooke, parents of Paul P. [Cooke] and Louis Phillip Cooke, Jr., or--
Speaker 1: That's fine, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  Daddy, we're not doing the essay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just identify.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Dr. Cooke.
Speaker 1: Do you know about what year this photo would have been taken?
Speaker 2: What would you say, Anne, by looking at it?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  19--early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's great.  That helps us get a reference.
Speaker 1: Now, Anne, you're not born if it's '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: ANNE COOKE:  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Dr. Cooke, this next one is you presenting a plaque on behalf of the AVC [American Veterans Committee] to Senator [Claiborne] Pell--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 1972.
Speaker 2: Just two of us or are there others?
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Yeah, you and Claiborne and there's somebody in the background, but I don't know who it is.
Speaker 2: That's probably an AVC plaque, isn't it?  I think I think it.  On behalf of the American Veteran's Committee, National Chairman Paul P. Cooke [Dr. Paul Cooke] presents a plaque to Senator Claiborne Pell.  Shall we give you the state in parenthesis?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: (Rhode Island), close parenthesis, for this service to veterans in the Senate, in the U.S. Senate.
Speaker 1: In 1972.
Speaker 2: In 1972.  I'm president [University of the District of Columbia] then, Anne, '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Well, you said, national chairman.
Speaker 2: But you got enough?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: If you add anything else, Cooke is president of--is DCTC [District of Columbia Teachers College] president.  Three words--four words, Cooke is--
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Daddy, we're not doing the essay.
Speaker 2: All right.  If you can get that.
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  You don't have to do the commas and the periods.
Speaker 2: But if you can get it in there.  One short sentence-
Speaker 1: ANNE COOKE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: --Cooke is DCTC [District of Columbia Teachers College] president.
