Story_ID: 33137
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Joseph Henry Carpenter.  That's J-O-S-E-P-H, Joseph, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Carpenter, C-A-R-P-E-N-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: All right, is there a story behind your name at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, not necessarily behind my name, and, of course, my family background goes back to Dr. Mudd.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll ask you about that.  That's the physician that attended John Wilkes Booth, right, in--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I can hardly--I can't--
Speaker 1: That's the physician that attended John Wilkes Booth back--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in 1864.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he was the doctor that--
Speaker 1: Well, I'll ask you about him later.  I just thought it might be something about the name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is June the 19th, 1924.  My place is Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My current occupation is retired (laughter), but I'm a retired United States Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: February the 14th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home, my address--
Speaker 1: You don't have to give the address.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're at my home in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 33138
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask that only require a short answer.  They're kind of like a warm up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite who?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Food.  Ribs, I guess (laughter).  That's about it, I guess.  But other than that, just about everything and anything, steak, ribs, potato salad.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  No, I don't have a favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, summertime is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii is about what I love the best, but I don't get there very often (laughter).  But that would, in fact is my favorite vacation area.  Then I, you know, I belong to the Montford Point Marines, and each year we travel around the country having convention, and each year, it's a different state.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really either.  I can't say that I do.
Story_ID: 33139
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get 'em confused.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Do you want maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yeah, too.
Speaker 2: Okay, Mary--well, she's deceased incidentally.  Okay, it's Mary Elizabeth Carpenter, and her maiden name is Edlin, E-D-L-I-N, Edlin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I can't understand everything you're saying?
Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June the 6th, 1903.  I think it was--yeah, June the 6th, 1903.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She (laughter), I believe Washington [D.C.], but I'm not too sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a rumor that there's some other place she might--is there a story about her being some other place?
Speaker 2: Not her, but her father, of course.  She was in--he was in Maryland rather in Washington or Maryland County.
Speaker 1: What was her father's name?
Speaker 2: Her father, John A. Edlin, E-D-L-I-N, John A. Edlin.
Speaker 1: And he's from Maryland, and he--
Speaker 2: He's from Maryland, yes.  Gee, I can't--I've got it on the tip of my tongue, but I can't call.  It's the Southern part of Maryland.  I can't call it right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  We'll just, you know, if--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it comes to you, then we'll deal with it.  And what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, her name is Theresa Edlin.  Now, I always called her "grandma" (laughter) so (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: --when she lived.  But her first name is Theresa, and the last name was Edlin.  I don't know what the middle name could have been.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: E-D-L-I-N.  And I don't know what her maiden name is, but she was from either Ireland or Scotland.
Speaker 1: From Ireland or Scotland.
Speaker 2: Or Scotland, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she a white Irish woman?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grand--and her husband was an Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is.  And her husband was an Indian, okay.  So, John Edlin, you're talking about John Edlin or--
Speaker 2: John Edlin, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was an American Indian?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a mixture, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, African American and Indian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right--
Speaker 2: But, you know, if you've heard of the Edlin Tobacco companies, all through Maryland, they're all connected, we're all connected with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I haven't heard of it myself.  I'm not from around here, but I'm writing it down, Edlin Tobacco.  Okay, all right.  Now, are there any stories--now, I guess this is where the story of Dr. Mudd comes in, right?  This is on your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but, you know, there's some big separation there (laughter).  So I can't get too much into Dr. Mudd, but the other, I'm just saying that we're related because he's--we're Edlin, and they tie into Edlin.  And the only way that, [clearing throat] excuse me, I became aware that we were related to Dr. Mudd or there is a relationship there, is that when my cousin, my first cousin, which is my mother's brother's son, he's a doctor.  He is a doctor.  He's a retired doctor now.  But he was practicing in Massachusetts and dealing with an abortion.  They charged him with homicide.  And so it was big article about it, and when that article was published, then a relative of Dr. Mudd called him and then they tied everything together, how we, how our family related to Dr. Mudd.  And my mother could tell you name by name, who it is, but I can't.
Speaker 1: Now, did your cousin get out of that trouble?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was not--he was found not guilty or it was dropped.  I don't know which way it went, but anyway, yes, it--
Speaker 1: Dr.--
Speaker 2: And he continued to practice medicine there, so he was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Until he retired (unclear).  And then he just retired a couple of years ago, about three or four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories in your, on your mother's side of the family of Emancipation or the end of slavery or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, not that I really know about.  Of course, I mean I know our generation had to go back there, but I don't know about--
Speaker 1: Okay, so none are passed down that you're pretty sure they--
Speaker 2: No, un-un, right.
Speaker 1: --experienced it.
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Story_ID: 33140
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your mother say about growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name?
Speaker 1: No, what did she say about growing up?
Speaker 2: What did she say about growing up?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Not a lot (laughter).  In fact, 'cause she grew up in the Washington [D.C.] area, now, 'cause she did go to Dunbar High School.  And that's where she met her--our father, met her husband, was there at Dunbar.  But she didn't talk much about, you know, her growing up 'cause she--okay, she grew up, years in--well some time ago, and she grew up in Southeast.  My grandfather, her father, had a coal business, ice and coal business there in Southeast at 16th and "B" Street, SE, which is now 16th and Independence Avenue.  But he had that whole corner there.  It's a big corner, and he had coal business.  In fact, he started off when we were youngsters, and he had horses and pulled the cart.  And he had ice.  He sold ice and coal.  And as a kid, as a youngster, I used to go over and mind the yard.  And he lived down the street from this coal yard.  He was only a couple of doors down from that.  And so and during the summer I would go down there, go over there rather, to that (unclear), when it was 15th and Bean, Northeast, which is only about four blocks where my grandfather lived and where his coal business was.  So I would, during the summertime, I'd go over there, and while he'd go down to his house to eat lunch, I would mind the yard for him.  And, of course, when he'd come back, he'd give me a quarter or something.  And, you know, the first place I headed was to the candy store and buy candy (laughter).  So, but that's what I would do.  I helped with him, you know, cutting ice, blocking ice and bagging coal and chopping wood and what not.
Speaker 1: So did your mother ever help out with the business?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of, no.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't happen while we were here anyway.
Speaker 1: What did she--did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she worked for Selective Service during the War [World War II] especially.  She was one of the managers of the Selective Service offices.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Selective Service, that was the draft office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, no draft now, and I don't know if it's gonna be one in the future or not, but they--that's something that people probably wouldn't know unless, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so Selective Service, that's the draft office.
Story_ID: 33141
Speaker 1: And, now, let's see, okay.  Now, what did your grandmother--did she have to work for a living at all or did--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so 'cause, well, you know, since we were around her, she was always at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we'd always go visit 'cause she'd always, she loved to cook.  And we loved to eat (laughter), so, us kids, so we'd go by there every time you wanted to eat something.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandparents have any trouble as a mixed couple in the City of Washington?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  He had never said--they never talked about any trouble.  And, you know, he, they were in Southeast [Washington, D.C.], and there was St. Cyprian's Catholic Church, and he was well known there.  He provided the church with coal and ice and what not, free, and he didn't charge them.  So he was well known in Southeast.  In fact, he supported most of Southeast with his business.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they attended the Catholic church on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was at 13th and "C" Street, SE.
Speaker 1: Which one is that?
Speaker 2: St. Cyprian--it's not there now--
Speaker 1: St. Cyprian?
Speaker 2: --St. Cyprian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And speaking of that, if you're interested, I grew up at, it was 15th and "B" and it's 15th and Constitution Avenue NE.  St. Cyprian was at 13th and "C" Street, SE.  And East Capitol Street is the dividing line for Southeast and Northeast.  At the corner of 14th and East Capitol was a white Catholic church.  And when we there, we had to sit in the back of the church, in the pew.  So we had to go by that church to go all the way to St. Cyprian's which was at 13th and "C", which was another, about four or five blocks from there.
Speaker 1: So St. Cyprian's was a black Catholic church.
Speaker 2: It was black, yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought so.  St. Cyprian's traditionally is thought of as being a black Saint--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you know.  And so it's interesting, yeah.  So, the City of Washington, D.C., the nation's Capital, we have segregated Catholic churches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we had segregated schools too, yeah.
Story_ID: 33142
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me go to your father's side of the family.  Now, can--
Speaker 2: Well, I know very little of my father (laughter), but okay, I'll answer the best I can.
Speaker 1: I'll ask you though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us his full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Carpenter, C-A-R-P-E-N-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  He's, he was a year or two younger than my mother.  That's all I can say.  But I'm not sure what his date of birth is.
Speaker 1: About 1905, I guess or so?
Speaker 2: That would be a good guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all (unclear).
Speaker 1: And where was he born?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure where he--I would suppose--he went to school in Washington [D.C.], so I would suppose he was born in Washington.  But when we were coming along, his mother and father lived in Atlantic City [New Jersey], and we used to go there quite often as a kid, as children.
Speaker 1: His parents lived in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Well, his parents did, yeah.  And that Atlantic City beach was there, and one side of the beach was for colored and the other side was for white (laughter) (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father have a chance to--well, what do you know about his parents?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, no, 'cause they, like I say, they were in Atlantic City.  We'd go visit them, but that's all I knew about them.
Speaker 1: What did they do there?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter).  No, we were very young when we went up there.  Of course, when we went up there, we went beach, and that was it.  And, of course, we'd spend the nights up there, but we didn't, we didn't learn too much about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your father went to school in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know he went to--the only thing I know he went to Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Now, the elementary school, I don't know where he went there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But I do know he went to Dunbar High School.
Speaker 1: Now, Dunbar drew students from all over D.C., black students from all over the D.C. area?
Speaker 2: Well, not, well, yeah, there were three--we had three regular high schools.  We had Dunbar, Armstrong and Cardozo that we had, which was for Spingarn.  Spingarn was, I think a high school, but that was for like mechanics and this type of thing.  I didn't go there, but I knew of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did your father have any stories about growing up that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, when we were kids, he worked at the Post Office, but that's all I know.  So we lived pretty comfortably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was a musician, incidentally.  He had a band, and--
Speaker 1: So what did he play?
Speaker 2: He played the piano.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He played with Duke Ellington.  He played for Ella Fitzgerald a few times I think, not very often, but once in a while he would fill in.
Speaker 1: That's pretty, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's pretty good.  He's a good musician if he can fill in for Duke Ellington.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, oh, he was a good pianist.  He wanted me to learn piano, but--and I started, but I got as far as to when I learned to play by ear, and then I stopped the lesson (laughter) and went on by ear.  (Unclear) I'm sorry I did that, but anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was lazy, very lazy.  That's how I went to Cardozo.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: I don't, I didn't hear that he did.  Now that you mention, it, I don't, I haven't heard him say he did, but I don't know.  He may have.  I just don't know.  My father and I weren't very close (laughter).  He was a very disciplinarian, and he was, he was very hard on his sons.  We weren't all that close.  We lived together, but I mean, got--had to get (unclear), 'cause my father, I had to get along with him, but I avoided him as much as I could (laughter).
Story_ID: 33143
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Other than at Dunbar, that's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were both going to Dunbar together.
Speaker 1: Now, she would have been, now, high school a couple of years makes a lot of difference.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah--
Speaker 1: So he was two years younger than her in high school?
Speaker 2: Maybe it wasn't, but he was younger than she.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And he, but they were both at Dunbar together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Now, he could have been, you know, a freshman in there, and she could be senior leaving, I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right, so did they get married in high school or--
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so it was after high school and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they have a--were they courting a long time before they got married or--
Speaker 2: I don't--that's before my time (laughter).  I wasn't even born then (laughter).
Speaker 1: But she didn't graduate--let's see--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she graduated from Dunbar.  I don't know what year, but she did.
Speaker 1: About 1920, I guess.
Speaker 2: Could be, could be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause she was 17 or 18, it would be 1920, '21' [1921].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were born in '24' [1924], so that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was born in '24' [1924].  Now, I have a sister that was, let's see she--there're six of us in my family six siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you wanna name them all and put yourself in the order?
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, let's start with the oldest, which will be my sister, Marguerite Selden.  She's deceased, Selden, S-E-L-D-E-N, Selden, Marguerite Selden.  Then I had a brother, Horace E. Carpenter.  He's deceased.  Then I'm next, Joseph Carpenter, I'm next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I had a brother, William Carpenter.  He's deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a sister, Mildred Gray is her last--maiden, Gray is her married name, of course, Mildred Gray.  Then I have a brother, Richard L. Carpenter.  He's--the three of us still living, my sister, the youngest sister and my youngest brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's six of you, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 33144
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their, you know, their attitudes, and how they look, how they walk, talk, talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I--(laughter), I guess I'm a mixture of both of 'em, I guess.  My mother was very easy going, and I was, I could always get by my mother by just doing any number of things, just by making her laugh.  And then that was my mistake though.  I didn't realize it, but anyway it's my mistake.  I'd make her laugh so she wouldn't punish me or anything.  But she would tell my father (laughter).  Then I really got the worst side of it (laughter).  If I'd a been smart, I'd go on accept it, whatever she wanted to do.  But I tried, called myself being slick.  But he was a real disciplinarian.  He, he didn't play, and he worked at the post office, and at that time, the Post Office had little, the postmen had a little leather belt, real thin belt, but it's thin, I think they used to tie the mail up with.  And he would use it against us (laughter), if we showed out, particularly if my mother told him, you know, she had trouble with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So would you say that he was excessive in--
Speaker 2: He was, I thought he was.
Speaker 1: Even for those days, you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say he was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why we didn't get along.  So I avoided him as much as I could.  I mean, you know, we, we'd speak together, you speak and talk and eat together, but if I didn't have to say anything to him, I wouldn't say it (laughter).  If I didn't have to be there, I wouldn't be there (laughter), but other than that, that's why--
Story_ID: 33145
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, okay, now, did you grow up in the same place the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, at 15th and "B", Northeast or like I say, it's now 15th and Constitution Avenue, but it was 15th and "B".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's 1503 was the address.
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood growing up, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at that time, Washington [D.C.] was segregated to some degree.  It wasn't a hard segregation.  Why I say that, where I grew up on a block, of course, a block square, the backside from us was white.  In other words, in three sides of that block were black.  And then the fourth side was white.  Then one of the sides, it would be a white, white living.  On the other side, it would be black, and in front would be black, see.  But only for a block or two, and then you're back in the white neighborhood or you're back in the black neighborhood.  If you walk a couple of blocks to go in one, one way, you'll go through a white neighborhood, and you're right back in the black neighborhood.  We didn't have much of a play area.  We had, it was a lot behind the houses.  The lot was pretty squared and in the middle of the block would be a big lot, garages, what not in there for cars to park, and also we used for baseball as our baseball fields and played football back there.  It was, we didn't have any problems.  It was typical neighborhood.  We had a couple of bullies in there, in the neighborhood, but nothing real serious.
Speaker 1: No gangs or anything?
Speaker 2: No real gang stuff, no.  Now, of course, we had to, we had to fight sometimes (laughter) to go to, get in certain areas, go in certain areas where there were blacks because they tried to keep you out.  And we'd go in, especially if we wanted to see some girls in somebody's neighborhood, they may chase you out of it.  And, of course, we'd do the same thing when they came in our neighborhood.  So just a friendly thing (laughter), I guess.  But any--and, of course, the other thing, (unclear) of our schools, because the schools were segregated.  So when we went to school, we went to school with blacks.  For example, the elementary school was Lovejoy Elementary School, and that was almost, oh, I don't know, about seven or eight blocks from where I lived, but within two block from the white elementary school.  So I'd go by that white elementary school to get to mine.  And the same thing with junior high school.  I went to Brown Junior High School which was, which was in Northeast on Bennings Road, yeah, Bennings Road, around 24th and Benning Road, was Brown Junior High School.  And that's where I went, but there was elementary, not elementary, but--I almost said the name of that school.  I've forgotten.  But anyway that was a block--that was a junior high school, and it was a block from my house.  And so was the high school which was--which is, can't think of it right now.  It'll come to me.  But that school I'm thinking of is at 17th and East Capital Street, South--Northeast, it's on the Northeast side--Eastern High School, Eastern High School was within a block, within two blocks of my house, when Cardozo was about three miles away (laughter) and so was Armstrong and Dunbar.  So we had to travel a long ways to get to high school and pass many white schools.  And I guess what I'm reading, what I'm really leading in, thinking about or leading up to is the fact that how we got along with each other because we only had three high schools.  So we'd all end up in one of those three high schools, so we practically knew all the blacks around town, just basically because of that.
Story_ID: 33146
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, we had, the black school had its own superintendent, and was completely independent of the white schools.  The white schools had their superintendent, black schools had their superintendent.  And my oldest sister [Marguerite Selden] became principal of several of, different schools, elementary schools, eventually, the assistant superintendent of [Washington] D.C. schools.  She had been appointed by President--can't remember which one, as--see the first, the district didn't have a mayor.  It had a council.
Speaker 1: Oh, that would have been during the Reagan days, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, before Reagan, way before Reagan.
Speaker 1: Way before--oh, before Robert C. Weaver, even before Weaver, I mean they had, even had a mayor in D.C.?  That would have been back in the '60' [1960s], I guess when Kennedy [John F. Kennedy] or--
Speaker 2: No, this would have been--
Speaker 1: Kennedy, Eisenhower [Dwight D. Eisenhower], I don't know, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson [Lyndon B. Johnson]?
Speaker 2: I don't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: I thought you meant the gap between Marion Barry and--
Speaker 2: No, no, not that, she's way ahead of--she's--
Speaker 1: She's like before Robert Weaver.  So she's back in the Kennedy or Johnson years, I guess.
Speaker 2: Who was before Johnson?
Speaker 1: Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Kennedy, who was before Kennedy now?
Speaker 1: Eisenhower.
Speaker 2: And before Eisenhower?
Speaker 1: Truman (laughter).
Speaker 2: Truman, not Truman, there's somebody in between there that--and that's what I can't--
Speaker 1: No, there's nobody between Truman and Eisenhower.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Truman and Eisenhower, two terms for Eisenhower, then comes Kennedy, and he dies in '63' [1963].  He's killed, then Johnson, from '63' [1963] to '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: Well, I can't remember right now.
Speaker 1: And [Richard Milhous] Nixon after Johnson, yeah.
Speaker 2: Nixon might, Nixon might be the one.
Speaker 1: Maybe so.
Speaker 2: He might have been the one.
Speaker 1: And I think (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Even before we had a mayor, the District--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Walter Washington was the mayor, right, the first mayor--
Speaker 2: Just before Washington, they had a council.  She was appointed on the council, on that council by the President of the U.S.
Speaker 1: So this is late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s], around there?
Speaker 2: Somewhere, I've forgotten now.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, she was appointed on a council.
Speaker 1: I kept saying Robert Weaver.  I meant Walter Washington.  I don't know how I got 'em--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just before Washington took office.  He was the first mayor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 33147
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well, at Lovejoy Elementary School, did you have a favorite subject--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--
Speaker 1: Or did you like school?
Speaker 2: No, I--I don't think I had any favorite subject in school at all (laughter).  Of course, I had, you know, girl watching if that's a subject, but, in fact, that's where I met my wife, believe me--believe it or not (laughter), in elementary school.
Speaker 1: At Lovejoy?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used to be a patrol boy, and Lovejoy was at 13th & "D" Street, NE.  And then two blocks down would be Maryland Avenue.  And she lived on the other side of Florida Avenue.  So she had to walk from her school home, and I used to be a patrol boy, and I always made sure I was on the corner that I knew she would be passing and kept flirting with her.  And sometimes I'd even walk home with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, being a patrol boy, now, was that--that's usually considered an honor, you know, a kind of a distinction in school, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, I guess it was sort of an honor or something that you earned, yeah, you had to earn the right to be one.  But, and I became a lieutenant on the patrol force.  So I had a lot of, so I could pick where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a paper route or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I had, I did AFRO, so I used to sell AFRO's right there by the government printing office which was at North Capital and "H" Street, NW.
Speaker 1: This is the Washington [D.C.] "Afro American"?
Speaker 2: Right, "Afro American".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I just did that for a short time.  I, I was kind of lazy, I'll tell you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you, you know, it wasn't the kind of family where your parents demand you work or anything like that.  You didn't have to--
Speaker 2: Huh, I'm not--
Speaker 1: Your parents didn't demand that you work--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  We lived fairly comfortable since my father [Henry Edward Carpenter] worked at the Post Office.  See, in that time, most blacks didn't have fairly decent jobs, but the post office was one of 'em, and if you were in a government, worked for the government, you'd be okay too, like government (unclear) and things like that.  But, even garbage truck drivers had to be white, and they were, the garbage people that picked up the garbage were black; same thing with the street car and buses.  There were white operators, no blacks.  Now, my uncle worked, my uncle, which is my mother's [Mary Elizabeth Carpenter] brother, he worked at the post office.  He was the only black that was at, had a window.  But he was at the window because they didn't know he was black because he was very fair.  And if you saw some of the pictures there, in there, I can show his picture.  I believe I've got a picture of him, but he's very fair.  And on my mother's side, except for her father, all of 'em were very fair 'cause they took after their mother.
Story_ID: 33148
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, tell us what you were saying about, your family is very fair--a lot of very fair-skinned people in the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my mother's side, they're very fair.  And, of course, you can't tell whether--who they are, except when my mother had her children (laughter), 'cause you having children, you're talking about, children, we all took after our, somewhat after our father, see, who was brown skinned.  And, but her mother, like said, was from Ireland, either Ireland or Scotland.  I always get confused on which one it is.  And, of course, her husband was Indian, and, of course, a mixture of black and Indian.  But all of their, all of my mother's siblings all came out real fair, that you couldn't tell them, when they had good hair, fair hair, you couldn't tell 'em from--what they were.  In fact, you'd assume if you saw 'em that they were white.  And, but my mother's oldest brother worked at the Post Office at the window, but at that time--and this was before the War [World War II], at that time, you know, D.C. was segregated, and the Post Office didn't want blacks at, working at a window.  You could work as a carrier, but you couldn't work at a window.  But, of course, he did because they didn't know what he was.  And to look at him, you couldn't tell.  And his wife was kind of fair, and even his children are fair.  And you, even if you saw him with his children, you wouldn't pay too much attention.  You might take a second look, but (unclear) get paid any real attention.  Well, what else were we saying?
Speaker 1: Well, I was asking you about Lovejoy--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and just growing up.  Now, so did you have any favorite teachers at Lovejoy [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had any favorite teacher there (laughter).  But I don't, I can't recall that I did.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean school was, wasn't one of the things that I really wanted.  I went to it 'cause I had no choice, but that wasn't one of my favorites.  That's how I happened to get to be typing 'cause that's the only reason that I got to be typing 'cause I was lazy.  And when I was in junior high school, we had to pick a subject.  And I took, the first year I tried Spanish, and, of course, had to take that book home and study it every night, plus, along with the other subjects.  So I got lazy, and I started looking around, and said, what can I do to cut out some of this homework.  And all of a sudden, I realized if I type, I don't have a typewriter.  So I can't go home with homework.  So I took typing for that reason.  And actually, I stayed with it.  And that caused me to go to Cardozo [High School].  Otherwise, I would have either gone to Armstrong or Dunbar, but because I was taking typing, they sent me to Cardozo, and I started taking bookkeeping, shorthand and accounting, and all the administrative subjects, which I'm glad I did 'cause that's why--that's what saved me during the war 'cause when I went to the Marine Corps, they found, they saw that I could type, and they needed clerks.  This commandant's intention was to make us self supporting, make our unit self supporting as fast as possible.  So if we had any ability to do anything, that's where they would put us so that they could remove the whites away from, take 'em out of our unit.
Story_ID: 33149
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, what about church?  Now, did you go to Catholic church?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to St. Cyprian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only because my mother dragged me there, but (laughter), I went there because she had--she was really a devout Catholic, and so I had to do it as long as she was living.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so was her father and her mother.  They all were devout Catholics, you know, we all were very closely related to St. Cyprians because as I said, my grandfather had a coal business--ice business, and he supplied that church with coal and ice and whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the things that you remember about growing up?  Now, you were--you grew up in the 1930s basically, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 1930s, right.
Speaker 1: You were a kid right in the, when the Depression hit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, and during the Depression, right?
Speaker 1: In 1929, you were five years old, and so what was life like then in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, life wasn't a real problem for us.  As I said, my father was in the Post Office, so he brought home pretty good money.  Of course, then our neighborhood, now, in our neighborhood, we had people of all economic levels.  We, I don't think we had a doctor, but--gee, I don't know what the parents were doing.  One of the, one of my close friends growing up was Gardner Milton, and his father worked down at the Navy.  I don't know what he did, but he worked the Navy yard and they lived pretty comfortably.  But most of us did, most of us didn't have any real problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, well, the things that, you know, I guess one of the things that really makes a big difference is we didn't have a playground or areas to play or pools to swim.  We used whatever we had.  And so we got to playing together because it didn't make any difference what kind of money you had, you couldn't go anywhere (laughter), you know, segregation and prejudice.  And the pool, the swimming pools were way uptown, and so the only thing we had in Northeast that we'd do, it had the Potomac River.  So we'd swim in the river.  So you got to mingle with everybody of all classes, I guess is what I'm leading to because, you know, you couldn't go anywhere other than with your race.  And we used to have a pool, called Motts swimming pool, where Howard [University] is now, where Howard's parking lot was a pool there called Mott, and we used to go up there.  But we'd hitch a ride to get up there, like hop on the back of a truck or whatever 'cause usually, we didn't have money to catch the bus or streetcar or, and so we'd catch the next best thing, hop on the back of a truck or something.  Well, now, we did do one thing though, now that reminded me.  Also as a kid I met a man who was a huckster, and he had a truck.  And so (unclear) deliver fruits and apples, and things like that.  And I worked on the truck with him for a--for quite some time, made a few pennies there, but, and, of course, I said, my grand--worked at my grandfather's coal yard, ice yard.  I helped him deliver ice and this type of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--what did you do for entertainment?  Did you have a radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had radio, yeah.  I guess, you know, didn't have, TV's weren't in existence, and so we listened to different stories like 'The Shadow' and 'Jack Armstrong' and the 'All American Boy,' and let's see, and there were stories I liked.  Like 'The Shadow,' I really enjoyed 'The Shadow'.  'Amos and Andy' was on also very popular at that time on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'Amos and Andy'.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were the movies segregated there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, basically, they were.  Now, there were a couple of white movies you could go into, but well, you'd have to go in the back and up in the balcony with one of them.  But we had our own theaters.  We had real nice theaters.  We had the Howard which was a very nice theater and Lincoln, The Republican Theater, and there were several others.  And they were real nice, and so we'd all go there, and that's another good thing for us because we were all, could assemble in the same general area.  And we got to know just about everybody, all the blacks in the District got--those worth knowing anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so okay.  So you came up along the time when Joe Louis was fighting?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, now, that was one thing.  We'd all gather around the radio to listen to that, definitely, yeah.  Yeah, and we watched, listened to the baseball games too 'cause you had the Griffith Stadium, which was at Florida Avenue and 7th Street at Georgia Avenue.  I guess it was 7th Street, Florida Avenue and 7th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was the Washington Senators in--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And they became the Minnesota Twins, I think, I believe.  Are they, not--yeah, they went to Minnesota, right?
Speaker 2: I forgot what they became (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, they left town and became the Twins.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 33150
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, well, now, at Brown Junior High School--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, Brown Junior High School, that was--was that closer than, was that a long way off too?
Speaker 2: That was a pretty good distance.  That was a good mile to, mile from my house, a good mile, maybe a mile and up to two miles.  That was 24th and Benning and I lived at 15th and "B".
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is this where you started typing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In junior high school?
Speaker 2: In junior high school 'cause we had to make a, so we had to select a subject.  And like I said, the first year, I chose Spanish, thinking that I was gonna learn Spanish.  And I would have if I'd stuck with it, but that was, I had more homework.  And I had English homework, math, and all the other subjects to go home with.  And that meant that I had to do a lot of studying at home.  And so--and I didn't wanna do that.  I was too lazy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, typing is not easy, so I don't (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, well, it is, once you get the hang of it, and, of course you know, it was interesting because on the board, black board, you have all the keys but the typewriters wouldn't have the keys.  So you'd have to watch the board, so you'd know which finger to move.  And I got very good at--not in, not at Brown.  I wasn't all that good, enough to pass.  So I did that at Brown, and the same thing at (unclear).  I wasn't, really wasn't that interested in typing.  But I, I had to take it so I didn't have any choice, so I took it.  And then, but when I really got proficient in it is when I went in the Service.  And when I went to Service, they--well, after I finished my boot camp training, I was the only one pulled out of my platoon.  The rest of 'em were sent to the 51st Defense battalion and, of course, I was sent right into an office.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, anything significant about Brown Junior High School before we take you to high school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I became a patrol boy there, and then I did that because I had a chance to flirt with the girls 'cause you were right there.  The patrol boys would give--like monitors inside the building, you know, make sure kids are quiet and stayed in line, this type of thing.  So I enjoyed that 'cause it gave me a chance to flirt with the girls, so that's why I stuck with that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you go to, so you're in--junior high school is what, sixth, seventh and eighth or--
Speaker 2: I think it was seventh, eighth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --seventh and eighth--
Speaker 2: --ninth.
Speaker 1: Seventh, eighth and ninth.
Speaker 2: Ninth, yeah, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then tenth, eleventh and twelfth, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you start Dunbar [High School] in the tenth grade, and--
Speaker 2: Tenth, eleventh, twelfth, yeah, that's Cardozo [High School], I started Cardozo in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, Cardozo, right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, tenth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: Cardozo, that's C-A-R-D-O-Z-A, right?
Speaker 2: Z-O.  I think it's Z-O.  C-A-R-D-O-Z-O.
Speaker 1: Cardozo, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's Z-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It's been a long time since I spelled it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any teachers at Brown that stick out that you--
Speaker 2: We had a young English teacher, very attractive.  She sticks out because I used to like talking to her.  And I can't remember her name.  But one thing that I did do with her, she felt something, I don't know what I did, but anyway, she was keeping some of us back after school because we would, we didn't do what we were told to do or something.  I don't remember exactly why, but we had to, punished.  So I said to her, what is your boyfriend gonna say if he comes here and find all of us here with you (laughter)?  And she got real angry, but that didn't go too far (laughter), didn't go too well (laughter).  I don't know what made me say that, but I, 'cause, yeah, I used to flirt, try to flirt with her too, you know, and, of course, you know, she ignored me most of the time.  But then, but anyway I just thought of that, that time I just sounded off, sounded it off.
Story_ID: 33151
Speaker 1: Now, when you went to Cardozo, now, today, most of the business programs where you learned typing and the clerical stuff, they're probably about mostly female students.  Was that true then too?
Speaker 2: No, un-un, there was quite a few.  In fact, from Brown, there were four of us that were at classes at Brown that went over there.  But there were others too, but I mean these, the four of us kind of hung out together.  So we went up to Cardozo.  In fact, all of us, all of our first names were Joe.  They had Joe Bowen, Joe Brant, Joe Gant, and myself and there was another "Joe", who--I don't remember, but anyway, yeah, but it was quite a few fellows there.  In fact, the first year at Cardozo, we, you know, Cardozo had a cadet corps so we had to drill.  And the first year we drilled--and there was just (unclear) boys in the drill, in the cadet corps, but we won first place, and we drilled at Griffith Stadium, and we won first place that first year.  But I didn't drill any more after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Cardozo, now were there any special teachers there?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, like I say, school was a necessity (laughter) and that was (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you play any sports in school?
Speaker 2: Not in school, no, I did play sandlot football and baseball and this type of thing, but not at school.
Speaker 1: Now, did you run for any offices or anything or--
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was just going to school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, the War [World War II] while you were in school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did, junior high school--I think I was in junior high 'cause it started in the '30's [1930s].  The War started, well, didn't, we didn't--
Speaker 1: Forties [1940s]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --the United States wasn't--
Speaker 1: Europe, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --involved, but it was in Europe, and we started, the draft started in the '30's [1930s].
Speaker 1: And I think they started up around '37' [1937] when Hitler--
Speaker 2: Somewhere, it was the early '30's [1930s]--
Speaker 1: Thirty-six [1936] or '37' [1937]--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was late '30's [1930s] when it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --when Hitler invaded--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Started the draft.
Speaker 1: --Poland or something, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so while I was high school, that was another thing too that I guess, we were somewhat concerned 'cause we just figured we'd, because the War was building up, we just knew that we were gonna end up going there.  In fact, I guess I was in--December of '41' [1941], yeah, I'm trying to think where I was.  That Sunday, I know it was a Sunday, and a friend of mine, I was in his car.  And we were going, we were going up, going to pick up some girls, if I remember correctly, when they announced about the attack on Pearl Harbor.  And I'm trying to remember whether I was--I must have been in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you would have--
Speaker 2: Must have been a senior in high.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: 'Cause when I got out, I got out--I graduated in '41' [1941], and I went from--when I graduated from Cardozo, everybody, all of my friends were going into the Service.
Speaker 1: So you would have been 17.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I wasn't going.  I mean I--wait a minute, no 18--I was 18 when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Eighteen for you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 18.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean in '41' [1941] when the--
Speaker 2: Oh, '41' [1941], yeah, okay.  Yeah, then I was still up in, I was still up at Cardozo.  Okay, but what I was getting at, when I graduated from Cardozo, I'd heard that the Navy yard was hiring apprentices.  So I went down to the Navy yard and went to work as an apprentice machinist, Navy yard.
Speaker 1: That's after graduation, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, before we get to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so the War is declared, and you're a senior in high school.  And were you considering going to college or anything at this point?
Speaker 2: I don't think, I would have gone had it not been for the War, but no, I'm not sure that at that point I was really thinking about going to college.  I was thinking, (unclear) (laughter).  But anyway, I don't think I was thinking about going to college.  Well, I might have, had there not been the War.  If it had not been the War, almost certainly, I would have gone to college, yeah.  But because of the War, all the, everybody was being drafted.  The people that I knew that were a little older than I, were being drafted.  And I figured, well, soon as I get out of school, I'd be drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything--now, you said you met your wife in grade school.  Did she, was she at Dunbar too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife went to Dunbar, yeah, but I went Cardozo.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, not--yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right.  So we didn't, in high school we didn't--until our senior year, we didn't meet much or have much association from the first year in high school to the second, maybe about the senior year is when we began to meet again because what happened was, a friend of hers became a good friend of the guy I was a good friend with, Gardner Milton.  And they, the two of them were together.  So it, and, of course, when we met them together, I started talking to her again.  And then the War came along, and I went in the Service.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was, did you give--when you were, well, you went in the Service after you graduated, first of all, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Story_ID: 33152
Speaker 1: Once I graduated I went to work at the Navy yard.
Speaker 2: Navy yard, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I only stayed there about eight months, maybe before I went in the Service, somewhere like--
Speaker 2: Okay, and meanwhile, you said your--somebody in your family is working for Selective Service.  Was that your mother?
Speaker 1: My mother, my mother, yeah.
Speaker 2: Your mother worked for Selective Service, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother in the meantime was still working Selective Service, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you had an update on what was going on, right?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, well, she knew when I was gonna be called, when I was gonna be called, yeah, and so that's one reason why I went to the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was wondering, you know, if you developed a strategy or something, you know, because of your mother's influence?
Speaker 1: No, she was too straight-laced (laughter).  She wanted us to be everything, just like everybody else.  She didn't want us to be any different, and so, in fact, a friend of--a friend's mother of mine, a friend's mother, came to my mother, tried to get my mother to assist her in getting her son out.  But she told her she couldn't.  And she said she said, she will, looking at my older brother and I, both, she said, we're both going in the Service.  No, she, from (unclear) what she did was right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But was your older brother already in the Service or, at this point?
Speaker 1: He, I guess he went out with, I guess he went--we went in about the same time.  But I guess he may have gone a little before I, or I could have gone before him.  I don't remember now.  I think he must have gone a little before me, yeah, 'cause he's about a year and a half, he's a year and a half older than I.  So he probably went first, and I next.
Speaker 2: Now, was home a consideration too like, you know, making sure you got in the Service.  Did you wanna get out of the house?  You were saying your, you didn't like--you and your father didn't get along too well.
Speaker 1: I'm not following your question.
Speaker 2: No, I said you were saying that you and your father didn't get along--
Speaker 1: Right, no, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --was that a factor too, trying to leave him--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I mean, you know, we survived--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and we didn't get along, but I mean, you know, I didn't feel uncomfortable at home, just that, you know, he was a strict disciplinarian, and he was very rough at it, but we got, you know, we got along all right, except when I did something that I should do, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay, now was there--did you, I mean well, why the Marine Corps, why didn't you just wanna go in the Army or the Navy or even had you thought about the new Army Air Corps or any of that?
Speaker 1: No, okay, well, the main reason I selected--well, there were two reasons really, I selected.  One is the Marine Corps, and the Marines, yeah, the movies of that time, you know, we didn't have TV.  We had movies.  And you'd the Marines in World War I fighting, and on the streets and in bars fighting and this type of thing.  So I was kind of impressed with that.  That was one reason.  Then when we heard that the Marine had opened up, then when I went down to the Navy yard, there were about four of us used to work together.  And the Navy yard had a swing shift.  You, every week--I think it was every week, you'd change, you would change shifts, and you'd work around the clock eventually.  So we used to go swimming and go bowling, these four of us because we were all on the same shift.  We'd go bowling.  So when we found out that we were gonna going to the Service, we said, well, we'd like to stick together.  So we said, well, the best thing to, the best--if we wanna stick together, the best place to go would be the Marine Corps because they only had one base.  They'd just opened up Montford Point, see, so we figured, well, we'll all go to the same base.  But it didn't work that way.  Two of us ended up in the Marine Corps and the rest of 'em, Army, I think the other two went in the Army.  But we didn't go in the Service together at the same time anyway.  My friend, Hap, I think he went in first.  He was older than I.  I think he went in first.  Then I probably was second.  And Oscar came in--Oscar was another one that was, he came in.  He was about a month or two behind me, and then I don't know exactly when the others went in 'cause I was already in the Service.
Story_ID: 33153
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so were you drafted at a certain point, and you could chose or did you go and enlist?
Speaker 2: I asked to go--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I wasn't drafted in the Marine Corps, but I probably would have been drafted in the Army if I didn't.
Speaker 1: So you enlisted in the Marines and--
Speaker 2: I might have speeded up my time just by a few days.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19--I think you graduated in '42' [1942], right, and--
Speaker 2: This is 1943 I went in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you enlisted in '43' [1943].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is January or--
Speaker 2: No, it was in May.  I went in May, May the 5th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what I was reading before, I mean you were responsible for a group of young men--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were four of us.
Speaker 1: Four, okay.
Speaker 2: There were four of us.  One of 'em I knew in school, and that was Proctor.  His nickname was "Chickee," "Chickee" Proctor.  I knew him from school.  And I was older than he, but he was, he--I knew him from elementary school 'cause we both went to Brown [Junior High], and he was behind me.  But anyway, I knew him.  But now, the other two, I didn't know.  And that was Frank Brown and Daniel Boone.  Frank Brown and I met at the recruiting station.  We were both signing up the same time.  And Frank was a very aggressive guy, very sociable.  So he came at me, and he said, hey, let's get together and celebrate 'cause since we're leaving together.  So I said, okay, so we did.  And then when we came back, 'cause the Marine Corps--we signed up on the 5th of May, the Marine Corps told us to go home and square away your business.  And you come back, and I think it was, I think it was about the 17th of May when we came, when we had to come back together.  And then they gave, issued orders, given to me, telling me to report to the Montford Point [North Carolina] with these three other guys.  And because they were named in the Order.  Do you want me to go on from there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were--what happened next?
Speaker 2: Okay, so we, so when we reported back to the induction station or Marine Corps station, the Marine Corps took, or had a truck, Marine Corps truck and a driver and then an escort Marine.  We got in the back of the truck.  They took us to the Union Station, and so when we got to Union Station, we walked down the walkway by the train to the car right behind the, I think it's a baggage car.  I think it was a baggage--if it wasn't, then it was just a strictly coal car 'cause the way it was, the engine, coal car and sometimes the baggage car and then, then the coaches, and, of course, our coach was the first coach behind the engine where they were whatever, it's a coal car in front of it, could have been or it could have been a baggage car.  But anyway, our car (unclear) for the first car behind the engine.  Any trains going South, when they hit Washington, D.C., all the blacks had to get off of wherever they were on that train and go to that one coach.  So anyway, we got on the coach--
Speaker 1: Was that--there's something special about that coach, though, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a segregated coach.  It's for blacks.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: See, no whites.
Speaker 1: But isn't there something else about being next to the engine?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I saying.  Well, I thought I'd line it for you, you've got engine, coal car, and then either a baggage--and in the baggage car, there'll be a baggage car and then the segregated car.  If no baggage car, the segregated or the car for black right against the coal car.  And I can't remember this incident when we first went, whether there was a baggage car between us and the coal car.  I don't remember that.  Late on, when I've traveled, I did notice it several times.  But anyway, for this first trip, I don't remember whether it was or not.  So anyway, we get on--the four of us get on the train, and the white Marine said that we get in this coach and get settled, and which we did.  And then so we started playing cards and what not, you know, entertaining ourselves.  But I didn't really realize what had happened, why--I'd gone, traveled (unclear) off on trains with no problem.  But I didn't know, didn't realize he put us in this particular car because we were going South in the segregation.  I didn't, at that point, I didn't realize it 'cause nothing--I'd heard a lot of stuff in the South, but, you know, it didn't impress me because it didn't involve me.
Story_ID: 33154
Speaker 1: So you hadn't, you didn't have a sense of how black soldiers were treated in the Army?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew how they'd been treated, but, you know, from radio, you hear on the radio or when you went to the movies, they had News Reels.  You'd see that and what you read in the paper, but, you know, you don't feel it.  You don't, you know of it, but you don't really appreciate, I should--I guess I should put it that way.  You don't appreciate what happened.  So anyway, we get going, and after a couple of hours, we decide we wanted to eat.  So we caught the conductor--it was a local train.  So it stopped at every station going South.  So the conductor comes through after every stop.  So when he came through this time, we said, where's the dining car?  And he says, well, you boys can't--I don't think he said, you boys.  You guys or--probably, you boys, I guess, he said, "You boys--he made have said it a black way.  He said "You boys can't go there because--he said, you boys can't go there."  And so we immediately we said, why?  He says, well, you're in the South, and there's a Jim Crowe law that doesn't allow blacks or colored to eat with the whites.  So we didn't argue with him.  So we said, okay, 'cause we could get off at Rocky Mountain.  So we asked him how close Rocky Mountain was, and he said, maybe an hour or two from where we were.  So we said, okay, we got--we talked together and said, okay, we'll just eat when we get in Rocky Mountain.  And, of course, none of us had ever been to Rocky Mountain.  So because of the way we were situated in the coaches, when the train pulled into the station for Rocky Mountain, it goes way--the engine goes way down the track.  And I said, we're going down the track with it.  So when we got out, when we got out, then everybody behind us is getting out at the same time, so it's all whites from the next car right behind us all the way back to the last car.  So immediately we, and we waited on the tracks, and we're walking back towards the station 'cause we're right--now, this puts us in the back of the white group that's going in.  And so we were talking, you know, we're still not paying any attention.  None of us really had lived in the South or were really familiar with the South.  So we were just walking with the group, going to the station 'cause we needed to find out where to get the bus 'cause nobody knew anything about Rocky Mountain.  And, of course, you wanna get something to eat.  So they all go in the station--in the, most of 'em started going into the station, and we were following right along, talking, not paying attention to signs or anything else.  So this cop steps up in front of us, and he was a big one too.  And he had a big pistol, about that thing was almost as tall as, almost as long as I was tall (laughter).  That's the way it looked.  But anyway, he says, where in the hell you--and he used the "N" word, think you're going?  I said, well, we're going in here 'cause we wanna get something to eat, and we got meal tickets, we got a meal ticket we're bringing.  I said, we got meal tickets, got our meal tickets, and we got to find out where to catch our bus, this type of thing.  He said, well, can't you guys read?  And he used the "N" word again.  And, you know, well, we weren't gonna argue with him 'cause he was a police (laughter).  And so he said, can't you guys read?  So I looked up there, and I saw it said, "white".  And I hadn't looked up there before, and then he says, well, you have to go around the corner.  And I went around the corner, and I saw a sign up there, says, "Colored".  And so we went in there.  Like I say, we're in Rocky Mountain, and I don't know the first place about Rocky Mountain, neither did any of us.  So we were completely lost without some information from somebody.  So anyway, we went in the side door there, and it was a long corridor, fairly long, and at the end of it was a sliding glass window.  So we go up to the window and look in, and we could see the white waitress in there, white people sitting around the counter, just talking and they were serving them.  So we stood there a few minutes, thinking that somebody's gonna recognize and come over and see what we wanted.  They completely ignored us.  So then I said, well, you know, we had a problem 'cause I had to--I don't know where to go after here.  So I knocked on glass.  And we decided, we were talking, since we saw them ignoring us, said, well, we're not gonna eat here, said, we don't wanna eat here if that's the way they're gonna treat us.
Story_ID: 33155
Speaker 1: So we decided before they came to the glass that we weren't gonna eat there.  So when she came, I said, ma'am, can you please--at first she comes over.  She also used the "N" word too.  And she got aggravated 'cause she was talking to somebody that was there, and we disturbed her, see, 'cause we kept knocking on the glass.  So she was angry, and she came over.  And we knew that police was outside too, so we didn't wanna cause any problems.  So she came over and said, "Ms., can you please tell us where we catch the Trailway Bus to Jacksonville, North Carolina?"  So she told us, about four blocks away and told us how to go and which direction to go.  So we did.  So we thought, maybe if we got to a bus station, we might get something to eat, but again, when we--this time, we knew to look for signs.  So this time, we got to the bus station, we looked for the sign that says "Colored".  So we go in the "colored" entrance.  But when we looked at how they were preparing food, we could see how the food was being prepared, we said, no, we're not gonna eat here either.  And we haven't eaten.  So we left 7:00 o'clock--we had met at the station, at the recruiting station at 7:00 o'clock in the morning.  That's when we met there, and about 8:00 o'clock in the morning, we were put on the train.  So we hadn't had anything to eat.  So we go in there.  We looked at what, at the bus, we looked at what they were doing, and so we decided, well, the way they fixed it, we decided we didn't wanna do that either.  So I said, well, I told them I had government transportation requests--well, they call 'em TR's.  I had TR to get bus tickets to take us to Jacksonville, North Carolina.  So she gave us the tickets, and then when we left, we saw the line, with about four or five young white guy standing in it, so we stayed in back and said, figure this is where the bus is gonna stop.  So we stood in the back behind them, and we were just having a decent conversation.  And then one of them turned to us and says, you guys are in the wrong line.  I said, what do you mean?  He says, he Pointd over there, and says, that's, your line's over there.  The sign says "colored" (laughter).  I (unclear) looked up to see it, to see what it says.  So anyway, it did say "colored", so we said, okay, we're not gonna--we're far from home now.  We don't want any trouble.  So we get, we go over there to that line, and then they had another line.  Finally, when the bus pulls up, the bus driver gets out.  He lets all the whites get in, and they take the seats.  Then he gets back on the bus.  He comes back to where the back door is.  That's where we are.  He opens the back door, and he stands on this side, inside the bus so when you come up, he's gonna direct you back to the back, which he did do.  And so he told us we had to sit back there.  Well, we did that 'cause now we're getting kinda concerned.  We too far from home, and we don't even know where we are.  If we have to run to go some place, we don't know what to do (laughter).  So anyway, we get to, the bus takes us to Jacksonville bus station which was about four--the City of Jacksonville is about four or five square blocks, or six square blocks.  That's a small city.  The bus pulls in, and when we get off the bus, we follow the crowd again, 'cause (unclear) my orders said, call at this number when I got to Jacksonville, see.  Well, now, I gotta find a phone in the main door there.  I figured I'd find a phone inside.  So we go in there and they yell out--.
Story_ID: 33156
Speaker 1: So anyway, we get to Jacksonville, North Carolina.  And I have to make a call to the base so that they can come, some transportation to pick us up.  So, again, I'm looking for a phone, and the only place I know to look is inside the building there.  So we all go right through the door, front door, and one of the waitresses yelled, "You "N" can't come in here".  I said, I gotta make a, I said, I gotta make call.  I got a set of orders here.  I'm in the Marine Corps, and I gotta call the base.  They said, you can't come in here.  The--your phone is around the corner outside.  So we said, okay, and we say, again, like I say, we're in the middle of nowhere as far as I'm concerned (laughter).  We go out, and I go around and I call, and they answer the phone.  I called the base there, and they sent a truck with a driver and an escort, I guess.
Speaker 2: Now, was the driver white or black?
Speaker 1: Black, they were black.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Both of them.  So, anyway, we get on the bus--I mean truck, and drive go into the woods, where the pine trees are on both sides, and we drive about a mile, mile and a half off from the main road, about a mile, a mile and a half before we get to the gate to the camp.  And then there's a century there, and he, too, is black.  He's there, and then they make us get out like they do for the whites, they made us get out and walk in single file to the receiving hut.  And one of the guys there, 'cause when they us get out of the truck, the Marine there that was escorting us, told us not to talk.  Don't say nothing to nobody, just get in line, stay quiet and follow him.  And, of course, we said, yes.  But, so anyway, after we got through the gates, somebody, one of the Marines that had already finished boot camp, yelled, black Marine, had yelled--boot camp training, had yelled at us 'cause he (unclear) yelled things like you gotta go home, you left.  They had all kinds of things, songs and such.  And one of them and I don't know who it was 'cause I was in front, one of them behind me said something to him, and what did he wanna do that for, 'cause then the Marine stopped us, and boy, he gets in that guy's face and just chews him out good.  So anyway, after he get through with that, they start us walking again towards the receiving hut.  So we get to the receiving hut and check in with our orders and the guy makes sure our orders are there and we got everything we're supposed to have.  And then we tell 'em, said, look, we've been traveling since 7:00 o'clock this morning.  Now, it's about 6:00 or 7:00 o'clock in the evening.  So we said, we haven't been able to eat, said where can we get something to eat.  He says, well, it's too late.  The mess hall is closed (laughter).  And it was, so we weren't able to eat till the next morning.  So the next morning, one of the DI's [drill instructors], said we didn't have enough people to form a recruit platoon for training, so they hold you over, just put you in the hut and start building up the people in the hut.
Speaker 2: Now, what kind of a place is this hut?
Speaker 1: This, this was a swampy, with quicksand, trees, thick woods.  Now, except for the little cut-out area where we were, they were--they actually built that camp just for us.  Basically, the first group that went in, and that's the group that was yelling at us.  They were the ones that actually started, constructed the camp.  Now, the huts were made out of fiber--some sort of fiberboard.  It wasn't very sturdy, and in the middle of it, it had a (unclear) stove, and then on each side of that firestone, were four bunks on each side.  And then they had upper berths for us.  So the hut actually held 16 people, and that took up the whole hut.  And so when we got there, I guess we were, we were about the only four, the first four or maybe there'd been a couple there when we got there.  I've forgot, I don't remember now whether there was a few there or not.  But it wasn't (unclear) enough, there wasn't enough for them to form a platoon yet.  So the next morning, the DI comes in (unclear) around 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  Now, we weren't expecting, nobody told us what.  So he yells for us to come on, "fall out, fall out".  Well, I knew what that meant because I'd had (unclear) at Cardozo.  And, of course, I guess the other, a couple of the other guys did, but anyway, I knew to get up and get out of there.  So I did, and we get out and stand in line.  And finally, he takes us over to the mess hall to eat.  And he marches us over--oh, before that he allowed us to go to the head [bathroom] first.  And the heads, there were no heads in the huts. The heads were on the front row.  So you had to go all the way up, just about a half a block away to the front row where all the heads were.  So all the heads were lined up on the front row.
Speaker 2: So during the night, you couldn't go to the bathroom?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you could go (laughter).  You were supposed to go.  You'd better not stop, nobody better not catch you stopping.  You're supposed to go there, and they expect you to go there, and I imagine two, a few guys did go out in the back, you know, and urinate or do whatever they had to do as long as nobody's around to watch you.  But if you're caught, you were in a world of trouble.  So anyway, and then, like I say, middle of the night, you just went up there.  That's all.  You couldn't see.  There're no lights around, but--except on the roadway.  But you weren't, you were a little off the road a little ways.  So, anyway, we went to the mess hall and eat, and then he brought us back and let us relax a little while.  But shortly afterwards, he'd come back and he'd fall us out, and took us through some exercise and what not.  He didn't, he wasn't too rough on us at that point.  But he was gonna be our DI.  So finally, when I think it's, I guess it's about sixty men in the platoon now--I don't remember the exact count, but close to sixty.  I'm not, that may not be the correct number.  I'm not quite sure, but anyway, you would have four squads, and I'm trying to--I was trying to think of about how many people were in the squad.  I can't remember.  I would say it's close to sixty people.  So when they get that, then that's when they really start to training you, see.  And early up in the morning, and then they would march us into the woods and make us stand at attention at night with mosquitoes and you couldn't even bat--the only thing you could move was your eyelids.  You couldn't move, you couldn't budge.  If a mosquito get on your nose, that's the worst thing in the world (laughter) or around your ears, and you can't, you can't move a muscle.
Story_ID: 33157
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story about, I was reading another interview you did where you were talking about how you got your equipment and stuff.
Speaker 2: How we were equipped?
Speaker 1: Or how you got it, when you took off your civilian clothes, and were given a uniform--
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: --and your equipment, whatever else you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well, okay, well, the next morning--
Speaker 1: Did that happen before, I mean that first night or--
Speaker 2: No, it didn't happen the first night.
Speaker 1: Okay,.
Speaker 2: Now, I think it was after we got the full platoon together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then they marched us to the warehouse.  There was a ware--two, a couple of warehouses there and sized us up and gave us uniforms.  And now the guy, the quartermaster people, they just look at you and say, oh, well, you're--this jacket will fit you and toss it to you, and this pair of trousers will fit you, 'cause we were all pretty slender anyway.  So, these trousers will fit you and these shoes, they'd ask you what size shoes you wore, and they'd hand you your shoes.  Then you went to another hut, and in that hut, they had booths like.  And about, maybe about six in a row.  And you'd stand there, and then you'd empty your pockets, and you wanna make sure that you didn't have anything you weren't supposed to have.  You didn't have any drugs or anything, and they'd check what you put out in front of you.  Then when you've done that, then they made you disrobe.  And they hand you a box for you to put your clothes in the box so that they can pack it up and they'll send it back to your house, which they did.  Then you put on the uniform, and you're ready to go.  Nothing exciting happened at that point that I can think of.  But, you know, if you had a knife or even made you put your watches in the box 'cause you--they didn't want you to have watches.  And I think rings too, but I'm not sure 'cause at that time, I wasn't wearing any rings.  But anyway, all your valuables and what not, you were supposed to 'em in the box, and they would--and they shipped 'em home for you 'cause you'd fill out an address thing so they would know where to send it.  Then after that, then they'd fall you out and maybe it's chow time.  You'd go to the mess hall, and then they start marching you and running you.  And they run you until your tongue dropped out basically, but--and then, we had all kinds of exercise.  We had obstacle courses that we had to perform all, (unclear) jumping over logs, climbing ropes, marching, climbing up a sawdust hill, hike for a long time.  (Unclear) As I said, it was swampy, and then in the mornings, you know, oh, all snakes, it was a lot of snakes.
Speaker 1: It said, they'd march you out at night and make you stand where the mosquitoes would bite you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the mosquitoes would--you'd stand and you just couldn't budge a muscle, and you'd better not move (laughter) 'cause if you did, they would make you go through the belt line and everybody would have to take off their belt, and you'd go down between the group, and if you're, if you're the one with the belt, you couldn't light up--if the DI thought that you hit the, didn't hit guy hard enough, he would then make you go through the belt line.  So that made sure that everybody swung right (laughter).  So did that.  Then they had a fire barrel, and it's about, with, these large oil cans.  And that was full with water.  And across it, it had the--I've forgotten the piece, what you call it.  But at each end of it, a little bucket hanging of water.  They would, and if you messed up, if you didn't stay right on track, doing what you're supposed to do--sometimes they make you stand on that board that goes across the bucket.  In fact, you had your arms like a wing, and say, I'm the biggest (unclear) bird (laughter).  And you flap up and down.  And that's not easy 'cause you, first you keep your balance.  It's hard to keep your balance on something like that.  But that was the other way they would treat us.  And marching all night long, and they'd fall us out in the middle of the night, march all night long and then particularly, if the DI was dissatisfied about something, he might come at any point and get you up.  And, of course, they were in good shape.  And they would dare you to resist them because in the Marine Corps, if you challenge someone, then you had to go in the woods with them and fight with them.  Of if they challenged you, you didn't have any choice.  And, of course, you dare not challenge any of the DI's 'cause they were in good shape.  They'd been running and racing before you got there.  So if you're getting ready to go through the same thing they've gone through, and dock walk.  And sometimes the dock walk with your hand, with your rifle over the top of your head, sit-ups, push-ups, did those by the hundreds.
Story_ID: 33158
Speaker 1: And I think I mentioned, there was a sawdust pile that we had to climb over, and, of course, they had--towards the end is when they got the pool, that, where we had a pool where we would have to go in the water with our full uniform, rifle, cartridge belt, shoes and you had to disrobe and keep--the only thing you were required to keep was the cartridge belt and your rifle.  And if you think getting under the water, try and get those boots off, 'cause boots, they'll kill you.  We laced 'em up to here, trying to get those off, those boots were pretty difficult.  But most of us managed to do it without any real problem.
Speaker 2: So you had to do that in the water?
Speaker 1: In the water, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd jump off of this platform into the water, like you're jumping off the ship, see.  And then you'd go to swim to shore, and you need, you certainly--you needed your rifle and cartridge belt.  Those are the two things that they required you have when you got to the end of the pool.  So you could get rid of anything else you wanted to, but the best thing to do was to get out of your shoes.  And, of course, we--if we got up on the things, we could loosen up our shoes and belt, our shoestrings so that we could get out of our boots without any real trouble.  And, of course, you do that on a ship anyway.  So--
Speaker 2: I mean would you lose your boots?  How--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, yeah, you'd be--everything you--anything you turned a loose, you just let go.
Speaker 2: Okay, I mean it wasn't retrievable.  I mean they never went and got 'em?
Speaker 1: Oh, we'd get 'em later.  We went to the pool and we'd get 'em later--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a pool (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The points is to make like you're making a beach landing--
Speaker 2: It was a pool, all right, not--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, no, right, I'm sorry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --not outside some place.
Speaker 1: --yeah, it was a pool, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: But you practiced like you make the beach landings, so then you'd--you gotta get there, and when you get there you gotta be able to fight.  So that's the only things that was required that you could--so you had to have your rifle and cartridge belt.  And eventually, later on in that same program, not the same day, but, eventually toward the end of the training, they allowed us then to take our trousers off, and before we'd go, tied to each leg tight.  And then when we'd go, go down and have your, to catch air in trousers so that you could use it as sort of a life jacket.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that's, but they left it (unclear) the first test.  That's what we did toward the end of the thing.
Speaker 2: And so how long did basic training last?
Speaker 1: About 12, 8, 12 weeks.  It was a good, long time, several months.
Speaker 2: Were there any, was there any coursework, things you had to memorize or learn?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, you had to learn the--you had to learn your rifle, name every piece of your rifle.  There was the, what do you call it?  The orders, no, let's see, what the--it's not what--you had to learn the orders.  What you do is when you guard what happens, and I can't--that's not the correct term.  But I can't think of it right now (laughter), general orders, you had to learn the general orders.  And I don't remember now how they go, but anyway, there was about a half dozen things that you had to--
Speaker 2: Protocol or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Let's there's something else I was gonna say.  No--
Speaker 2: Well, I've got a question anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter)--
Speaker 2: So how many people were in your--what did they call your group, a squad, a unit or--
Speaker 1: A platoon, platoon.
Speaker 2: Platoon, okay, platoon.
Speaker 1: I think it was about 60 people, I think--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think.  I can't quite remember (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, well, where were the other guys from?  Were they basically from--
Speaker 1: Oh, from all over.  It's just--
Speaker 2: From all, okay.
Speaker 1: --whenever you came in, well, if you came the same day I came in, and then, you know, and they hadn't filled up my platoon, then you go there.  So people from all over the country.
Speaker 2: Were they more from the South than from the North?
Speaker 1: The majority, I think, were--well, I, I would say, yeah, the majority may be from the South--may have been from the South, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But there were quite a few from the North and West 'cause there were some California, Massachusetts, people, a few I know, that that I knew.
Speaker 2: So how many started out and how many made it?  I mean by just proportionally, what would you say?
Speaker 1: Basically, we all made it.  We didn't have too much trouble--one or two may have dropped out, but then they'd put 'em back and start 'em over again if the--whatever the problem was, they would let them resolve that and then start 'em in a platoon, see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, you had another chance if you, say you failed to get in that one, you could--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) They'd put you in another platoon that's forming up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I don't recall anybody in our platoon dropping out.
Speaker 2: So nobody broke down and--
Speaker 1: I don't recall--well, of course, you know, we had all kind of problems, you know, because they'd run until you dropped.  And that used to get me because everybody's fall around, falling down around me, and I'm still standing, and I'm still running.  And I, 'cause I used to try to, make myself think I'm weak, I'm gonna fall out or I'm pass, but it never happened.  I used to try to convince myself that I'm gonna fall out, but it wouldn't, it wouldn't work at all (laughter).  I'd be still standing, and still running, with my tongue hanging out.  But--
Speaker 2: Running in place?
Speaker 1: Yeah--well, no, running on the road.
Speaker 2: Okay, running--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And a lot of times, we'd have a marching pack, having a marching order on, and it's about 50 pounds or so that you'd be marching with.  And you'd march for five or 10 miles.
Story_ID: 33159
Speaker 1: So was there a certain point when you knew the end was--did they tell you when the end was near or did you have any sense of it when you were in it?  Or did you think it was gonna last forever when you were in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, we knew it wasn't gonna last forever.  I'm just trying to remember.  I don't remember, I can't remember them telling when we were gonna graduate.  I don't think they really told us.  I mean they just took us through the program that we're supposed to go through, and then, all of a sudden, they'd tell us we're graduating and--
Speaker 1: So it's not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'cause we knew when we were gonna graduate but, 'cause we had to prepare for that.  And--
Speaker 1: But all of a sudden, I mean, the end just kind of hit?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And, of course, when we finished up, I was the only one that they pulled out of my recruit to put me in the office 'cause we had a class--when we first went in there we had a classifier and he, several classifiers, and, of course, they evaluate you and what your experiences were and this type of thing.  And, of course, the one that interviewed me, when I told him I had graduated from Cardozo [High school], he knew then that I could type 'cause he asked me, could I type?  And I immediately said, no, I can't, 'cause I wanted to stay with my platoon, but that doesn't mean anything because when I graduated I was the only one pulled out of the platoon and told to stay on the side with my "C" bag.  And I kind of resisted a little bit, but I couldn't do too much because I'm in the Service 'cause I was wanting to stay with the platoon, and I was the only one that was pulled out of there.  And so I kept telling the DI [drill instructor] I wanna stay with the group.  But it's, no, he says, you got orders, you got orders and so you've gotta stand there.  And so after they marched my platoon away, then another Marine came up to me and told me to follow him.  And they took me to the company office which was headquarters for battalion company office.  And that's when I met my First Sergeant, and the Marine I was gonna replace there was a guy that was working there in the office that they were gonna send out with the 51st or one of the outfits that was leaving.  And I was replacing him.  So I go in there, and the First Sergeant sits me down and introduced me to the guy I'm gonna replace and told--asked me if I would work with him for a month or so before he left because he was gonna be leaving soon, if I'd work with him, rather than take my leave right then.  And I said, sure, it's fine.  And he says, well, if you do that, what I'll do is when you get ready to take your leave, I'll make sure you have a nice break.  So I agreed to it, and everybody took off on leave, see.  So once you finish the recruit training, you get two weeks furlough to go home and get yourself ready because a lot of times--and in this case, most of 'em would go overseas after--when they came back would be going overseas.  So they took off, and I didn't.  I stayed there in the company office, and for about a month, I guess, and then the First Sergeant said I could take off on leave.  So now, I'm the only one--now, I don't have a group.  See, if I had left with everybody else, four of us would have gone back to [Washington] D.C. together.
Story_ID: 33160
Speaker 1: So anyway--
Speaker 2: So you had to go back by yourself.
Speaker 1: I went--
Speaker 2: But let me freeze here for a second--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and go back to basic training.  I didn't ask you about the DI [drill instructor].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had a DI.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I saw the movie years ago, the "DI", with Jack Webb--
Speaker 1: Right (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 2: We've all seen Gomer Pile, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --USMC [United States Marine Corps]--
Speaker 1: It was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The DI's a tough guy and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Tough, and you--that's--
Speaker 2: --did you have a tough DI?
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely.  They, all of 'em were tough.  That's the only way they could make it to be DI.  They had to be tough.  And--
Speaker 2: Who was yours?  What was yours named?
Speaker 1: Carter, he--Carter, he was--
Speaker 2: Carter?
Speaker 1: --he was a considerate guy.  He was, well, he had a program he had to follow.  So he had to do what everybody else had to do.  You know, you had to meet these certain conditions and get us to be able to do certain things.  And he did that.  Of course, you know, he, they yelled at you and they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Called you a lot of names.
Speaker 1: --got in your face, called you all kinds of names and make you do all kinds of things.  Like I said, I told you, make you stand on the barrow and flap your hands, and run around.  There's a water tower, run around the water tower till you drop.  Oh, I don't know.  There were so many things they would do, but the main thing was just getting in your face and yelling at you and nose-to-nose, and you can't say anything.  And he's yelling in your face (laughter), and you're just standing there (laughter).
Speaker 2: So nobody ever resisted or got mad and punched the guy or tried--
Speaker 1: You wouldn't do, you wouldn't dare do that.  I remember, these guys are in better shape than you 'cause they've been through what you're going through.  So they're physically prepared.
Speaker 2: Well, this is--now, I know the rational mind would think that, but in that situation that he's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you knew that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that, a situation, a young guy who's angry might?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's true, but you went running with this guy for a while, you'd know that you can't keep up with him (laughter).  You know, that you're not gonna mess with him.  And, of course, you can challenge him, and they--you could if you wanted to challenge him.  You could take him in the boondocks or he could challenge you to go with him in the boondocks if he wanted to, and if you're crazy enough to go with him, you're gonna be in trouble.
Speaker 2: Did anybody do it?
Speaker 1: I don't anybody challenged, no, I didn't see anybody do that.  Now, 'cause once you see these guys, these guys, these DI's, see, they've gone through training, special training to begin, to be a DI, and so they're in excellent shape, physically, mentally.  And they're twice as strong as you are.  You could see the muscles in 'em, like the--in fact, you know, when you first look at how muscular you are, 'cause when I first came home, oh, people were, everybody was just shocked at how my broad my shoulders, you know, how many muscles I had and all that.  So you just didn't mess with 'em, no, but you could if you wanted to.  But I don't--there may have been one or two, but I don't recall anybody wanting to go in the boondocks with 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what about now, the legendary Sergeant Hashmark Johnson--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Did you know him at that period of time?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I knew him well, I knew him well.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: He was not my DI.  When I first went in there, when I first got in, he may have been a Corporal, and he was a DI at that time, but he wasn't mine.  Mine was Carter, and like I say, Carter was a guy, he taught up at Howard [University] after the War [World War II] was over.  And I met him several times after the War was over.  And he and I got along good.  But anyway, for Hashmark, Hashmark was a real disciplinarian, but he was, in my mind--and I (unclear)just don't want it on record, but anyway, he was a real tough guy to deal with.  And the first thing, if you did anything wrong, he wouldn't correct you there.  He would take you up to the CO [commanding officer], who was white, of course, and make you, and report you to the CO and let the CO issue your punishment.  He wouldn't make any punishment up at all.  He wouldn't create any punishment himself, but he'd just always take you up to the commanding officer who was white.  But, now, Huff--now, Huff was another DI, another popular DI.  He was a big guy, bigger than Huff--bigger than Hashmark, I mean Huff was.  Now, you, (unclear) get in Huff's face, now, Huff would knock you down in a second, see.  I mean knock you with his fist down on the ground.  You'd fall (laughter).  And he was a big guy and strong.  And he didn't, he wouldn't hesitate to hit you.  And that was the other thing.  See, we had--they had no restrictions.  There were no restrictions on--unless they put us in the hospital.  So we got kicked--I mean kicked, literally.  They had a swagger stick, it's like a crop, like you wear with a horse, strike you across the head with that or across the face.  That, they could do anything they wanted to do, except kill you.  That's the only thing they couldn't do.  And they did it.  I mean they treated us real rough.  And, of course, I understand the white DI's treated them rough, so they were just, just getting even, I guess.
Speaker 2: Equally bad treatment, some of 'em.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 33161
Speaker 1: Now, did you come in contact with white Marines--
Speaker 2: Not right away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think with--let's see, there's something else I was gonna point out now.  Wait a minute.  Yeah, as far as Hashmark, Hash--I, when I came (unclear) I became, I first was clerk typist and Hashmark was in the, still the DI.  But eventually, when I became chief clerk, Hashmark then was battalion, acting battalion Sergeant Major of the battalion, and I was headquarters company of the battalion.  So I had a chance to work with Hashmark quite a bit because, you know, my reports would go through him.  And I'd have to meet with him.  And going back to Hashmark as a DI, he had a saying that, he come to you if he saw you doing something wrong, and says "Lad, have you ever seen a dog with turpentine poured up his rear end?"  And he didn't use the word "rear end", but, and you'd say, "No, sir".  And he'd say, "Well, anyway, I want you to imitate that dog.  Take off."  That meant for you to start running.  And the other favorite saying, said, "Lad, I'll make you catch more hell than the alligators caught when the pond went dry."  Those were some of his statements that he would say.  But, like I say, he didn't create any punishment for you.  He would take you--if you did something wrong, and he saw it, he would take you to the CO [commanding officer] and let the CO make the punishment.  Now, Huff would catch, correct you physically.  He would punch you, kick you or whatever he wanted to do, and you could retaliate if you wanted to (laughter).  But no one dared to.  So that's the way it went.  That made us, I think, a better group.  Now, the other thing too, the--I don't know whether anybody (unclear), we were pretty fortunate as black Marines because regardless of who you were, what your experiences were, what your education was, when you went in that Marine Corps, you came as a private.  So we had people with Masters degrees, Doctor degrees, all kinds of degrees, plus high school graduates.  So we had a pretty good group of people.  There were, also we had two recruits that once had commissions in the Army.  One had a lieutenant--well, I think both of them had lieutenant commission in the Army.  They resigned their commission to come into the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 33162
Speaker 1: What was the attraction of the Marine Corps, you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's record, its history.  It's a fighting force, well trained, we thought, first in, first out, and they sometimes had point of the spear.  But it's had a heck of a reputation, as I'm sure you've heard.  It's more meaningful than the Army and the Navy.  I could tell you a story about the Navy, but I'm sitting on a board, but I don't know whether you wanna jump that far ahead 'cause this was after I was commissioned.
Speaker 1: Well, if you think it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's funny, it would be funny--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, I was a (unclear) [minyer?] and I was assigned to the Navy Review Discharge Board for the Marine Corps side.  We had the Navy office and the Marine Corps, and there were a couple other Marine offices.  And we went to Chicago, and what they do, they, the board publishes in different areas when it's gonna be there, see.  So this was in Chicago, and so we had a--he was a lot younger, but he was a young Marine.  He said, he came in and he had an undesirable discharge in his chart (unclear).  So the question we asked was, well, you knew the Marine Corps was tough.  And you knew that the other services are a lot liberal, a lot more liberal.  He said, "Yes, sir".  He says then when did you pick the Marine Corps?  He says, "Well, I wasn't smart enough to get into the Army.  I was too smart to go in--I wasn't--no, excuse me.  "I was too smart to go in the Army.  I wasn't smart enough to get in the Air Force, and I was too much man to go in the Navy, so I went in the Marine Corps."  And that's the way he answered (laughter).  And we a Naval officer there.  It was, that's all I could do is keep a straight face.  I was, man, I was sitting in front (unclear) of most of (laughter) (unclear), I had a heck of a time straightening out my face (laughter).
Speaker 1: Too much of a man to go to the Navy (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And there were others that were interesting, but they were a little different.  But that one, I thought was very comical (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a good, yeah, now, that's--you often hear, I know I used to hear it when I was a teenager, and you hear it now, that white kids in Kentucky and Appalachia and black kids in high school and stuff, I hear 'em say, I've--you know, I say, well, what are you gonna do?  I'm a join the Marines--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so they can make a man out of me."
Speaker 2: Right, it will, it will definitely do that.  Yeah, it will do that (laughter).  And as I say, all the things, yelling--now, since the River Creek incident, and that happened a few years ago, quite a few years ago, they've restricted the Marine Corps now.  It can't do the things it used to do, but there was no restriction.  When you went in, went to boot camp, you were at the mercy of that DI [drill instructor], and whatever he wanted to do, he could do.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the incident--you just referred to something that changed things?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the River Creek--
Speaker 1: River Creek?
Speaker 2: --some time ago.  Yeah, that's prayer (unclear) thing.  Yeah, that wasn't, that wasn't a Montford Point thing.  But this DI marched these people, these recruits into this creek, and a lot of 'em drowned.  And so then the commandant of the Marine Corps then started cracking down on the drill instructors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because quite a few of that recruit platoon drowned.
Speaker 1: So, well, when you were coming along, they weren't supposed to kill 'em, at any rate, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so he did, and I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --he caused the death of some--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah.  But that could have happened during our time too, but it's just that they didn't do it.  But now, we missed a few Marines occasionally.  Now, we don't know now whether they were caught in quicksand--there was quicksand there.  They, and if they tried to run away or something to leave the base and go cut through the woods, they could cut there or gotten quicksand.  Nobody knows.  Some of them, they never found and they don't know where they are.
Story_ID: 33163
Speaker 1: Off-camera, I was just saying that the, you were saying that you didn't, you hadn't heard of the Tuskegee Airmen when--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when you entered--
Speaker 2: Not while I was in the Marine Corp, not until after I came out.
Speaker 1: And it seemed like you would have been a good candidate for Tuskegee Airmen, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't have mind, no.  I mean, knowing now what I--I know I wouldn't mind.  I, but, well, I don't regret a moment of going--you know, I hated it while I was going through it.  In fact, when I was discharged, I was through with the Marine Corps.  That, I never had any idea I'd ever even look back at the Marines, except for I was working for the Marine Corps, but as a civilian, see.  But I had--and I was just sick of it, see.  And I just went, didn't want any part of it, the military side of it.  But then after a while, you know, after a while all hurts, you know--time heals all wounds.  And I guess that's what happened to me after several years, almost twenty years, I guess--well, I decided I'd try it again (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go back to--now, you had just finished boot camp.  You were taken over, and you're gonna serve as a clerk?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you do an apprenticeship for about a month, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about a month.
Speaker 1: And now, who is--so you're in an office.  Now, was this a black office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a black office, yeah, black office--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --except for the officers.  Now, all the commissioned officers were white.  Now, the CO [commanding officer] of that company was white.
Speaker 1: Who is the CO of your company?
Speaker 2: There was, they changed several.  One was Cochran is one name comes to mind.  Jackson was another one.  Jackson got in trouble--or I caused Jackson trouble.  But that was when we went into (unclear).  I don't remember.  Well, we had about three different CO's because once a depot was going up, they might pull your CO out, put him over there in the depot and assign another one in.
Speaker 1: Now, did the white officers--
Speaker 2: They were all, always white (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Did they, did you get the impression that they considered, you know, serving in the colored troops, like to be a bad assignment or something they didn't wanna do or--
Speaker 2: Some of 'em did, particularly, if they had any rank.  Now, a lot of 'em were outright out of college, so they were youngsters, and they needed to learn, so, and they needed to learn from us what to do.  But, now, there was a Major--and I'll never forget him, and I can't, but I can't remember his name.  He was CO of headquarters company.  And I was the clerk there.  And there was two doors to the office.  And he had a back door, nobody would see him come and go.  He had the front and you gotta come walk by all the people working in the office.  And he would constantly come in the front door.  Well, then he would want us to stand, and then he insisted that we would stand when he comes in.  Usually, you know, when an officer steps in, the senior enlisted person will, yell, "stand by" and "attention".  And that's what he wanted as he walked in.  So he'd keep coming in through the front door, and we were trying to do his work.  And I was trying to type, and that just shows you, that muster roll, you had to be perfect on each side.  And it had to meet a deadline, and you had a short notice from the--'cause you can't start until the end of the month, and you had to have it out by, maybe about the fifth of the month.
Story_ID: 33164
Speaker 1: Now, okay, explain what this is 'cause you showed it to me, but people listening don't know what it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, a muster roll is a long sheet, about as long as legal paper, maybe a little bit longer.  And you had to record all of the events that took place in that company during the month, all of the events that, at least that, all the reports--they had what they call recordable, reportable events, like leave guys--like maybe, Ray goes on leave.  You had to record that, what length his leave was or he may go in the hospital, and you record that.  Or he may be promoted or any number of things.  And I can't think of everything that was reportable.  But anyway, you have to--for each Marine in that company, you had to write, indicate on this muster roll what event took place, if any.  If not, his name, just his name will appear on it.  And you typed down, you had type down one side, turn the paper over and then type down the other side.  Now, because we were new in the Marine Corps, we needed to make an impression.  All of the First Sergeants insisted--that is, black First Sergeants, actually, they weren't First Sergeants in rank.  They were active First Sergeants or affiliate First Sergeants (unclear).  None of us had the right rank because we were just getting in the Marine Corps.  And some of the positions we held or we did--everything was on-the-job training.  Some of the positions we held required whites to go to school for two or three years, and we'd sit right at the desk, given a manual or book and say "do it".  That's the way we worked.  So anyway, typing down this muster roll, and since I had graduated Cardozo High School, I was able to type, type down the muster roll, down one side, then down the other.  So when this guy, when this Major comes in, he--everybody yells attention.  So I would purposely, and muster roll at the time, I would purposely strike a key accidentally, supposedly accidently as I'd get up.  And then I would yell out, I'd say, you know, and I'd say "Dam it, now, I gotta do this whole thing over again."  So he kept doing that.  So finally the First Sergeant got tired of it and went to the Battalion CO [commanding officer] and complained.  And when the Battalion CO heard of it, he immediately transferred that cap--that Major out and sent, (unclear) called him for the next depot leaving because, yeah, it was wrong.  And then they got reports late 'cause see, and he gets in trouble too when the reports are late.  But, but the thing that hurt me is now I gotta do the thing over again, and again, I gotta be perfect.  And to be perfect, I mean, the First Sergeant, when I got through and turned in that report, he would take a magnifying glass and go right over that whole--entire report, looking for any strikeovers, paper disturbance, where you had, where I had to erase something, he'd look for that, a misspell or any errors.  That's what he'd constantly look for, and if it wasn't perfect, I'd have to do the whole thing over again.  So I'd gotten very good, and learned to do it real fast.  And so that meant I became a prima donna because as I said, these reports had to be out at a certain time.  If I didn't get 'em out at a certain, everybody would get in trouble.  So I'd tell the First Sergeant, when it comes time to do this report, I said, "Top, I'm a have to take a little leave to get relaxed and get myself together."  And they'd let me go for, give me a--in order to get a three-day pass, and I can come to Washington from the base and to go back.  So then I'd do the muster roll, and I'd always get it out on time.  And I had gotten so I could sit down and just run right down both sides perfectly.  But you get tense, when you get on the second side, you do get a little tense.  You start slacking up and start being more careful as you punch.
Speaker 1: You don't wanna make a mistake on that last couple--
Speaker 2: No, not on that last side (laughter), especially when you get way down to the bottom and have to do it over, and I've had to do that for a while.  But after a while, like I say, after doing it for years, you get so you could handle it, and I did.
Speaker 1: So this commanding officer who was coming in there, he was doing that just to see you all jump up and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's what--see, an officer is entitled to that when he walks into a place where there're junior people.  The senior person in that group is supposed to yell, "stand by at attention" when he comes in.  But you usually, not when you're--not in your office where you work, where everybody's working.  That doesn't happen in the office, but it happens like in auditoriums or things or if they're putting on some kind of explanations or meetings or something.  Then when the officer walks in, if he's a senior officer, everybody stands at attention.
Story_ID: 33165
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now, did most of your platoon get sent overseas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most, well, in fact, I think they all did except for me because they were sent to the 51st.  All of 'em didn't go out with the 51st.  They went, they split them up and some of 'em went out to different depots.  But all of them, all of 'em that went over as far as I know, did go overseas and I was the only one that didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would have been in the--
Speaker 2: Now, this would have--
Speaker 1: --towards the last quarter of the War, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, this would be in '43' [1943].  I went in May.  So I guess--
Speaker 1: Two more years to go.
Speaker 2: I guess after two or three months when I, May, June--May, June, July, say about July or August is when they, you know, the 51st probably left, around in that time that they put them in there.  Other than that, I would have gone.  In fact, I wanted to go but they wouldn't let me go, and, of course, I couldn't do it on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you had that kind of training.  That must have been a strange feeling to have all that training, to be gung ho, and all of a sudden they tell you to type.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter), yeah, you're sitting in the office.  That's right.  Well, see, once I found out that I could--I didn't mind too much because I could get back to D.C., see, and I lived in D.C.  So that, and I can tell you a lot of stories about that.  But anyway, I--once, when it'd come towards the end of the month, I could always use my, the act that I'm tired, and I need to get a break so I can get perfect, so I can type 'cause they knew it was difficult.  That weren't many people that could do that, do the whole muster on both sides.  And [if] they did, and what's--after a while they start hunting and pecking because you get real tense.  But I could just sit up there and just go right on with it.  So, and, of course, I'd make it as close to the deadline as I could and so that nobody would mess with me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you still do any training once you finished basic training?
Speaker 2: Not, not for infantry or that type of thing, no, no, strictly studying what was required for administration.
Speaker 1: No more running and any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no, 'cause the job, this was working for records, with records, and, you know, the records were constantly changing or events were changing, and you had to keep up with what was going on, what new regulations might come out, this type of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, now, and you were in there at Montford Point until '46' [1946], right?
Speaker 2: About '45' [1945]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945], okay.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, until '45' [1945].  I left Montford Point in about, maybe around September of '45' [1945].  I went there in May of '43' [1943].  I left maybe about September of '45' [1945], August, September.  And how I left there, I was put in a depot.  They switched me and the depot was detached from Montford Point to Norfolk Naval Shipyard because the War ended in June of '45' [1945], see.  Then the ships were coming back.  The ships were coming back into Norfolk to be unloaded, and that's what my depot was supposed to do, to help unload those ships.  But when they put, when they sent us to Norfolk, they put us right next to the Italian prisoners.  The Italian prisoners had a fenced-in area, but it was no--there was an open gate.  So they had more liberty on the base and in town than we did or than I did.  They could go anywhere the whites could go.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I've heard this said of the German prisoners.
Speaker 2: Same thing with the German prisoners.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They both had, could do anywhere--go anywhere that the whites could go, and do anything whites could do.  But we had, we could only do what blacks could do, and that is, if--like in Norfolk, there's only certain parts of the town in Norfolk I could go.  If I caught a bus in Norfolk, I had to ride in the back of the bus or if I'd get on a train, I'd get in the segregated car where--and they went on leave too, incidentally.  And they could--
Speaker 1: The prisoners?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  Well, they could, they would get passes to do it, and some of 'em probably had relatives, you know, or connections with people around.  Anyway, they could get leave and go wherever they wanted to go.  And I don't know how, and I don't know what the restrictions were 'cause I wasn't in there.  I was right next to them.  You know, what the requirements were.  I'm sure they had some kind of requirements that they kept 'em checked, but-
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of the Double-V campaign when you were in the Service?
Speaker 2: I've heard of it.  Let me see if I can think of what it is now.
Speaker 1: The 'Pittsburgh Courier' sponsored the, you know, victory at home and victory--I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --overseas and victory at home against segregation too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was--
Speaker 2: We, for us, they were saying we had to fight for the right to fight.
Story_ID: 33166
Speaker 1: Let's see.  Where are we now?
Speaker 2: Oh, you're at--we were talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I forget--I'm down to Norfolk.
Speaker 2: You're in Norfolk, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, of course, I was the chief clerk there with the outfit and with the Montford.  And I stayed there about a month, and that's when the commandant came up with a letter saying that if you could type and wanted to come up to headquarters Marine Corps, to submit an application.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I knew if I didn't, I would be going overseas as a replacement when people were coming back home 'cause the Wars were over.  And I didn't wanna go overseas at that time.  I wanted to go with my platoon, but they wouldn't let me go.  But I didn't wanna go after the War was over when everybody was coming home.  So when I had the opportunity to submit the request up to headquarters Marine Corps, I knew if I sent it like I was supposed to, that is, back to Montford Point, because that's where my command was, back at Montford Point, I was, I decided I wouldn't do that 'cause I knew if I did that, they would hold it up and put me on replacement to go overseas.  So I wrote through the Norfolk Base Shipyard by them, up to the commandant Marine Corps.  And the Commandant Marine Corps then sent me orders back, sent orders back to, for me to come to Washington [D.C].  Now, he, they knew I was colored at the time because on my request when it was endorsed, the Navy guy put in there, he--"I'm a member of a colored troop."  That's what he put on there.  He didn't know me, so that's all he could put on there.  And then, and as I said, I got my CO [commanding officer] in trouble 'cause see, by not following the regulation, which was send my request through Norfolk--I mean through Montford Point, he got in trouble 'cause he should have known that he wasn't supposed--I wasn't supposed to do it the way I did it.  But it was nothing they could do when the commandant, he's the head guy, he says, come up in Washington, nothing nobody else could say, see.  So it was too late for anybody to do anything at that point.
Speaker 2: So did you get any bad feedback or anything from him?
Speaker 1: Not for me, no.
Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't.
Speaker 1: But the captain did.  I happened--I talked to him after I got up to headquarters Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: So he did catch hell?
Speaker 1: He did, yeah, 'cause he, 'cause he let me go, and they had plans of sending me overseas, see (laughter) and they--'cause they needed clerks to go overseas, you know.  And I was scheduled to go.
Speaker 2: So they brought you to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I go, I'm headquarters Marine Corps now, and I--then, the other thing about that, when I was working at Navy Shipyard while I was stationed there, I was going through the warehouse, and anything I wanted I would pick up and take back to my quarters.  And I had picked up a few souvenirs like a few German weapons and this type of thing and put in my "C" bag.  Then when I got my orders to come up to Washington, I got scared, and I said, I'll get up there and they might check my "C" bag.  So I emptied my "C" bag.  I only had what I was supposed to have.  I took everything else out and left it there.  So I get up to Washington, and I get to Union Station.  I called when I get to Union Station 'cause I was supposed to report at the headquarters battalion, headquarters Marine Corps.  So I--and I had a number to call.  So I called 'em, and said here I am at the Union Station, reporting in.  He says, well, do you have a place to stay?  I said, yeah, I used to live here.  He said, well, take your "C" bag and go home and then come in the morning to headquarters.  I (laughter), and so I said, (laughter) I'd emptied everything.  I didn't have nothing illegal in my "C" bag (laughter).  So anyway, and I was married anyway, see, my wife and I.  So I went over to her house and settled in there.  And the next morning came to headquarters Marine Corps and when I came to headquarters Marine Corps, the word got around there's a black Marine here.  And no, none other had been there.  I was the first one.  And I caught, created a lot of disturbance because big, I don't know if you know what the (unclear) is, a three-story building, and it has about twelve wings in it.  And all the blacks (unclear) particularly, male and female, come right through my office--right through my wing.  See, and there was a warehouse.  So the office in the wing part were open, and they had petitions like file cabinets to divide the office up or (unclear) petitions.  So it's all open, so and the people just come marching right down the center of the place to see me, and, of course, they would wave and speak and all that.  And I couldn't move, I'd look at 'em, 'cause my boss, was the First Sergeant, was way behind, see.  So he couldn't really see what I was doing, and I would wink at 'em, and all that stuff.  But I couldn't--I dare not move (laughter).  So he called me over, and said, you stop those people from coming through here.  And I said, stop?  How am I gonna stop those people?  I don't even know them.  I have no control over 'em.  So then he got smart.  He put me back there near him by the window, see.  Then, of course, I couldn't do anything there, and, of course, they could see me, but--or wave as they go, but there's nothing else they could do.  They couldn't speak to me.  So, that went that way for a while.  Eventually, they started bringing black Marines in after that.
Story_ID: 33167
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so, now, was 1946 your last year in the Service?
Speaker 2: No, forty--really, it's '45' [1945].  It was December.  I got out on the 21st of December in 1945.  And I didn't go back to work until the first of the year, go to work there until the first of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually worked for the--after your tour of duty was over--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I applied to headquarters Marine Corps, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you went back to headquarters--
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's why I came up there to work as a typist there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, as I said, I was married, and before--and the only job I had prior to that was working at the Navy yard, and the War was over with, so the Navy yard was closing down.  I checked the Navy yard, and they said they weren't doing anymore hiring.  And they would bring me back, but they weren't sure how long I could stay there.  And, well, the headquarters Marine Corps had already given me a job.  And I got a, I got a job there, so I could stay as long as I wanted, I guess.  So that's why I didn't move out of there 'cause I hadn't intended to stay there that long, but when I went and checked the Navy yard, and they says, we'll hire you back, but we can't promise you how it'll be.  And so I didn't want anything like that.  So then by it being at headquarters Marine Corps, they began to automate and go from manual accounting to automation.  And because of my experience in the office, they decided they would use me to help to convert from manual to automation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how I became a data processing officer because of, I worked that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were there as a civilian for how long?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I started out as a civilian.  I stayed there as civilian for a long time.  I eventually worked up to a GS-14, and after '49' [1949] when Roosevelt issued his Executive Order which integrated the services as well as the government.  And you know, there was prejudice in the government too.  The civilians side of it, they segregated, in even the government offices, they had segregation for blacks.  In fact, as a matter of fact, at headquarters Marine Corps, when I went up there, the only blacks they had were like in pools, typing pools and things like that.  So I was about, I think I was the first one that wasn't in the, in a real pool.  And they put me in the officer performance section and because of my administrative experience.  Then when they got ready to automate it, then they called on me to work with changing from first (unclear) or manual to automation, and then they'd key with IBM punch card equipment.  And I helped design cards on that.  Then the, then they brought in the IBM 1401.  We also--I'm not, I don't wanna get--I might be getting a little bit out of order.  We also, we ended up, we had the NCR cash--NCR computer.  NCR put out a large computer, like IBM 360.  We had the IBM 360 in fact, (unclear) and Anda, IBM's Anda (ph.).  But we started off on--I think the punch card equipment came first.  I'm not sure, but I was working on both of them.  I worked at both of them, but I'm not sure which came first.  Actually, I think the punch card equipment came first.
Story_ID: 33168
Speaker 1: So anyway, I'm assuming that--I'm not sure, so I worked on designing the punch cards, and, for the key punch to punch up and we, and in selecting the IBM-1401.  And that's where we--that was later.  That's where we processed, that 1401, the automated, what is it?  What do you call it?  Electric, electric accounting machines, I guess is what it was called.  They had sorters.  They had tabulators, collators and things like that.  Well, I designed procedures so we can use those things, along--yeah, I was on the staff, on a group doing it.  (Unclear) Yeah, then--oh, wait a minute now.  Some time later, okay, then we start going to the bigger computers.  And I think that's when the NCR came in, and that stood for National Cash Register, but they made a computer, a big computer.  I think it would fill this room up, in fact, be bigger than this room really when they got through.  And all the air conditioning you put in.  Let's see now.  I can't remember the order we're going now.
Speaker 2: That's when the cards were, were you all using Fortran or something--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Fortran came in, we went--that, that was sort of a scientific.  We used it to some extent, but not, not for personal accounting.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We designed systems for personal accounting.  And that's when they'd use tape, you know, the big thick tape, rolls of tape for NCR, but now, when we went to IBM, and I can't get straight which one came first.  But we went IBM, and then we had the punch card equipment.  And that was from the office at--I eventually went to Texas to help to select the M-313 (unclear) expanse then.  So we wanted to put the (unclear) 1401 in this van so that we could take it, send it near combat so we could put it in combat areas and then have a tractor trailer and you have a tractor that can pull this trailer which is a van, pull this van, and the way it was, the sides open up, and drop down and that gave you the flooring for the chairs, but we had the equipment right in the center of the van, like the 1401 collators, as sorters, this type of thing, and then the chairs and the key punch equipment.  Well, the key punch equipment was in the center part, but the chairs would be out on the expansible part.  And, I can't be sure of what year that I went to Texas to check it because what happened was, I was a project officer for the Marine Corps, and we hired contractors, the civilian contractors, see.  And I was the project officer, so I was in charge of that project.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute.  I don't wanna get you to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So you're not back in the Marine Corps now, are you?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Project officer.  You're still a civilian?
Speaker 1: Right, well, no, I'm still, but as a civilian.  I was civilian as a project--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --not a commissioned officer, but as a civilian.
Speaker 2: All right, all right.
Speaker 1: But I was the officer in charge of the project.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, I just wanna make sure we--so this is in the '50's [1950s], right or--
Speaker 1: I would think so.  Now, I'm, I've kind of lost track on time now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so, I mean but you're pretty much working as a civilian in the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but now--
Story_ID: 33169
Speaker 1: Through, and you were going to school too, right?
Speaker 2: At night, yeah.
Speaker 1: At night.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was going to night school.
Speaker 1: Where were you going to school at?
Speaker 2: First I started off with the U.S.D.A., which is the Department of Agriculture, the undergrad, they had an undergraduate school at the Department of Agriculture.  So that's where I started first.  And I went there for a long time, for several years.  And it was in the agriculture department, right across from the--where they make money.
Speaker 1: The Treasury--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Treasury, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went there for several years, maybe five years, I guess.
Speaker 1: All right, so everything was right, close by.  You--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I'm losing track of what comes first (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, don't worry about that so much.  But you were working on computers doing the design--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --cards, key punch cards.
Speaker 2: And setting up the course, setting up procedures for how the Marine Corps would operate their accounting system.  And the reason, you know, the reason they pulled me in because I had done so much of the administrative part of it, manual part of it, rather, and I was probably the most knowledgeable one there at headquarters about the manual personal accounting system 'cause I did payroll.  I did the muster roll, "G" sheets and all this other stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, where am I?  Oh, the point I was gonna make with this van, I had to go to Texas, and I had--I was the project officer with these two white contractors, civilian contractors that they--the Marine Corps hired and still do my project.  So my boss, who was a Colonel, was on leave when we decided we were gonna go to Texas to look at--'cause we wanted, the contractor wanted to see how strong the body of that van or trailer was so it would hold--whether or not it was capable of holding the IBM 1401 in rough turns and things.  So the only way to do that was to go to Texas to--that's where they were being assembled.  So my, so I had my orders drawn up to go to Texas with these guys.  So then Jack was white.  He was one of 'em.  He was as a senior person we had hired.  So he makes reservations for us, the three of us to Texas.  He had one of his people and myself and himself, so he makes reservations in Texas.  And the place we were going is (unclear) Rade (ph.), Texas, which is the heart of Texas.  So he makes the reservations.  So fortunately, the next morning I, the next morning which was a day before I was supposed to leave, my boss comes back off of leave.  And he was familiar with Texas, and he saw my orders on his desk.  So he called me in, and he says, I see you're going to Texas.  I said, yes, sir.  He says, have you ever been there?  I said, I've been to Texas, but not this area, no.  So he says, well, where are you gonna stay?  I said, I don't know.  Jack made the reservations, but he told me he's got reservations for three of us.  So he said, well, ask Jack to call me.  So I called Jack on the phone and said, Jack, the Colonel wants to talk with you.  So Jack calls the Colonel.  So the Colonel says, I see where you guys are going to--you and Joe Carpenter are going to Texas.  And he said, yes, sir.  He says, and I understand you made reservations for him.  He said, yes, sir.  He said, well, where?  So Jack told him.  And so he says, okay, thank you.  Then he called this place that Jack made the reservations and he says, I understand you got three reservations, and the people said, yes.  And he says, well, do you know one of 'em is colored?  They said, nope (laughter).  And then he said, well, can he stay there?  They said, nope (laughter).  I had to stay at Goodfellow Air Force Base in San Angelo, Texas, which is 90 miles from Rade and commute by car 'cause they wouldn't let me stay in that area (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ninety miles.
Speaker 2: So all three (unclear) I, myself and all three of us stayed there, stayed at Goodfellow Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They could have stayed there, but since the three of us were together, we all three stayed.  And we drove back and forth.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was this in the '50's [1950s] or when do you think?
Speaker 2: Either '50's [1950s] or '60's [1960s].  I'm not quite sure when it was, but it was when we were going to the use the expandable, M-313 expansible van.  We eventually checked it out and decided to use it, and, of course, then we took it down to Camp McEwen and ran it on the tractor trailers with the 1401 equipment mounted in there to make sure it would hold.  And it turned out well, fine.  And eventually, it was used in Vietnam, and then went, then it went to, to--I meant eventually (unclear).  And then he went to Vietnam and in Vietnam were used in Fable huts like the Navy was using those, and so we decided we'll, for the same thing.  They used them in hospitals.  We decided we'd use 'em for equipment.  And so we went to that.
Story_ID: 33170
Speaker 1: All right, so okay, so we got you in the '60's [1960s], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, it's about '60's [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and so you keep getting higher and higher as a government employee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And like I say, after Truman passed this order in '48' [1948], yeah, '48' [1948].  It was effective '49' [1949], but it was in '48' [1948] when he passed it, that caused the government to change its policies.  As I said, the prejudice was all through the government, the federal government, for civilians as well as military.  And, of course, that caused the military to integrate, and it caused the federal government for their civilian employees to become more liberal.  And that's when I got involved in trying to make things better for blacks in the Marine Corps.  That's where you, on the civilian side, 'cause I'm still a civilian at this point, on the civilian side.  So I did quite a bit of work.  Now, eventually, got the director of the civilian personnel side to create a review board, and I was put, made--put in charge of that.  So that before a person could be promoted, then they have--well, you have a selection group to select the person for promotion.  But before they could announce it, (unclear) agreed that, by a review board, would have to review it.  And also if someone gets a low fitness report--fitness report for the military, whatever it is, fitness, something similar to a fitness report.  I think fitness is a military term for that, their report.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Evaluation?  Is it evaluation?
Speaker 2: It's some kind of, yeah, well, they evaluate you, but anyway before--if it's derogatory or demeaning or low, before they could announce it effective, they had to come to the board, and we would analyze it and match it and see whether it's a fair marking, a fair grading.  And so I made quite a reputation involved there, and the Marine Corp came a long ways from the civilian side, and, of course, also from the military side after it integrated.  And that's when I went back into the service.  But see, I (unclear) worked in the Marine Corps so well and so long that that part, that I decided that, you know, the Marine Corps wasn't all that bad when I was in it, and I'll go back and try it as an officer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you knew the path to do that and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, I worked at headquarters Marine Corps, so I was just about in there (laughter).  U was doing the work of people more senior than myself.
Speaker 1: So you're coming back in.  You're about 40, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I came, no, I came, no.  You mean, what you're talking about age?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I was about, yeah, I was about 40 in age, yeah, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because this is 1966, and--
Speaker 2: And I'm 24 (unclear), so yeah.
Speaker 1: It's 1966 when you go back to the Marine Corps, and--
Speaker 2: Well, 40, about 42, yeah, that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it a difficult transition to come--it was pretty easy, huh, coming back?
Speaker 2: Very easy.  Well, say, well, I knew most of the seniors in the Marine Corps and I worked at headquarters Marine Corps.  And see when I was working there as a civilian, I had what they call by direction authority, so I could sign for the commandant, anything pertaining to data processing.  I didn't have to--unless it was a request by a general officer, then, of course, they didn't, it had to go to commandant.  But just a request from a captain or something from the field, that pertained to data processing, then I could handle it and signed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your first assignment when you returned as an officer?
Speaker 2: Marine Corps?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Back in civil affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, well, my primary was data processing, but I went back in, my first assignment was civil affairs, even though I was data processing officer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is civil affairs?  What's that in the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: They, the group that will, that precedes an advancing combat group primarily to get the civilians and things out of the way, to keep them as much as you can out of harm's way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess that's the easiest way to put it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Marines are coming.  There's a, there's actually some advance men that try to get--
Speaker 2: Right, well, you try to get the civilians out the way.  You don't wanna kill all the civilians, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you don't wanna kill all the civilians if you can help it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that's basically what we did.
Speaker 1: That seems like--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --that would be a dangerous job in itself.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, and also after the service would leave, we'd try to help them to rebuild, the civilians that--in the company, to rebuild, to rebuild, to help 'em to get their farms and everything straight.  And then, and then also, any damage to private property, the U.S. government will pay for it, and we helped to evaluate it and-
Story_ID: 33171
Speaker 1: Now, you were there, I guess, in the middle of the Vietnam War, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I wasn't involved in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: You're not in Vietnam, but on this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, right, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --but on this end, then training people to do that on the other end or--
Speaker 2: Well, data processing, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh, the data processing.
Speaker 2: --sure, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, let's see.
Speaker 2: And I guess one thing that really kept me out of combat areas was because of my age.  I was getting kind of senior, age wise.
Speaker 1: Okay, that doesn't seem old to me now.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, (unclear) I didn't feel old at all.
Speaker 1: Forty years old.
Speaker 2: No, I was very active at 40 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Forty-two or whatever, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, no, about 40, 50, I'd very active.  In fact, I'm still fairly active and I'm 88 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], what, was it 1963, Dr.--JFK [President John F. Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: By an ex-Marine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the talk about that in the Marine Corps?  Did they talk about it in the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  The Marine Corps didn't wanna have anything to do with it (laughter).  No, un-un.  No, the Marine Corps will drop anything that will give it bad publicity.
Speaker 1: But when you heard it, did it seem likely that a Marine could do, could actually perform that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That never crossed my mind because Marines were people, and some of 'em are pretty vicious.  And they were trained to be vicious.  [pause] You got me jumping around now.  Let's see (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, it was back to the '60's [1960s], but that was before you became an officer.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 33172
Speaker 1: As an officer, your group is working on the, in civil affairs in the Marine Corps--
Speaker 2: Right.  That's when I went in Panama.  And that's one thing, I did in Panama civil affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a detachment at--I was the officer in charge.  Now, that's one I really, that's the only assignment I could say that I really enjoyed.  The rest of 'em, you know, were just occupation.  But this one.
Speaker 1: When did you go to Panama?
Speaker 2: It was in the '60's [1960s], I'm sure, '60's [1960s], '70's [1970s], '60's [1960s], I guess.  It was shortly after I was commissioned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly when.  But what I liked about it, see, we were, they put us in the canal zone, at least, I was in the canal zone, but they took my enlisted people, and they scattered 'em all out in the jungle, what they call barren.  And we did a hostile group on an island, and there were several farm areas that they put 'em in.  And so what they did, they gave me a helicopter and a translator because when you got into the jungle, they had one language, but they had a way of communicating it in Spanish, which I couldn't.  So anyway, they gave me a helicopter.  So I could go anywhere where I had my troops, and I had my troops on an island, Sun Blas, in the Sun Blas Island which is on the Eastern shore, I believe, Eastern shore, I think.  It might have been on the Western shore, I'm not sure now.  Anyway, it's an island and--of Indians.  And they are really hostile there, and they had small huts--it was crowded, the island was crowded with these huts.  And they were such that the natives, the females, the women couldn't leave the island.  If women left the island, they couldn't come back unless they left to go to the hospital.  If they were sick or something and put in the hospital, they could come back, but if they left on their own, they couldn't come back.  But the men went to the mainland to farm and hunt and do this type of thing.  So they sent us there 'cause they were building a hospital, and we had--
Speaker 1: Well, why couldn't women come back if they wanted to--
Speaker 2: It was just some custom they had.  I don't know, but that was it.  Once they, if they left on their own, they couldn't come back.  If they went to the hospital, they could come back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But now, like I say, I had a helicopter.  So my helicopter landed on the main side, and a kid with a canoe like, we call it cayuco but it's a dugout and they call it cayuco, he came over.  He got me, and rowed me over to the main island so I could check on my people that I had there.  And they were allowed to stay there in a hut.  They spent the, overnight there in the hut.  And the natives weren't used to seeing men with hair on their chest.  And so that created quite a (laughter) commotion 'cause the women come rubbing 'em on the chest, you know, 'cause they weren't used to seeing that.  So anyway, so I decided, I had also--'cause I knew we were gonna go to water, I had picked the snorkel and the face mask 'cause I was gonna go swimming while I was over there.  So this kid that rowed me over, he came back, he asked me if I wanted to go fishing or go swimming.  And I said, yeah, go swimming.  So I put on my snorkel and this type thing and went in the water with him.  We, well, he rowed out to the water louie (unclear) we're at the water with--and then there was a barracuda was swimming around.  So he pointed to it, and I pointed it, and I did this [thumb upwards], meaning I'm gonna go up, but he thought I meant take that fish and put it in (laughter), and he actually grabbed that thing with his hand, took it up there, and put it in the canoe (laughter).  I was shocked, but he was a young kid too, very young.  So when I left, I gave him my snorkel and face mask to take it, 'cause he was a good swimmer, so, but I was shocked that he could grab that thing in his hand and take (laughter) it up.
Story_ID: 33173
Speaker 1: He was so used to 'em, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And then there's one other thing.  The other thing that I said really impressed me was a village I went into.  It was a primitive as you've ever imagined.  They, the people lived in huts which were built up off the ground.  Your palm, tree stumps, way up off the ground, and it's about as high as, as tall as about as high as my head.  And the natives, the women, they had, their bodies were all painted with stripes, so evenly painted, you--it seemed almost unbelievable.  And, of course, they didn't have any tops.  They just had a bottom skirt, and the same thing with the men.  They wore skirts like.  So, what struck me was so interesting is, at the top of the, sitting on this hut--and they had petitions that they could lower or drop to cover the sides so for the weather.  And they had, and for the steps, they had a log that they had hewed out steps, and they'd pull it up at night so snakes and animals can't get to it, get to them.  But what struck was so interesting was that there was a woman up there cooking, and she had a fire, and I could see the fire, but I couldn't--and she was on a wooden floor, and I couldn't imagine how she could have a fire up there and not burn through there.  So I attempted to get the, to go up the step, the tree place where they'd hewed out these steps, this trunk tree.  So I attempted to go up there and then the natives stopped me, said, step (unclear).  So I stopped, and I backed off of it.  So I looked up there, and I pointed up there to the first, and but he couldn't--I couldn't communicate with him, and he couldn't communicate with me.  So anyway, we dropped it, so I never did really get up there to see just how she was doing it.  But I imagine, and in talking to people around there, that what she had was two logs together, and dirt floor, and an area where she had covered the ground--the thing with dirt or something so the fire wouldn't burn through.  That's what I imagine, and she'd keep pushing the logs together to keep the fire going 'cause the fire goes for just about ever, I guess.  But it was interesting, very interesting.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the people that you were around?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: They were some sort of Indians.  I guess, I--I remember the Sun Blas Indians, but that's because they were on the island.  And the island's named after 'em, but they're all some sort of Indians.  But they're, and as I say, at that time, the jungle is so hostile, that there's no way of traveling except by canoe for them 'cause they couldn't go all the way to the jungle.  So they--and most of them were on some sort of water area, body of water to travel.
Speaker 1: Now, did you see many black people in Panama?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw--when I got in the city, I went in the city--we didn't stay much in the city.
Speaker 1: Panama City?
Speaker 2: But I did go in there once, and I tried to communicate with one of 'em--now, they could speak English, but they wouldn't speak English.  They were against us at that time.  And I had a book that I could translate into Spanish, but she refused to accept it, so (laughter), and I just started--since I thought maybe she couldn't understand my translation, so I started pointing at the Spanish words thinking that she could see the words as what I wanted.  But she refused.  So I just gave up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then one day, we, I had borrowed this Army's, Army officer's truck, and it was three of us, I guess, it was.  We (unclear), I had two white officers, and I was the only black officer there.  The white officers were junior to me.  So the three of us was having to go into Panama, and one of 'em was driving.  And so we went down there where the president lives, and once we hit that street, all of a sudden, all of a sudden, here comes people with machine guns out at us right off and stopped us.  They wanted to know what we were doing down there.  And, of course, we tried to explain 'cause they spoke English.  So we didn't have any problem communicating with them.  So we told 'em, well, we're just sightseeing.  But they made us get out of the area.  And then there was a, the, a body of water, sort of like bay like.  And it had crosses in it.  You could see crosses and several crosses.  So we inquired as to why they had so many crosses out there.  And what they did was if punishing somebody to be executed, they'd fasten them to the cross and when the tide comes in, it would drown 'em, and that's the way they were doing it.  And (laughter), yeah, you're not kidding.  Yeah, that just seems a strange way to do things, but that's the way they were doing it at that time.
Speaker 1: That's a rough way to die too.
Speaker 2: Well, they may not be doing it.  At that time, they were--at one time was doing it any way.  And 'cause I didn't see no body out there, but we just saw all the crosses and inquired about the crosses.
Speaker 1: I think the sea creatures start eating you before the tide takes care of you.  I think, if I remember that right--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in that kind of punishment, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, so, where do we go (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess away from that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 33174
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come back to the U.S., and now, you retired in '86' [1986], but what are some of the other highlights of your service?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And you retired as a Lieutenant Colonel, right?  You were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, retired Lieutenant Colonel.  Yeah, it was '86' [1986], I retired, yeah.  Well, one thing, as I said, I had a secretary in civil affairs, and I went down to, I believe it was Albany, Georgia, to--there's an Army base there, school, and I went to the, that school for a course in civil affairs.  I was the only Marine officer.  There were some Army officers--I don't know whether there were Air Force officers there or not.  And there were a few black Army soldiers.  We, they were officers--we were all officers, soldiers.  So that weekend came up, so when the weekend came up, we--they all, the black soldiers all took off.  And I was left there with the white soldiers, and so they decided that they would go to Atlanta [Georgia].  And so they asked me, well, what are you gonna do?  I said, nothing.  I'm here.  They said, well, how would you like to go to Atlanta with us?  I said, okay, sure, why not?  Said, 'cause we gotta get our own room in one of the hotels anyway.  So I said, okay.  So I get in the car, I would go with 'em and drive along.  So when they stopped to get gas, all four of us--I think it was four of us, it was probably four, it wasn't more than that.  Anyway, all four of us got off to go into the restaurant--into the gas station office to use the restroom.  So they got in, so we got--so the first guy went in there, and we were all standing, one behind the other, and I was the last one.  So this black comes over to me, and says, you can't go in there.  You gotta go outside and go around the back.  So then the guy in front of me heard him say that, and so and they turned and said, what are you talking about?  He's with us.  So anyway, he didn't change.  And I didn't wanna argue with him 'cause I'm sure his boss told him to do that, and it could cause him to lose his job or something.  So I says, well, let's just don't worry about it.  I'll just go on out.  So they all just started to walk out, so we never did get the gas at that station.  We got gas at another station, and didn't stop to go use the head until we got to Atlanta, of course.  Then we stayed at the Hyatt Regency when we got there.
Speaker 1: Now, is this in the '60's [1960s] or '70's [1970s] or what?
Speaker 2: It could be, could--I was a Major at the time, and, gee, I don't know.
Speaker 1: You came in as a lieutenant, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, well, no, I came in as an officer, as commissioned officer, in fact, as a Major, really.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) all of my experience at headquarters Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: All right, now, this is in the late '60's [1960s] or early '70's [1970s], something like that?
Speaker 2: Could be early '70's [1970s], could have been early '70's [1970].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But anyway, yeah, it was after the war.  The war had ended some time ago, so.
Speaker 1: The Vietnam War, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably around in that area.
Speaker 1: That's '74' [1974], '75' [1975].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the only other problem--I didn't have any problems since then, you know.  I was, I went back to Montfort Point.  I enjoyed that because I was coming back as an officer, and I'd been there as enlisted.  And, but when I got there, then that was a time that the blacks were rioting, particularly, in the service.  So when I got there, the CO [commissioned officers], when I reported to my CO, he told me that, you know, there's a lot of friction enlisted, against the officers so be careful when you walk around at night.  Well, I walked around at night, and I didn't have any problem at all.  But that's, I didn't have problem with anything really.  (Simultaneous)
Story_ID: 33175
Speaker 1: Now, you were--shortly after you enlisted, I mean re-enlisted, Dr. King was assassinated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was assassinated in--
Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Now, let's see, where am I?  Where--
Speaker 1: Were you in [Washington] D.C. area when--
Speaker 2: I think I was in the D.C. area when he was assassinated.  Yeah, I know I was, yeah, 'cause we had, we had a meeting here of, on 14th Street, and didn't know what had happened.  We were in the meeting, and we didn't know what had happened, and when we come out, we saw people blowing the horns and everything, and I lived out in Northeast at that time.  So, and I had a friend who came from Chicago.  We were having a meeting, for Montfort Point, well, it was Montfort Point [North Carolina] getting, for the Montfort Point assembly unit.  So anyway, we get in the car 'cause we didn't have any idea what was happening.  So somebody yelled, "Turn on your light".  So I didn't know what they were talking--why they had said, "turn on your light".  But then when we got a little further out towards on "U" Street where, then we begin to see all this fire and all these people running around in the streets and everything.  Then we realized why they wanted us to turn on our lights.  And we drove all the way home, all the way into Northeast.  Nobody bothered us or stopped us, but fire was everywhere.  People raiding stores and everything else.  But we weren't bothered at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I thought I'd ask you about that 'cause that's a--so, okay.  So how fast, did your promotions happen in a timely way?
Speaker 2: Ah, it was timely.  They were timely, sure.  I didn't have any problem with that.
Speaker 1: And were there any people in the Marine Corps that you would consider to be mentors to you?
Speaker 2: For me?
Speaker 1: Yes, for you.
Speaker 2: Not really, 'cause--we were in the area where there was still discrimination and a lot of prejudice.  So, I didn't have any real mentors, no.  I mean I was sort of a loner, I guess.  And I always wanted to know why I couldn't, so that's the only thing that kept me going.  Somebody said, you can't do it, and I wanted--the first thing I would say is, why (laughter).  And even now, even I had my general officer get on me too one day.  I was, I was to brief him, and I had--I was in charge of a branch then.  And I had about four, I had about four sections.  And one was, one was--he worked in intelligence, one section did.  And they were a lot more knowledgeable about intelligence than I was.  Everything else, I would say, satisfied with, data processing, and this type of thing, I was satisfied with that.  But anyway, every so often we had to brief the General.  And they would give me notes of what they were doing and where they are, and I would review them with them and make sure I understood what was going on.  And so this morning after--(unclear), well, anyway, this meeting, all the branch heads were there, and 'cause I was a branch head.  And John wanted, asked me to brief him.  So I started briefing, I started looking at my notes.  And he says, well, I don't need you to look at your notes.  Give me your notes.  So I had to think real fast, I said, gee, well, you know, you can't ask me any questions if you take my notes.  You got all my answers (laughter), I mean everybody laughed, and then they settled down, and I didn't have no more problems (laughter).  I was pretty quick witted at times, and I always tried to be so I could always stay ahead of other people, particularly, the people I have to deal with.  But that threw him off, and everything went along real smooth after that.
Story_ID: 33176
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what was your assignment when you retired or what were you doing?
Speaker 2: When I retired from the Marine Corps?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was your last assignment?
Speaker 2: My last assignment, let's see.  I had been to Norway.  I had been to--I guess on the island of, off of Puerto Rico.  We had an exercise going there, and it was, there wasn't too many people that stayed on this island.  And, of course, they were complaining about the military using a lot of explosives on the island.  I'm trying to think of the name of it.  I almost had it, but it slipped.  It's right outside of Puerto Rico 'cause we've operated out of Puerto Rico. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Vieques?
Speaker 1: I think he's got it back here.  Say it out loud. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Vieques?
Speaker 2: Vieques, yeah, Vieques, that's what it is, right, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, that's what it was, Vieques, right, yeah.  So anyway, we had exercises going on there.  That was my last assignment.  When I finished up that, I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you feel about retirement when it came?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I hated to retire.  I had began to like, I got used to being an officer, and there's a lot of privileges you have, you know, and a lot of authority, and you go places and people--you're respected.  So I hated to give that up.  But I had to (laughter).  And I enjoyed every moment of it.  And a few times, things got rough, but you know, when you stop to think about it, it's not that bad, and it was always--everything was always a learning step.  So, which was good for me because I was just lucky to be in the right place at the right time, and say the right things at the right time.
Speaker 1: Now, you had a chance to see like people like Frank Peterson--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I knew Peterson well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --people coming, come through and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew Peterson.  I knew him when he was a Lieutenant Colonel.  And I knew him, in fact, we one time was in Florida together raking the bar stops (laughter).  Yeah, I knew Peterson well, and then Gary Cooper, I don't know if you've heard of him or not.  But he's another popular one, black Marine.  He retired as a Major General.  He also owns a bike in Atlanta.  He has a bike that he owns.
Speaker 1: I have heard of him to tell the truth.  He, Gary Cooper, yeah.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Gary Cooper, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gary Cooper.  He's  retired.
Speaker 1: So he became a General too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's retired Lieutenant General.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, all three of us were, we knew all three pretty well--all three of us knew each other pretty well.
Story_ID: 33177
Speaker 1: So how, well, just can you give us some reflections on the changes in the Marine Corps since you started--
Speaker 2: The Marine Corps has come a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and finished?
Speaker 2: --a long, long ways (laughter).  When I started, as you say, there were no officers.  In fact, I never expected to see an officer in the Marine Corps when I started.  And as an enlisted, I was really disgusted with it because of the hardship that gave us, with the prejudices that we were faced with, and the commandant had really--the commandant at that time, Holcomb I think is the name, was, at that time, he was the one that said that there were no place for blacks in the Marine Corps--in the units that he commanded, there was no place for blacks to be in the units he commanded.  He was the one that said that and said that, that if he had to choose between 5,000 white Marines and 250,000 Negro Marines, he would choose the whites.  And he said that if Negroes really wanted to serve their country, that we have to do so in the Army, and then the Secretary of the Navy which was Secretary [Frank] Knox at that time, directed him to start enlisting African Americans or Negroes as we were called at that time.  So the commandant then established a board to study the integration of Negroes into the Marine Corps.  And then the board recommended that Negroes be assigned to composite defense battalions, including coastal artillery anti-aircraft artillery infantry tanks.  And consequently, well, what I'm leading up to, he then created a very hostile environment for us in the Marine Corps, and that's why we were having such a hard time in the Marine Corps, as well as in various cities, and especially, those in the South.
Story_ID: 33178
Speaker 1: And that's why the police and all of 'em--that reminds me of another thing.  But that's why police and all of 'em would give us a hard time because they knew we had no one, we had no one looking out for us.  We were on, kind of on our own.  And the (unclear) way up, after I got in the head--when I went in the recruit company, as, right out of boot camp, went into recruit company, and I told you that the First Sergeant asked me to wait a while before I took my leave, well, about a month later when I took my leave, I left the office at 4:30 that evening, and went into Jacksonville [North Carolina] to catch the bus to go to Rocky Mountain to catch the train there to go to [Washington] D.C.  That's the only way I knew to travel 'cause that's the first time off the base.  So anyway, I go into Jacksonville at around 4:30, right after work Friday, and about the time I got out of Jacksonville, it was midnight because of the white Marines from Camp LeJeune [North Carolina] were inside and there were a thousand of them.  And the Jim Crow law says whites fill up first, and if it's any room afterwards, blacks could go.  So it was from 4:30 and a bus would leave, left around 6:00, another left around 8:00, and another left around midnight, and I got the--the one I got was midnight when I got out of there.  So, when I get to Rocky Mountain, now, it's about--well, about time the train comes through, it's about 2:00 o'clock in the morning.  So I get on the train to go to D.C.  I get to D.C., and it's about 8:00 o'clock Saturday morning or 9:00 o'clock, somewhere in there.  It's morning.  I walk through the gate from, coming out of the train, where the train area is, where the train's there.  You go through the gate, and then you're in the station.  And it's a wide area there.  And who's standing right there at the gate, is an MP [military police].  And he looks at me, and he calls me over.  And he says, Marine, you're out of uniform.  I said, what are you talking about I'm out of uniform.  He says that uniform you're in is filthy.  I said, well, I just got off the train.  And he says, I'm sorry, but you're--you can't go into town like that.  I said, well, okay.  Well, I got a, a change of uniform in my bag.  I got a bag right. I can go in the men's room and change up.  He said, nah, I'm not gonna let you do that.  You can't do that.  So he held me over at their, at the station until the next train going South, put me on the next train going South to go back to camp.  And I did 'cause I had no choice really.  Then he's the police to me.  He's the police.  And if he said, do it, you do it.  He says, and plus, I'm gonna send a letter back to your command reporting this.  So I said, well, I--so to me, I said, well, I'd better go back and make sure that I square everything away.  So anyway, he puts me on the train and I come back.  So I get back, maybe late Saturday evening or early Sunday morning.  I don't remember which.  Anyway, it was the next, that Monday when we go to work, I go in the office and the first thing Tops, the First Sergeant, and we called Top, First Sergeant, First Sergeant Top, so the First Sergeant said, well, what are you doing here?  You're supposed to be on leave.  So I explained to him what happened.  So he said, okay, he said, what he would do, he was gonna notify the battalion, our battalion CO [commanding officer] who in turn could notify  Colonel Woods who was the camp CO to notify the CO of the MP's down here, and explain to 'em what's happening so that, you know, we can't, we've got--we have to ride that train, and nothing we could do because the coach we're in is the one that's filthy 'cause that's the one right behind the coal car basically, you know, and then when the blacks caught it in the South, you know, they bring chicken and everything else.  That's where everybody has to ride if you ride a train.  So they bring live chickens and everything on the train down in the South at that time, they would.  And so it was filthy, and the soot from the dust--you could feel grit.  It just, the seat felt gritty, but you couldn't, that's the only you could do is sit on it, if you sat down.  And I didn't know any better 'cause I mean I sat there.  I didn't realize I was gonna get that dirty, but my suit, my uniform really was dirty 'cause I was perspiring.  So you perspire, and you're rubbing against it, and so anyway so my First Sergeant says, I'll give you another set of leaves.  And this time when you, just catch the bus and go to D.C. to avoid that until we can get it squared away.  So I said, okay, I'll catch the bus.  So he did give me a break.  He started off with two weeks leave.  So he gave me two weeks, plus a--what they call a 72-hour pass, which is another three days he had, he tacked onto it for me.  So anyway, I catch the bus, and now in the Jim Crow laws there, when the bus stops at one of those restaurants, you can't go in and eat.  You gotta go around the back, see, and then knock on the door and then the cooks or what not would come to the door, and serve you whatever you want.  But then if you wanted to go to the restroom, they had an outhouse for you, for blacks.  And that thing was never clean.  And so you could imagine what it was like to step in something that's been there for years and used for years.  So I said to myself, boy, this is not, this is just not it.  So anyway, I get back on the bus, and decide I wouldn't get off until I got to D.C.  And I did, I went all the way to D.C.  Of course, I had to come back that way, but coming back, I made sure I didn't have to stop for nothing (laughter).  I just had to ride the bus.  I was gonna stay on the bus the whole trip, which I did 'cause it was terrible.
Story_ID: 33179
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm not sure we were finished with that story, but you, but this is just, these were the trials and tribulations of just trying to negotiate a leave?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, right.  Yeah, well, that was--'cause after that, I sent something to the "Washingtonian", I knew that when the train came into Union Station, it would stop and back in.  And I knew at "K" Street--I don't know how familiar you are with Washington [D.C.], but anyway, the train goes over the top of "K" Street, and there's a hill.  But I think they've closed I up now.  But at that time, there was a hill that led down to "K" Street, see.  So after that when I caught the train the next time, what I would do, when the trains comes into the station and stops to back into the station, I would get off of the train out in the yard and go down the hill onto "K" Street, see (laughter) and then go on and catch the bus and go on home.
Speaker 1: And you could avoid the MP [military police] and all that?
Speaker 2: Right, but I if had to go to the Union Street, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a shame.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: If people would think about just doing those kind of things, people would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I never did go, after that, I never did go into the station in uniform.
Speaker 1: Okay, so retirement in 1986.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then what were your plans?  Did you have any plans, after-retirement plans?
Speaker 2: Well, not really.  You know, I was interested in boating, and I got myself a little boat.  So then summer became very important to me because I used my boat.  So then I decided that what I'd do is find a job that I could work during the winter months and not work during the summer.  And, of course, the only thing I could think of was taxes (laughter), income taxes.  So that's what I did.  I started working, doing income taxes, and I had my summers free.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, I worked up and got a bigger boat.  I ended up with a thirty-six footer, cabin cruiser.  But I just got rid of it in October because my wife said she, well, she--and also myself, she couldn't climb up and down on it too much, and, of course, I could do it, but I couldn't move and jump around like I used to.  So I figured it's best us get rid of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you set up a business or something or did you--
Speaker 2: I worked, I had an office, one of Block's offices, H and R Block offices in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Georgetown.  I had that.  And really, I wasn't looking to make a lot of money because I, my pensions were pretty good.  So--
Story_ID: 33180
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, there's a story attached to the, I guess the recognition of Montford Point Marines, I know in that, I know I first heard it, I guess in the '80's [1980s] about the Tuskegee Airmen and people were trying to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that was starting to resurface, talk about the Tuskegee Airmen.  Then subsequently, there was a made-for-TV movie about 'em, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, yeah, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and analysis.
Speaker 2: Well, see, they're different because see they're general officers, they had a lot of general officers.  We're all enlisted.  Montford Point [North Carolina] is strictly enlisted, when you talk Montford Point, there's no officers.  So we don't have the voice or the attention that they did until recent.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it took a longer time for--
Speaker 2: A much longer--(laughter)--we just got the [U.S.] Congressional Gold Medal, the June twenty--last year, on June the 27th.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I worked a lot to help get it.  I went up on the Hill [Capitol Hill].  I talked to Congressmen.  Then I talked Senators, and we did a lot of things.  Like we went up on the Hill--in fact, well, we kind of goofed up.  Let's see, we got this--two years ago, I guess, when we started.  But we didn't realize that to get things out of committee in Congress that you needed 199 signatures.  We worked at Congress.  We got sixty-six, I believe it was.  Well, we thought we had it made, and we stopped (laughter).  So then when we went back to find out what, why--and the next year changed, we wanted to find out why this thing didn't come out of the committee.  And we found out that we needed 199.  So when General [James F.] Amos who is now the commandant of the Marine Corps, he was, he happened to have been in California, and he attended one of the Montford Point functions there.  And then when he attended, he'd never heard, he said he'd never heard of Montford Point.  And so he said, he's gonna--when he got through he said, he's gonna make Montford Point well known.  And when he came back, he really started working.  So he and I and several of us went up on the Hill a couple of times and talked to Congress for this Congressional Gold Medal, and then Congresswoman [Corrine] Brown from Florida, we got with her, and she really pushed Congress to get it through.  And then Kay Bailey, Senator Kay Bailey, she's white, but Brown is black, of course.  She's white, Kay Bailey is a Senator in North Carolina.  And she pushed the Senate and got it through the Senate.  And we were the only ones that went through unanimously in both House and Senate.  And that's because of the stories that we were telling them about our experiences.  And they were all shocked that, you know, they were so long giving it to us, that we hadn't--didn't get it a lot earlier.
Speaker 1: How old is the Montford Point organization?
Speaker 2: Oh, association.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the association.
Speaker 2: They started in '65' [1965]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in September of '65' [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay, Montford Point, 1965.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you all have been meeting ever since '65' [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, see, every year we have a convention somewhere.  Now, this year, it's gonna be in San Diego [California].  Now, last--we went for, yeah, this year.  Yeah, in 2012, it was in North Carolina at Camp Montford Point, and I think just before then it was in Atlanta [Georgia].  But anyway, every year, each chapter will vote to, or make a proposal rather, to hold a convention.
Speaker 1: Okay, so culminating, I mean the Congressional Gold Medal was issued in 2010--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Twenty--just last year in September.
Speaker 1: Oh, twenty--just last year, 2012.
Speaker 2: Yeah, September the 27th.
Speaker 1: Okay, September 27th--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --2012, okay.  And what was that ceremony like?
Speaker 2: Well, the--it's two parts.  The first part was the awarding of bill--the awarding of the medal rather, and that was at the Emancipation Hall at the Washington--at the United States Capitol.  And that's when Congress, the Senators there presented us with a Congressional Gold Medal.  Then the next day, the commandant had it, us there, and they were actually, they actually hung the Congressional Medal on us.  The Congress only presented the original one, and then the commandant had others--had it duplicated in bronze.  And I have one in the, I have one in the other room if you wanna see it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the Congressional Medal.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know we, I know we saw some of the photos.  And you have some too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have the real one, well, the bronze one, not the-- right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I wish I did have the gold one (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 33181
Speaker 1: So, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or the legacy of the Montford Point Marines first of all, then yours?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--I don't know.  I never considered myself a big, important or anything else, just rather a normal person.  But as I said, when I was working at headquarters Marine Corps [?](unclear), I did a lot of things to help other blacks to advance, to get promotions or to be selected fairly.  And that's what I was really working for, to see that they were selected fairly.  And the legacy is that, well, we did integrate the Marine Corps 'cause prior to us getting in, going into the Marine Corps, there hadn't been any blacks except during the Revolutionary War.  But then it was the Continental Marines.  It wasn't the United States Marines.  It was Continental Marines, and, of course, and the Continental Marines worked on ships with the Navy.  They were the sharp shooters, lady (unclear) and the captain's disciplinary to enforce the captain's disciplinary actions.  Then Marines, then in 1790--let's see, late 1795, 1798, the Marine Corps reorganized.  And then that's when the United States Marine Corps became, and then when they did that, they passed an order or whatever that they would not enlist Negroes, Colored--Negroes, Indians, there was about three groups.  Let's see, or three groups, Negroes, Indians, what's the other one?
Speaker 1: Pacific Islanders, Asians?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It'll come to me later (laughter).
Speaker 1: Latinos or--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Latinos or Hispanics?
Speaker 2: Un-un, no, with a fair, a real fair complexioned people.  Let it come to me later.  Let's, I'll get off on something else, and it'll pop in.  One thing that, you know, we--at Montford Point [North Carolina], our legacy rather, we, like I say, we integrated the Marine Corps and made it possible for people to be, for Marines, particularly, to advance the way they have.  And like I say, we're now--you said, you mentioned General Williams, who's a three-star [Three-Star General], and when we were in, (laughter) nobody ever thought that they'd even be an officer, so not only officer, but he's got three stars.  And he's not the only one, like Peterson had three stars.  And then you got Charlie Bolden, the two-star--he's an astronaut and, at NASA.  I knew all, I knew all of 'em well.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned Gary Cooper.
Speaker 2: There's Gary Cooper, yeah, (unclear).  He's a two-star, and he's in Atlanta [Georgia].  And then, of course, there's Coleman.  And there're--Coleman, I think is three stars too.  He's retired.  I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, okay, well, when you look back--
Speaker 2: Mulattos is what I was trying to think of.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mulattos, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, light-skinned, black people--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --or mixed race people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's what I was trying to think of, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 33182
Speaker 1: Now, again, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I suppose if I, if I were to start over again, I think I would take more interest in education for one thing.  I think I would have definitely not done anything until I got through college.  I'm certain of that 'cause I regret not doing that, and I missed a lot of opportunities that I would have had had I really had a degree and so I could say that, you know, I specialized in something and was prepared to do something.  Really, I wasn't.  I, what I learned, I did learning as I did it, on the job, as we'd say.  But I was always a fairly good learner when I wanted to learn something.  And that's what I think carried me through.  For example, like I say, when we were in Marine Corps, Marine Corps didn't send us to school, but they sent the whites to school.  And they sent them to school for years.  They just sat, put us in a job, handed us a manual or instructions and says, you do it and do it right.  And we did.  And that's because, I was able to pick up the manual, and I and to pick up the manual and read it and make sure I did it, word-by-word, even the abbreviations in the muster roll, they had to be perfect.  You couldn't just put anything in there.  You had to have a Marine Corps accepted abbreviation so you had to make sure you used the one they used, they wanted.
Speaker 1: Okay, not easy.
Speaker 2: No, (laughter).  But we did it, and that's one reason--the Marine Corps gave us a lot of credit for that too because the commandant said that he wanted to make us self supporting.  And we, he made us self supporting immediately, and he pulled the whites out as fast as he could.  And as a matter of fact, when the white DI's [drill instructors] started leaving and started being replaced by the black DI's, the commandant comes, put out a letter of instruction which directed that no white Marine would be placed in a position where he would be junior to a black Marine.  So that, so they were just pulling the whites out real fast and left it up to us to make it, which we did.
Story_ID: 33183
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd like to see them advance, and I think they've come a long ways, when you think now, we have a black President [President Barack Obama], and I would think that the black communities then would become more united where they haven't been.  They basically, have been for themselves or individually, been individuals rather than a group, basically.  We still have a lot that are trying to pull us together, and I think we're on the right track, and I think we're getting there, but it's slow.  And I, and see, we've got people that, right now we've got blacks moving into all kinds of positions.  I can't begin to name 'em (laughter), but I think the biggest thing is the fact that we now have a black president [POTUS] and I think that's gonna open up the country up more for blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us something about your family.  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have a, well, I have a late daughter.  I have a daughter--I had a daughter.  She's deceased.  She died when she was thirty-six [years old].  Now, I have a grandson, and a great grandson 'cause her son--and he's close with us, because he was sixteen [years old] when she died.  So I legally adopted him because his father, his mother and father didn't get along too well.  And she, when she made her will, she asked that, she put in the will that we adopt him.  So, which I did.  I went to court and legally adopted him, though he's my grandson.  And he has a son.  And I have pictures of them in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Now, we've been up here, I guess almost seventy years.  But when we first came here, this was a white neighborhood (laughter), and all of 'em didn't, all of the neighbors didn't really want us up here.
Speaker 1: What's the neighborhood called?
Speaker 2: This is Chevy Chase area, but we're, you're in the District [Washington, D.C.], but right across, right--it's called, is a dividing line from Maryland.  And this is Chevy Chase area of the District.  But like I say, there were some whites didn't want us up here.  Matter of fact, they dumped my trash over a couple of times, but there was a neighbor across the street--he's deceased now, but he would come over and help.  He was very friendly, and there were a few of 'em that were friendly.  But there were a lot that weren't.  But eventually, I mean we--they've changed, everything's changed now.  And so now, I'm just--oh, we enjoyed being up here anyway, but now it's real nice.  We've, we really enjoy it.
Story_ID: 33184
Speaker 1: Okay, well, and the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I guess as a pioneer, going into the Marine Corps, helped to integrate that, even in the Officer Corps, helped to integrate that and make it more accessible to blacks.  And then when I worked as a civilian at headquarters Marine Corps, I worked hard to get blacks to be able to advance and to make sure we were treated squarely--fairly.  But I don't know, I never really gave much thought as what I want people to remember me (laughter, I guess when I'm gone, I could care less (laughter).  I don't know.  I don't know.  I think I've lived a pretty fortunate life.  I really do that, 'cause some of the things, and I was a very sensitive person, you know, when I was growing up.  And I couldn't go this place, couldn't go that place because, you know, that was for whites and this was for blacks, even here in the District.  Well, like I say, it wasn't just demeaning because the whites lived very close to blacks in the District, except there were certain areas of the District that were strictly for whites.  And [if] the police caught you in that area, they'll stop you and wanna know what you're doing in that area.  But those were only a few areas, but basically, blacks and whites almost lived next door to each other in the District.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what else to say (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's enough, that's enough.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Oh, my pleasure.  Thank you, thank you, I enjoyed it.  I wish I could have given you more information, but--
Speaker 1: No, you-- (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Story_ID: 33185
Speaker 1: That's the picture of the new post which shows the designation of, Montford Point changed to Camp Johnson, Hashmark Johnson in '74' [1974].
Speaker 2: Now, this is when we were at the House Office Building briefing them about Montford Point, working towards the Congressional Gold Medal, and that's, the first one is me is General Williams, and that's a female Marine and male Marine.  Both of 'em were at, stationed there at the House Office Building.  I don't know their names, but General Williams is next to me.
Speaker 1: And that's me briefing Congress also at the same time, telling my story.
Speaker 2: Now, here I am with, in the middle, the female is Congressman Corrine Brown.  To her right is her aide and, of course, that's me to her left and then Joe Geeter who was the national president of Montford Marine Association, but he's now the public relations officer. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what's his name?
Speaker 1: Joe Geeter, G-E-E-T-E-R.
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know, I know there's myself.  A lot of people wanted to pose with me.  We're still up there in the Black Caucus meeting, and a lot of people just got together and say, hey, we wanna take a picture with you.
Speaker 1: And, again, there, that's Congresswoman Brown, Corrine Brown and her aide and myself on her left.
Speaker 2: And this is still, same people.  I don't know the two people other than Congresswoman Corrine Brown and myself.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm not sure where that was taken.  That's me, of course, sitting there, but there's--that's just one of the conventions, I guess, at (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's me as a Major in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Now, that, we're--except for the Master Sergeant, we're three officers.  The one in front is, I don't remember their names.  It was taken some time ago. Braxton is the enlisted guy's name, but--and, of course, I'm sitting, I'm standing in front of him.
Speaker 2: Now, that's me and my wife.  And that's just a little before I retired.  I was getting ready to retire.  And they-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Anne, Annie B. Carpenter.
Speaker 2: And, of course, that's me as a Colonel, getting ready to retire, as Lieutenant Colonel.
Speaker 1: Now, that's my boot camp picture.  That was taken right after I finished boot camp.
Speaker 2: Now, that's at Montford Point.  That's me standing on your left looking at it and with the Sergeant, and that's Freddie Perry is the guy standing beside me, (unclear) the person kneeling, and I don't remember his name.  But that's all down at Montford Point.
Speaker 1: And that's myself again at Montford Point, and that's also a larger shot of my boot camp picture.
Speaker 2: That's my recruit platoon.  I'll point to it, I'm, that's me up--I can't get closer.  This is me here, and that's the drill sergeant--
Speaker 1: You were--
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: Right here?
Speaker 2: No, here, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right there, yeah, you're pointing right at me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And this is the drill instructor and this is junior, this is his assistant rather, Joe Stratton (ph.) (unclear).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Again, this is at Montford Point, and this is a group (unclear) standing, and the only one I know is Fred--I don't even see him now, yeah, I think that's Freddie Perry here, and that's me standing there.
Speaker 1: And, of course, again, that's me. They were all taken on Montford Point.
Speaker 2: All right, now, that picture shows my grandson, this is my grandson and my great grandson.  I don't know who--I don't know the name of the other gentleman.  He's a friend of my grandson's.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: That's my wife, yeah.  That was when she was young, when we're real young there.  That's not the way she looks today (laughter).  We're both in our eighties now (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm sure she thinks she looks just like that now.
Speaker 2: I know she thinks she does (laughter).  I hope she didn't hear me 'cause she's upstairs (laughter).  I may have--I may regret that (laughter). (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: That's a poster that I altered.  This was for, a Martin Luther King poster, this part.  I altered it because I was making a video, and so I added these two things to it and the name up there.
Speaker 2: That's a folder that the commandant had prepared for us.  Inside of it is a picture, well, inside too.  Well, that's the back of that folder, and that's Gaslo (ph.) that's doing the judo.  This is Gaslo, his name is Gaslo.  He went, when he left Montford Point, he went to work with the FBI to teach them judo.
Story_ID: 33186
Speaker 1: And, of course, that's me, of course.
Speaker 2: And this is what was, this is where we were actually given the Congressional Gold Medal, each of us were given the Congressional Gold Medal.  That's the Congressional Gold Medal there, and it's a group out on the grounds of the Marine barracks (unclear) and I, where were handed the--
Speaker 1: Now, that's the book that was prepared at Montford Point to record the history of us coming in there.  It was done very early at Montford Point.
Speaker 2: I was just showing off there 'cause we weren't supposed to do that, but I got a cigarette in my mouth and I got the gun, my holster, you know, angled like a cowboy.  But we weren't supposed to do that though (laughter), but I did it just for the pictures. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Well, that's me at the slop shoot at, drinking bear at a slop shoot there on the base.  They called it slop shoot where they had beer, they sold us beer.
Speaker 2: Now, what's going on here in these little ones?
Speaker 1: Oh, it's talking, that was just to show off a picture.  I can't quite remember the names of the people, but this is me sitting at a desk, that I know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, let's get that one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was chief clerk, I was chief clerk.  The First Sergeant is sitting there off to my right.  He was the First Sergeant.
Speaker 2: Now, that was taken by the TV station, I forgot which one.  But that's when we left Congress, after Congress had passed the bill for the Congressional Gold Medal.
Speaker 1: And, again, we were at the Congress to get the Congressional Gold Medal.  There, I was--this is me.  That's Fred Ferguson.  This is the national president, Avehart.  This is the Senator that replaced Obama, and, you know, he only stayed just for a short term, and he's back. I can't remember his name right off.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking about--
Speaker 1: The one that replaced Obama as soon as he left the Senate--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Roland Burris.
Speaker 1: Burris, yeah, Burris, yeah, Burris, right, yeah. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Oh, that's at the, I mean the Marine Barracks aides and I where the, where we received, actually received the Congressional Gold Medal.  This is, they had the Three-Star Generals, the commandant arranged for the Three-Star Generals to take it.  This is my nephew there, and that's the parade session that they performed for us.
Speaker 1: And that's again, there at the Navy--at the Marine Barracks aides and I, we were sitting in there for the, watching the parade and what not take place.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  That's a publication I picked up somewhere.
Speaker 1: And that's the first publication that the Marine Corps did on us.
Speaker 2: With Hashmark?
Speaker 1: That's Hashmark Johnson there, yeah, that's Hashmark Johnson there, right.
Speaker 2: And that's another one.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, Hashmark passed right before any of this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, he's buried here in [Arlington].
