Story_ID: 103255
Speaker 1: Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Neculai Burghelea is the videographer.  Can you please state your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I am Harriette Cole, H-A-R-R-I-E-T-T-E, C-O-L-E.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I do, Ann, A-N-N (laughing).
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 14, 1961.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: November 7, 2006.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a Magazine Editor, Writer, Author, Life Coach.  I describe my work as helping people how to discover how to be their best, using various arms of the media.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We are at the Harlem YMCA on 135th Street in Harlem [New York City, New York].
Story_ID: 103256
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna get started and I'm gonna ask you some People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To begin, okay?  Tell me what is our favorite food?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, a favorite food is a hard question.  But my favorite comfort food is corn pudding, and its corn pudding now made by my sister, Stephanie [Cole] who makes it for me every Christmas.  If she--we go to her house for Christmas dinner and if she doesn't have corn pudding, then I'm crying.  It's an old family recipe and she has perfected it, and I want her to make a separate casserole just for me.  So that I can have my corn pudding (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year, well I have two answers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's two favorites.  I love the fall because I love fashion and so I love the clothes that you can wear in the fall and layering and the colors.  I love the summer because I absolutely love the beach and love being warm and having the sun kiss me and get in the water.  So I love both those times of the year.
Speaker 1: So loving the summer, what is your favorite vacation bes--destination?
Speaker 2: I think that my favorite vacation destination is Jamaica in the West Indies.  We go to Port Antonio, my husband [HM George Chinsee] is from Jamaica, and we have gone there many times over the years.  And we Port Antonio is a very quiet, non-touristy area, so I'm probably giving it away by talking about it.  But we love going there can really relaxing and being by the water.
Speaker 1: And I know you're into fashion, so what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I've always said that my favorite color is yellow.  And it's not so much that I wear it, but I surround myself with different tones of yellow.  Like the walls, several walls in my home are yellow.  The walls in my office are yellow, so I like to be in the presence of yellow, it's sunny and happy.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite saying, words that I do my best to live by are, "see God in each other."  And I got that phrase from my meditation teacher, whose name is (unclear) and we learned that when you look for the best in people and look for that God spirit in people, then you can really have a high experience.  And sometimes it's hard to do that, especially when you're mad or you're frustrated.  But at those moments when you can look to see God in another person, you can often make the moment better.
Story_ID: 103257
Speaker 1: --Okay, wonderful.  So now we're gonna start by talking about your parents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name, where she was born and what her date of birth is?
Speaker 2: My mother is Doris Irene Freeland Cole.  She was born--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I'm sorry can you spell it for me?
Speaker 2: D-O-R-I-S, I-R-E-N-E, Freeland, F-R-E-E-L-A-N-D, Cole, C-O-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in Baltimore, Maryland; I think she was born on a street called Gold Street.  Her birthday is October 28, oh I don't know what year, but she just turned 77 in '06 [2006] (laughing).  So I just remember--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: 1929.
Speaker 2: Well okay.  October 28, 1929 and she's, she's many years young is how she likes to put it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well describe your mother to me.
Speaker 2: My mother is a very exuberant, she, she has exuberance to her personality.  She's got a big smile, she lights up the room when she comes in, that's what people often say about her.  She is, she studied at--to be a teacher, she was a Kindergarten teacher for many years.  I am one of three girls and when my youngest sister [Stephanie Cole] was born, she retired to take care of us.  But its, it's interesting because she has the background of education.  She took all of that background and gave it to us.  So like we never could have nicknames, because when she was teaching in Kindergarten, many of her students didn't know their names.  They were "Pumpkin" and "Peaches" (laughing) there were many fruits, fruits and vegetables were her bit hit, "Baby," "Princess."  But they didn't know if their names were other things, they didn't know what they were.  So we were not allowed to have nicknames, we were not allowed to have our names shortened, because we needed to know what our names were, and be able to spell our names, and stand proudly in our names, and I actually appreciate that, now knowing what our parents chose to call us, even what it stood for.  My mother is the daughter of--her mother was Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-I-E, Elizabeth, A-L-S-U-P, Freeland, and she was born in Calvert County, Maryland.  She was four foot nine and thought she was a thousand feet tall.  She looked like very pale white woman, but she told us she was colored and (laughing) we believed her.  She was born in 1889 and, what year did she pass?  She lived to be 101, so I remember when she was in her late '80s; she was sitting on the floor playing jacks with us.  She was very nimble and, and she was completely lucid up until her last day.  Her husband, my grandfather was Harvey Freeland and he was a porter in Baltimore.  My grandmother was a domestic worker; she worked for among the people who were her--for whom she took care, was two sisters called the Cone Sisters [Claribel Cone and Etta Cone].  And they have an amazing art collection [The Cone Collection in the Baltimore Museum of Art] in Maryland, and at a certain point during my mother--my grandmother's working for them, she traveled to Europe.  Kind of like a lady in waiting.  So the interesting thing about doing domestic work, which I often tell young people you know you can make anything what you want it to be.  And for my grandmother, she chose to learn all about world--the world to learn about art and culture and history.  She met [Henri] Matisse, she met Mary Cassatt because she worked for people who knew them, and who collected their work, I mean imagine.  And she--and when they gave her things it was the finest china and silver that they didn't want anymore.  And so we have heirlooms from my grandmother, who I think had a six or seventh grade education.  Who was brilliant and very knowledgeable, because she read and learned from the people who she worked for, and she took great care of them.  And I remember her telling me years ago, when I was angry, I remember at a certain point when I was in high school and I was angry that my grandmother was still working.  And she was working for rich white people and why did she have to do that?  We had enough money to take care of her, I remember being very bitter about this.  And she said to me, "There's no reason for you to be made at me or mad at the people I work for, I love my work, I love the people that I work for and when you have your work, you should love it.  And love all the people who surround you because that--that is what makes life worth living."  And I never forgotten that, it really kind've dispelled all of that negativity that I had, because she didn't have it.  And she said there was no reason to have it, so my mother emerges from this very strong woman who was very loving, and my mother is the same.
Story_ID: 103258
Speaker 1: I want to tell you one more thing about my grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I could talk about her forever in fact I decided when I was a little girl that if I ever had a child I reserved her name for my child.  Now I had my child at age forty-two (laughing) and I still reserved the name, and so I have a daughter named "Carrie."  Because I knew and I said "Ooh, what if it's a boy," I always thought I would have a girl, and I did.  But I was gonna name him Carrie and just change the spelling because I wanted to invoke the spirit of my grandmother through whatever blessing of a child will come in my life.  Anyhow, when my, my grandmother was too ill to go to church, because she went to church every Sunday, when she was too ill to go, and I can't really say ill, too frail, I mean she was old.  When she too frail to go to church, the ministers would come to have church with her, and at this point she lived with my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole].  And by the way, she did not want to live with them, she moved when she--I think she stopped working to--when she was 92 or 93, because (laughing) and she lived in her own house that she owned.  And she wanted to be independent, but my mother's like come on, you're at 90-something; you can come and stay with us.  You can do what you want, but let us, let us take care of you the way you've taken care of us all these years.  And so she did, and somewhere in her mid to late nineties, she stopped going to church every Sunday, and the minister came to visit her.  And at her funeral, the--there were several ministers; seven ministers at her funeral spoke, first of all.  And among them were people who had known her over the years, including two who had come visit her at home.  And what the ones who came to visit her at home described was that every time they would come, when they would step over the threshold of, into her room, they felt like they had entered God's room.  And they came to minister her and they always left saying that she had ministered to them.  Before they're--I think they spent about an hour together, and before they ended that hour, she would offer a prayer for them to keep them for the rest of the week.  So they said they looked forward to coming to see her, you know that idea of coming to visit the sick and shut-in?  And sometimes, people, even in the ministry can feel it's a little bit of a burden because it depends upon the, you know what, what energy they're getting when they come.  Well they thought it was a blessing to come visit my grandmother.  And it--she was that blessing for me in her life and I've done lots of research about African American culture and African culture and I know from our history, it says that our ancestors stay with us.  I feel her now, like as I'm telling you the story, I feel her presence.  And the, that, that kind of vivaciousness and fieriness that was part of her personality.  As well as the sweetness lived in my mother and in my daughter, so she's still with us.
Story_ID: 103259
Speaker 1: Now my dad [Harry Augustus Cole]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: Let me ask you-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: About your grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland].  You said she looked like a very pale white woman.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What was her--who are her parents, do you about her parents?
Speaker 1: I don't know much about her parents, her mother was very ill at a young age.  And I believe that she had rheumatoid arthritis, so my grandmother actually after getting married, went back to Calvert County [Maryland] for quite a while, if I'm getting the story straight, to take care of her mother and her husband's mother at a certain point.  Her mother died young, and what I recall is my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] telling the story that she died of a broken heart.  Her husband was a, I think he was a sailor and we believed that he was British.  You know the name Freeland is you know because our names all got changed, we don't know, but I mean, definitely there was somebody white in our family, not too far back.  Because my grandmother looks like a white woman and her son, my mother's brother [Wendell G. Freeland], has blue eyes, and white skin and straight hair, and he looks like a white man.  And he by the way is a Civil Rights Attorney whose very strong (laughing) black man and he has many, many stories of duping people.  Because he would be in the company of people, the fly on the wall, the brother in the room whom nobody knew was a brother.  Anyhow, so we believe that her father was a British member of the military or sailor and that my grandmother's parents perhaps were married, we're not sure.  But certainly had a love affair and she, and she has a brother, Harry, were the product of that union, but at some point, he left.  And the, the legend has it that my grandmother's mother died of a broken heart.  So we don't' you know unfortunately it's really hard to trace back the roots.  We have traced that the Calvert County is a Calvert County Family Reunion Group which is not just our direct family, but there are, there are cousins and cousins of cousins and there's a lot of Native American heritage in our family.  And unfortunately I can't tell you the family tree, I can tell you who knows it but, I do know that there's Native American in our family.  But directly through my grandmother, I believe that her father was a British man named Freeland.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 103260
Speaker 1: So my dad for whom I am named was Harry Augustus Cole and so Harry is typical spelling, Augustus, A-U-G-U-S-T-U-S, Cole, C-O-L-E.  My father was born in Washington D.C., he was the youngest of five children and his mother was Rosina Thompson Cole and I actually--I they hardly ever told stories of his father [Richard Baker Cole].  So I don't really know his father's story, his mother is from South Carolina.  My--I do know there're five children, three girls and two boys, my father was the baby.  He was the spoiled baby and also really a brilliant man.
Speaker 2: What years was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born [January 21] 1921, and he died in [February 14] 1999, and his mother--I-here's the interesting about African American stories.  A lot of times the stories that people don't want to tell, they don't get told and then you don't know what they are.  So I know a little bit and I've piece together certain things, and so I can share what I've pieced together.  It sounds like Daddy was not the nicest man, and my father's mother, Rosina was a strong woman.  Who was a cook and so you know a cook with five children, that's not a big paycheck.  But she took her skills and her five children and left her husband and moved to Baltimore [Maryland], because he was going to do her wrong no longer.  And she made it, she was able to be a cook and take care of her children and they never had a lot of money, and also I inherited from my Dad long skinny feet.  Everybody, they were tall people like me, (interruption) they're tall people like me and so you know tall.  And even when black folks aren't tall, we usually (laughing) have long feet.  Well, my family--my father's side of the family has long skinny feet, well my daddy used to tell stories when he was growing up, he was a string bean.  He had to wear his sister's shoes because you know you had the hand-me-down shoes, the, the brothers were bookends.  Richard was the oldest brother, Harry is the youngest and they're three girls in between.  And so there's wasn't enough money to buy everybody shoes, but also even if they wanted to, his feet were so narrow that the boy's shoes were too wide.  So Harry had to wear his sister's shoes to school, you can imagine how upset he was, that he had to put on some girls shoes.  But mama said you gone do it, and you don't wanna get your butt beat, so you put on those shoes and went to school. (laughing)  So he was very much tended to as boys often are, he had three big sisters who took care of him, and, and he was very, very smart.  And his mother encouraged him and all of his siblings to pursue their education to the best of their ability.  Understanding that in order to go to college, they would have to find the money, earn the money whatever it might be.
Story_ID: 103261
Speaker 1: My father [Harry Augustus Cole] went to Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland], which was Morgan State College, at the time.  And in order to raise whatever money it cost to go there, he shined shoes for a year, and there--and I, I inherited his shoe shinning kit, which is this beautiful wooden shoe shining kit.  And he--because he learned how to do a spit shine and really make the shoes and boots look beautiful, he understood how to do it well and he always took really good care of his clothes, of his shoes.  And I remember him telling us as we were growing up, "You don't have to have much, but whatever you have needs to be of good quality, and you need to take care of it."  And one time, I tell you I inherited his feet, so one time I had this one pair of shoes, 'cause there were many years that I had one pair of shoes.  'Cause we would search up and down the Eastern seaboard looking for shoes that would fit these long narrow feet.  I had one pair of shoes that was a slingback with a nice heel and I wore those shoes into the ground, the heels were all, you know like, looked like they were shaved.  The heel (laughing) was coming up and I, and I didn't realize it for a certain point.  And I said, "Oh no what am I gonna do" 'cause it wasn't like I could just go to the store and find another pair.  So I said Daddy will know, and I brought them to him "Could you please ask your shoemaker, your shoe man if he would fix them?"  And he said, "I am embarrassed to take these shoes anywhere, and I will take them if you promise to never let to this happen again."  And then I had go through hearing all the stories of how he paid his way go get into school and the importance of taking care of your shoes.  He had my heels restored, and the funny thing is, all these things that I learned growing up, I now teach people, I earn a living teaching people how to do things my parents taught me.  People ask me well how did you get to do this stuff, because I had no choice but to pay attention to my parents, and even as I grew up, the reminded me.  Even though he's gone, I hear him, in my, in my head, "Did you shine those shoes, girl, don't go out looking a mess, we don't go out looking a mess.  Head to toe you need to have it all together."  So he went to college earning enough money to pay whatever it was, he got a scholarship, an academic scholarship but he still needed more money.  He was a history major and when he was at Morgan, he began writing, and I don't know when he knew he wanted to work in the law, but he knew it early on.  And by the way, my father was a Republican, he decided--there was a group of young African American men during his time, you know in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] who decided that they would try to use the Republican Party to our advantage.  There was a belief that we needed to be in both parties strong in order to make an important enough impact on our government.  And he and a number of other African American men in particular, joined the Republican Party and my father became very prominent.  He wrote a political column for the [Baltimore] Afro American newspaper and you know I write a column, it's so interesting.  And we look of the pictures of him in his column and I look like him.  My father was very tall, he was almost six two, he carried himself even taller, so he always--he had quiet stature, very dark skinned man who because he was tall and dark and potentially imposing, always made it his business to look pristine.  You know he had one suit for a long time, but he looked good in that one suit, and he carried himself with dignity and he learned from his mother [Rosina Thompson Cole] social graces.  And let me tell you every social grace that anyone could learn, we learned growing up because our parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] said this was very important.  You needed to know, you needed to know how to play the game the way the game is played, you needed to know what the rules are.  The rules of the table, the rules of the social setting, the rules of a party, the rules of dance, my father, I don't know who taught him how to dance, maybe his sisters?  But we learned how to Waltz, Two-Step, Cha Cha in my basement, because my father said, that his daughters would know how to dance.  So that we could go to a formal affair, and know what you wear to a formal affair, and know how to present ourselves there.  So when we were growing up, we didn't want to know that stuff, but I'm glad we know it now.  And I believe that his sisters probably taught him, and then along the way.
Story_ID: 103262
Speaker 1: Anyhow, he [Harry Augustus Cole] wanted to be a lawyer, he graduated; he graduated Valedictorian from Morgan State [Morgan State College, now Morgan State University, in Baltimore, Maryland] and was not at his graduation because he enlisted in the [U.S.] Army to-- for World War II.  He was in World War II in the Army, he became a Lieutenant, and he and Uncle Wendell [Wendell G. Freeland] my mother's [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] brother, used to tell stories because Uncle Wendell was in, I think he was in the Army too.  I can't remember, but Uncle Wendell is the very short, white looking man, my father's a very tall, very dark man.  And they both had stories of potential mutinies that they incited while they were participating in World War II because they did not want to stand down regarding racism.  So my father was on a ship, they were heading, I believe to Okinawa [Island], Japan, he was on a ship and there were--my father liked to play bridge.  And he was playing bridge with one of the white officers, my father was an officer, and it was time for lunch, so my father decided that he was going to continue his bridge game with this white officer during lunch.  So he was going go to the white officer's mess hall, well that was not done and my father was not passing he was a tall dark skinned man (laughing) so he decided he was gonna go and this was his opportunity to be color blind.  And he walked into the mess hall and he sat down with the guy and they began to play bridge, and the other officers are looking like "What's going on?"  Meanwhile, he has a whole cabin of his men who he was leading who are waiting, 'cause they know what Harry Cole has done and they know something is about to happen.  And they are waiting and listening and hearing you know now there's is a stir, it's a flurry, Harry Cole is breaking the rules, and he did not want to leave.  And he said, "I'm gonna--why do I have to leave, we're playing bridge we continuing our game."  Well, the officers, you know the heads above them we're trying to figure out what do we do, they asked him to leave.  He said "No, I'm finishing my game," and Harry Cole's men were getting angry and restless and about to try to stand up for him, and that was going to create a different kind of situation.  So ultimately my father decided to leave so that he would not jeopardize the lives of his men. But here was you know the stories of race relations back then are, are just amazing, because at any turn just living your life and, and believing that you deserve to be where you are and where you believe you should be in the next moment could get you killed.  Could, could create a source of, of violence for people for whom you're responsible, and there's always a choice.  And it was a choice that we shouldn't have had to make, well perhaps that's why my father wanted to be in the law because he wanted to help change what the choices would be.  He went to University of Maryland Law School [University of Maryland School of Law in Baltimore, Maryland], I believe he was Valedictorian there, and he became a lawyer.  He opened his own firm for a short while and he was a civil rights attorney, he worked with many business people in the African American community in Baltimore.  And Baltimore is an interesting place, because there were a lot--there was a growing black middle class, growing group of conscious black people who were striving.  Many also who had money, maybe their parents didn't you know usually--the definition of poor then was very different than the definition of poor now.  They just didn't have money; they weren't poor in spirit or in their understanding of how to live, but there were also some affluent black people in Baltimore.  There was a very, a growing social scene and political scene in Baltimore, as my parents were growing up.  And my, my mother likes to tell this story that my father was written up as the most eligible bachelor in Baltimore at some point.  And they were married for forty-one years before he passed so.
Story_ID: 103263
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the fact that your mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] said there was a write-up about your father [Harry Augustus Cole] being an eligible bachelor.
Speaker 2: The most eligible bachelor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Baltimore [Maryland].  Actually my parents knew each other when they were young.  My father was nine years older than my mother, so he was old at first when, when they knew each other.  I think they knew each other when they were kids, maybe he was a teenager and she was a kid.  She used to wear pigtails, he used to say she had her pigtails; she was sitting on the steps on her house on Gold Street.  And he would come and sit on the steps with her and talk to her.  So I think he had his eyes on her when she was young, but it actually took, both of them were previously married when they were very young.  I don't know anything about my father's first wife, he, like she didn't exist she was invisible.  I know a little bit about my mother's first husband, but basically, it's like those relationships didn't exist.  They were meant for each other, but it took a minute to figure it out.  They dated for seven years before they got married, and my mother, you know that thing you better you-know-what or get off the pot (laughing)?  She said at a certain point, she's like "This is enough, Harry Cole (laughing).  If you want me, we gone get married," so they did, and they were married for forty-one years before my father passed.  And they had a really great life together you know they, they enjoyed life together and it was really interesting to see--for me to see growing up what it was like to have two parents in the home.  Now I didn't know it then but I know now because there's so many people who don't have that experience.  You know you see the squabbles, you see how they get resolved, you see how parents su--, the roles that parents have and how they support one another, or not.  And you know and how you adjust when those things, when things aren't working, and its certainty's made a difference for me to understand what life can be like as a family.  We always shared two meals together, everyday, we had breakfast together and we had dinner together.  And during those meals, we talked about our day, we, we had to eat properly (laughing) we--you couldn't get up from the table before it was time.  And all those little things that I'm learning people just don't learn now as much, so I actually teach those things to people.  Because I've--I realize the value of them and want families to, to craft that quality time and make the time to spend with each other.  Talking with each other and break, you know, over a meal.
Story_ID: 103264
Speaker 1: Anyhow my dad [Harry Augustus Cole] decided at some point along the way that he was going to be an attorney, he was a criminal attorney and civil rights attorney for a long time.  And interestingly, you know being a criminal attorney; he became on the right side of many of the people who were involved in whatever the world of crime was in Baltimore [Maryland].  Which became kind of protection for him, I don't think he thought of it that way, but all those people looked out for him and our family forever, because he took care of them.  I don't remember what year, but during the same time that many--during the Civil Rights Movement, when many African American leaders were either being killed or compromised in one way or another, there was a group of attorneys who were made judges.  And it was around the same time that Thurgood Marshall became a judge, now I think it was a good and bad thing.  Good in that he was an opportunity to have a different kind of impact on the government and you know through the legislative branch.  But also it was slightly disempowering, because then you couldn't be political anymore, so some of the greatest political minds became judges.  Now my father used it to best of his ability, he, he bumped up along the way in the court system.  And ultimately became the first black judge on the Maryland Court of Appeals, which is like the Supreme Court of the State.  And you can imagine first anything, like he became, by the way, before that he was the first black state senator in Maryland.  And I think assistant attorney general--I don't know he had went--I, I can't remember every position.  But he, he was a first in many positions in the legislative branch.  And then he moved to the judicial branch, and was a judge for over thirty years.  So when he moved to the Maryland Court of Appeals, one of the stories that he told at a certain point, after he retired, was about the restroom.  He said that there in the restroom, it's an old court in Annapolis [Maryland] and he was very excited and they wore red robes.  And he really got dressed up to do this work and, and he thought that getting dressed up was important, he always thought was important because it, it helped prepare you for your day.  If you tended to yourself and really dressed your best, and in this case you put on the robes of justice and these robes were red robes.  Well and you brush whatever little hair he had left at that time, (laughing) so he was in the restroom and in the restroom, there was a brush and a comb.  And he says great you know I'll brush my hair before I go into--or on the bench.  Well one of the other judges was in the restroom at one point when he brushed his hair.  And he saw the judge look at him in horror and disbelief that Harry Cole, the black judge was using the brush, and after that day, there were never brushes and combs in the bathroom anymore.  The subtle things that happened that just show "Oh, you're using it I can never touch that," and you can imagine how hurtful that was.  Here this is the highest court in the state; this is way after the Civil Rights Movement.  I mean I'm sure that he was appointed to this court in the '70s [1970s] and probably later '70's [1970's].  And still you know the beliefs remain ingrained in you know people might try their best even on the court to do what's fair, but fair remains relative.  Which is why it's so important for us to lobby for the people who share our views for the Supreme Court and for any position legislative or judicial.  And I learned that from my father that it is important, not so much what political party you belong to, but that you pay attention to what the issues are.  You pay attention to what the political candidates and judicial candidates are talking about.  What do they really believe, and you learn about them, because these people represent us.
Story_ID: 103265
Speaker 1: So my father [Harry Augustus Cole] then had--this, this is a great story.  My father had many mentees, he was, he always offering wisdom to other people, we really learned more about this after he died, because he walked the talk but didn't talk about what he did, he just did it, he helped a lot of people.  Well one person that he helped a lot we did know because he was almost like a son to my father and he was at our house a lot.   He--his name is Robert Bell [HM Robert Mack Bell], he is now the Chief Justice of the Maryland Court of Appeals, the Chief Justice is a black man.  And my father was instrumental in helping him to get to that position.  How to how--what I remember growing up is Judge Bell came to Baltimore [Maryland], I don't know where he came from, but he came to Balt--Baltimore and he--we thought he was so cool 'cause he kind of dressed like Super Fly.  He had you know the, the bell bottom-suit, it was a suit bell bottom suit, wide lapel, bright tie and he always carried a little clutch bag, you know like the Super Fly bag.  And he had it under his arm, and the big hat it--I mean, he was Super Fly (laughing) he came--I remember, I'll never forget him coming to our house dressed like this.  And we loved seeing him 'cause he looked cool, and my father said, "You can look like that if you want, but it depends on what you want.  If you want to grow in your career as a judge in this town, you can't continue to dress like that, because you will not be taken seriously.  And you will not rise up to the position that your intellect and your academic achievement and your ability can lead you.  So you need to decide what the choice is that you wanna make" and we were there when he was talking to him about this.  And it took him a minute (laughing) you know 'cause he wanted--he was young and he was fly (laughing) and he slowly but surely became more conservative not all--he never became all the way conservative, he still carries his little clutch bag whatever men call that bag.  But he became more conservative or more appropriate to the position of the judge in Baltimore, and probably judge just about anywhere.  And so over the years, my father groomed him, you know he's one of the smartest men I ever met and so they would have wonderful discussions about the issues of the day, you know you're not supposed to talk about cases.  And my father never-I, I don't know I mean I wasn't in the room at other times, but I don't believe he ever broke the law consciously.  I remember one point somebody gave him a telephone you know just--and it and during--when we were growing up the telephones all came from the telephone company.  It wasn't like now when you can go to the store and buy a phone, so the phones only came from the telephone company.  And somebody--one of the people, who was grateful for the work he had done for them over the years, gave him a phone.  I remember seeing that phone--see he accepted so that he would, wouldn't be rude to the person, that phone sat on the table never did he plug it in.  Because he (laughing) didn't want it ever to be said that he used something that could have been stolen, he didn't know if it was stolen, he didn't buy himself from the phone company, so it didn't get plugged in.  So now I have to tell you something, I used to think he was ultra paranoid and ridiculous because, "Come on, it's a telephone Daddy."  Well, look at what's happening to all these people as we look at all these political leaders, legislative leaders, religious leaders who are just being knocked down because of something that they did that is against the law, that is immoral that is one of those things.  That didn't happen to my father, and he believed that you live an honest life to the best of your ability, everybody makes mistakes.  If you make mistakes you admit the mistakes that you make, and you change your life so that you're not apologizing again, again and again for the same thing.  You make a mistake, you figure out how you don't make that mistake again, and you move on.  And I'll tell you I, I really appreciate it now, because it's, it's those kinds of things that are getting people in trouble.  You know the, the car service that you weren't supposed to use or whatever it might be, so.
Story_ID: 103266
Speaker 1: Father [Harry Augustus Cole] was very interesting.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was an interesting man, and he was a lot of fun, he love--like I say, he loved to dance and I--you know one of the sad realities of our life is my father had diabetes, and it runs many black families and it runs in mine.  And as disciplined as he was about his work, he was not about his health, and we could see the difference.  My father had an amazing wardrobe of clothes that he had made for him over the years, so we--when we went through his walk in closet, we could see when he was a [Maryland] state senator, he was physically active and moving around, and he was much slimmer.  After he became a judge [on the Maryland Court of Appeals], he gained a lot of weight, 'cause you're sitting a lot.  And that sitting and gaining weight really made the diabetes kick in and that ultimately is what killed him.  And I remember as he was very, very ill, he was not able to walk anymore--again, I said my father was a man of great stature.  He walked into the room and everybody looked, and he was very well-known and respected and here he was lying in a bed, unable to move and at a certain point, they started cutting.  And they cut his foot and I remember my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] made me and my sisters look at his foot, "We like we don't wanna see that man," and she said "Yes you, you will see this.  Because you need to know this can happen to you if you don't take the right precautions in the way that you exercise and eat and, you know can happen anyway.  'Cause diabetes can happen in that way, anyway but you can make other choices" and I remember--so we looked and we saw what the--how the disease can ravage your body.  And I remember sitting with my father and what broke his spirit was something he said to me, "Now I realize I will never be able to teach my grandson how to dance."  And at this point--my sister has three children, my younger sister, and her second child was born, but he was very young, he was probably less than a year old.  And he taught us to dance, he taught my niece who was old enough to learn and the way he taught us to dance we would stand on his feet as little kids and he would, he would move us around with his feet and so we learned even before, you know, we were really little.  And he realized that this was what hurt him the most, not that he was gonna die, but that he couldn't pass on this great gift that he had learned that brought so much joy to him and our family.  So you just never know you never know what's going to be the most hurtful thing about your life ending but family is what it was for him.  You know he had his stellar career, he's written up in all the history books, but for him family would--was number one.  And he was able somehow to find that balance, which is something that I seek you know as a career woman and how do you find the balance when you work a lot of hours, and have you know, have a husband and a child and it's an interesting challenge.  And I look back on my parents to see how they did it to see how I can do it.
Story_ID: 103267
Speaker 1: Okay, your mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] and father [Harry Augustus Cole], very interesting people and I'm glad you shared that with us.  But now we're gonna go into talking about you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So now you're mother and father had been married how long before you were born?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, but let's see.  So I'm the middle child, so my oldest sister is Susan [Cole], and I think they were married a couple of years before she was born.  So then and she's two years older than me, so let's say four or five years they were married before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We lived in a traditionally black neighborhood when we were--when I was born--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In Maryland?
Speaker 2: In Mar--in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Baltimore.
Speaker 2: In--it's not called downtown but you know one of the older black neighborhoods, my parents owned a house there and they moved to what was the suburbs, still in the city, on the outskirts of the city to Forest Park Avenue, which was a developing community of black professionals.  And so there were--our next door neighbors, the husband was a doctor; there were doctors, lawyers, educators in this neighborhood.  I was born and then my youngest sister, Stephanie [Cole] was born, and we grew up going to public school, my parents believed in going to public school.  We went to Dickey Hill Elementary School [now Dickey Hill Elementary/Middle School] and one of my greatest memories of going to this school has to do with my name.  Because there was a commercial that was really popular when I was in elementary school and it said "Harriette, the Ajax cleanser shakes out white, turns blue."  This was--Ajax must've made a lot of money that year because it was a popular commercial.  And the children used to chant this at me as I was walking up the steps so let me describe myself.  I was always the tallest one, I was always the skinniest one I wore glasses.  Trust me back then it was not fashionable (laughing) and I had long braids, so I was the egghead child.  You know my sense of style did not come that young and never mind no clothes fit me, I was so skinny that my mother made all of my clothes.  So I didn't even have whatever the trends were, you know I had these long skinny feet, I had the corniest shoes, whatever shoes could fit me.  So I was just like a walking example of somebody could talk about me.  And you know how kids can be, I came home one day crying, my feelings were so hurt, the kids had chanted this at me and I told my mother.  And she said "What are you crying about?"  I told her, "They're making fun of my name, I hate my name, my name is so old fashioned," she said, "Let me tell you about your name."  She said, "First of all, you know that you're named for your father," and she reminded me of all my father's accomplishments and how well respected he was in the community.  She said, "but you're not just named for him, you get your name and the spelling of your name from your great, great grandmother on my mother's side."  So her--my grandmother's grandmother was named Harriette Ann and you know when that--when my mother would call me Harriette Ann, I'd say "Oh, it's so country."  Well let me tell you why you're named Harriette Ann.  Harriette Ann was born, I don't know when, but she was alive during slavery, she, she somehow bought her freedom.  And she was married to a man who was enslaved and walked from Calvert County [Maryland] to Annapolis [Maryland], which is a really long walk, after she saved up whatever money she had to buy the freedom of her husband and children.  And my mother said "The next time somebody chants something negative about your name, remember you come from a legacy of powerful people, both sides of the family.  And all of that is in your name," I never cried again.  And I wanted to make sure people spelled my name right after that, because I realized that it wasn't just an old-fashioned name, it was a name that came with great power.
Story_ID: 103268
Speaker 1: I was always a good student, I was really always an A student, and I wanted to be like my daddy [Harry Augustus Cole] so bad, he was the Valedictorian, and I wanted to be the Valedictorian.  Through--I did very well in all of the schools, I went to, to--in junior high school [Greenspring Junior High School in Baltimore, Maryland] I went to school that just had opened in Baltimore [Mother], so it was the first year.  And I like it, the only thing is that the principal lived behind me, so you know my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] used to talk about she had eyes in the back of her head.  And I remember as a little girl, I would look for the eyes, you know, 'cause my mother, the way she would discipline us at first was to open her eyes really big, and she had hazel eyes.  She has hazel eyes, so you know sort of a greenish brown and I'm like "Ooh, those eyes are looking at me."  So I thought where, I couldn't see them in the back of her head; I learned it was the neighbor's, it was the people from the church, it was all the people who would report back to my mother.  Before I would get home from school, she would have a report if something went well, and if something didn't.  Mr. Patterson lived behind us and he was the principal, like great if I even wanted to get in trouble, I couldn't.  I do remember one time experimenting with cursing, because I had liked a boy and he didn't like me back and I yelled at him and--I was a product of bussing, we were bused to the school.  And I was standing in the bus line and was mean to me and I yelled the F-word at him.  I didn't even know how to say it good, but you know I was mad and hurt, and so I wanted to act like the other kids (chuckling) who did that.  The man in charge of the bus line came over to me and said "You know you're not supposed to say that," my mother knew before I got home.  Now I thought about this why did he ta--tell on me, there were so many other kids who did this, but why he told on me, I now know because he knew I would care.  He knew it would matter to my parents and it did, I didn't do it again (laughing), so I went to Western High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 103269
Speaker 1: Let's just step back--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: To--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Your elementary years
Speaker 2: Oh sure, okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me what was your very first memory as a child?
Speaker 2: My very memory as a child is earlier than elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister, Susan [Cole], my big sister, taught me how to read, and by four I could read, because she was--she had school (laughing) with me.  And she, she wanted to make sure that I said the letters properly that I could do anything she could do.  And my sister, you know big--she was a big sister to this day and she was very, very bossy, and I had to follow her direction.  So she taught me how to read, I remember in our home she did that.  And then I remember when I was four, my sister Stephanie [Cole] was born, and she became my child.  And even though she's grown with three children, she's still my child (laughing) and my memories are of family from a very, very young age.  In school, I tell you what I loved about school was the learning part.  I actually felt traumatized by the social part, from the beginning because kids teased me so bad about everything.  And I really thought I was the only one who got teased, I now know that everybody gets teased.  And so family was the balance, when the kids were mean to me, I would come home and tell my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] and or not, she would figure it out and you know my big sister Susan was ready to beat em up (laughing).  And Stephanie [Cole] was one who just loved me anyway and, and it was just really the balance of family with school that made a difference.  But I believe that the reason that I was such a good student is that I would escape in my school work.  And I would escape in my writing, I kept a journal at a very young age, and when things would bother me, I would write poetry.  When people were mean to me, I would write stories, and I would, would study and I would write.  And I had volumes of my little bound books that my mother years later said you really haven't lived here for a long time, you need to come and get these things.  I became a good writer by writing, and discovered this is something that I really like.  And I, I tell young people a lot whatever the negatives are you can figure out how to turn it into a positive.  And I really have been able to do that, I'm sure that my staying an A student was because that was my escape.  Well you know do well in school, and by the way I didn't--it wasn't like I was bragging about it, I say it now, I didn't want people to know because that just made the students hate you more.  Oh and you're smart too?  You know? (laughing)
Story_ID: 103270
Speaker 1: So I recall in junior high school [Greenspring Junior High School in Baltimore, Maryland] --a turning point for me came in junior high school.  I was friends with a girl from Kindergarten to seventh grade and with a group of girls and this was like my best friend group.  And one day, the teacher in junior high school put my A up on the wall and asked me to stay after class, and I was mortified 'cause I never wanted to kids to know.  And my group of friends I wanted them to wait up for me and they didn't, and I called out to them after, after she released me.  And they didn't answer, and I called louder and they didn't answer, by the way, during this time I was very shy, come--I did not behave like I do now.  I had a very soft voice, I had to find the power in my voice and they still didn't answer.  And I followed, I ran up to them and they literally acted as if I wasn't there, it was the most painful traumatic experience I ever had as a young person.  And it turns out that they had decided that one day we--they weren't going to talk to me.  No, what kind of cruel hoax was this and it was spearheaded by the girl who I thought--who we called each other best friends.  And so I went home traumatized and my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] said to me, you know--and I wanted to know why, she said, "Sometimes you don't get the answer to why.  But if people treat you like this you walk away, then they're not your friends."  And she really helped me to walk away because I was trying to convince them to still be my friends.  She's like people who do that don't deserve to be your friends and that--why I mention it is it was a turning point.  Thank God for mother she let me know no, everybody doesn't--it-people don't have to stay your friends for life.  And you can forgive them, and by the way it took me years to forgive them, because it hurt so deeply.  What I did was I cut my hair, I had long pigtails, I cut my hair to about two inches long and had a little short curly afro.  I was always interested in fashion that became the turning point or me.  And by the way this is like 13, 13's the worst age for everybody, I think; I got involved in fashion and music at this point.  I got I was--I could sing I was in the choir I had started playing violin, my group of friends was all--they were all gonna take Spanish.  And we had agreed to do that together, I changed and took French instead, I chose to follow my own path, independent of them, and to pursue the interest that I had had from a young child.  When I was writing, I was also drawing fashion, never well.
Story_ID: 102988
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna step back to your primary years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me what it was like during holidays at your house on you know you have told us that your family was very important to you.  What were holidays like, what special events and, just daily life really?
Speaker 2: So holidays were dress up time,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a formal dining room and it was our job to help set the table.  We would set the table the night before for Thanksgiving and for Christmas with beautiful white linen tablecloths and napkins.  And we learned how to iron these (laughing) which is quite a job and how to set the table properly, we would clean the silver.  'Cause my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] had silver and all--there's so much silver to clean, so all the preparation before the meal really making a beautiful table was a big part of the responsibility of the girls.  And we would, depending upon how old we were, we would have different tasks, but cleaning the silver, setting the table, making sure that everything was in the right place.  You know pulling out the glasses, the glasses, there were certain glasses that we only used for Thanksgiving and Christmas and any of the few times that we had formal meals.  And by the way, we dressed formally, as well, we had to dress up.  And you know we fixed our hair in a dressy way and it was dress up, from the youngest age.  So we had to learn how to eat and not make a mess at the table, and as we grew up and we invited boys, they would have to wear a jacket, a shirt and a tie, or they were not invited to come to the table.  And so (laughing) we had to prep the boys because you know that was not necessarily the way that their parents had taught them that they were to dress.  But daddy was not gone let a young man sit at the table improperly dressed, so that was important.  We didn't really help that much with the cooking, but a little bit, like we would keep my mother company.  And it would often be my mother cooking and my, my father's sisters would help, so we would help like to snap the green beans and shuck corn if we would have corn.   But corn would be more like for summer meal, but occasionally we would have corn, but we would help with what we could.  We help tear the lettuce so that with those kinds of things we would help do--and tell stories, we would tell stories while the meal was being prepared.  My mother always cooked healthy food and so the--you know something that had some ham hocks in it--my aunts would bring something that had some flavor to it you know (laughing) because we had-our, our meal was always a little bit bland, and we grew to like that and it certainly was healthy.  But you know they had to bring something else up in there (laughing) some of the traditional Southern flavor, including sweet potato pie, and the corn pudding again would be something that.  Aunt Audrey had a recipe and my mother's friend, Aunt Margaret; and you know everybody was an Aunt, even if they weren't related.  So Aunt Margaret had a recipe that was a little healthier, Stephanie [Cole], my sister has created a hybrid of those.  So it's, it's healthier than the super down-home version, but it's still corn pudding, so (laughing) it's good.  So we would help to set the table, help to bring out the food and help to clear the table and wash the dishes.  My father typically would say the grace and my mother--my father would--was always formal with the grace, my mother would add something and there would all--by the time she was finished, she would be crying a little bit somebody would have some tears, because we were, we were thanking God for all the great things that had happened over the course of the year.  And of course the grace could go a little long and Harrette Cole was ready to eat (laughing) but it was a lot of fun, and just a beautiful setting.
Story_ID: 102989
Speaker 1: My mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] would order a centerpiece, some beautiful floral arrangement and the other thing I remember about preparation, is that my father [Harry Augustus Cole] loved music.  And he would always play some great jazz music, Count Basie, Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan; you would hear that piped through the house.  Because somewhere in the early '70s [1970s], what--there was a, there was a type of stereo system that came out that was called Quadraphonic sound.  Okay, so this gave you the ability to have speakers upstairs--'cause our basement was outfitted as full party area, it--we lived in a ranch style house and the basement was the size of the upstairs.  My parents used to have band, live music downstairs sometimes and all kinds of great events.  But for the holidays, from early in the morning, my father would play music and different kinds of music would play upstairs with this Quadraphonic sound.  We had a piano, my mother has a beautiful soprano voice and she can play the piano and so at different points during the day, she would sit and play and we would all sing, and you sing Christmas music.  And Stephanie [Cole], my younger sister also has a beautiful voice; she sings on the choir now and has from a little girl.  And she sang at my wedding, she sings at people's funerals, I cannot say that I sing that well, I was on the choir in our church growing up, and, as an alto.  I tried to play the piano; I played the violin I play the violin well enough because you know I was disciplined about learning, so I played the violin well enough to actually be in the All-City Orchestra in Baltimore [Maryland] in high school.  So I played from elementary school through high school, but I never learned how to read music well.  So I was never good enough to be really good at it, but I did it (laughing) Stephanie [Cole] has a beautiful melodic voice, my mother has a beautiful melodic voice, Susan [Cole] wanted to be in a band.  She wanted to be like Earth, Wind and Fire and travel around my country, my father said "Absolutely not" (laughing).  But we can all sing fairly well, and we would sing together, that's one of my great memories of being at home.  And we still do sing together, whenever all the girls are together, we sing together, sometimes a capella, we love watching "The Sound of Music" and know all of the songs to "The Sound of Music" and when we were last at home together in Baltimore, we were all singing a capella in the kitchen.  And my husband, George [HM George Chinsee], is in the other room going "Okay, the girls are at it," but he enjoyed listening (laughing).  I also remember when we were very young my Aunt Pearl [Pearl Cole Brackett], who is my father's sister, would have Christmas dinner at her house.  This was just for a few years, what I loved about dinner at her house, is that she had a children's table, so we were really young and it was a low table where the children would sit.  And we would dress up in these beautiful dresses, we had our own centerpiece, our own glasses and we got to behave like the adults but be together at the table.  And really did perfectly, because we were--felt so honored that we had our own table, that's my memory of having Christmas dinner at her house.  She was like my father; she became a superintendent [assistant superintendent of community schools] of the Baltimore City School System [Baltimore City Public Schools].  She got a Ph.D. from Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut], you know for a black woman to get a Ph.D. was a huge thing back then, and she was one of the few who did.
Story_ID: 102990
Speaker 1: The other ritual that I remember so well which is really more of a daily ritual but it happened in the summer.  We had a porch on our house and--an enclosed porch and on Saturday mornings in the summer, the delicacy that we would have for breakfast was soft shell crabs, 'cause you know "Maryland is for crabs," that used to be our motto.  And we would have soft shell crabs and my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] just still prepare them the best; I've never had it better.  And I've tried cooking them for my husband [HM George Chinsee], I do fairly well, and trust me I'm not a cook, but there few specialties that I've learned and that's one of them.  But our special meal would be soft shell crabs and eggs and, and those big beautiful tomatoes and--so it would be more like brunch.  With homemade iced tea and we would just enjoy ourselves having a leisurely breakfast on Saturday mornings.  The other thing with crabs, see outside, when I think about growing up in Baltimore [Maryland], we had, we had the milkman who come and deliver milk in a little pail, I mean that's gone with the wind.  But there was also the crab man, the crab man would come he had an old station wagon and bushels of crabs.  And he would deliver live crabs to your house, once a week, or whenever you ordered them.  And I just remember on bright, hot sunny weekend morning, the crab man would come and inevitably a crab would get loose.  And you would see the crab you know being a side, a side walker running for dear life and he would have his tongs and you know we would just watch it.  "Oh you can't get near the crab, 'cause it'll get you," but we see the crab side walking down the street trying to get away.  That was just really fun to have the experience of the crabs.  The other thing I remember from growing up in the neighborhood [Baltimore, Maryland], we--our neighborhood was a horseshoe, like that--just the way that the neighborhood was built.  So we were in the front of the horseshoe, over the years, the neighborhood developed, the horseshoe developed and we had a Neighborhood Association.  All the kids would get together, but it still had a bit of woodsiness to it and so very naturally wild--the wildflowers that would grow were honeysuckle flowers.  So I remember the smell of honeysuckle, and whenever I smell honeysuckle, I think of my neighborhood in Baltimore.  And we don't have that home anymore; my mother sold the house after my father [Harry Augustus Cole] passed, because she just didn't want to live in that big house without him.  And her prep was to, to help us understand you know, "It's not like your life is evaporating, your childhood is evaporating because I'm moving from this house, home is where I am.  So I'm gonna move to this place and that's where home will be," and it really is, it was amazing.  She prepped us and it worked (laughing), but we still go back to the neighborhood sometimes to see it.
Speaker 2: What, what was the name of the street that you lived on?
Speaker 1: Forest Park Avenue.
Speaker 2: Avenue, okay
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 102991
Speaker 1: And your community, you said, were people of different professions.
Speaker 2: It was it was a professional, I guess, now it would be called the upper middle class black families.  But what's funny is almost every single person from that neighborhood had parents who were so-called "poor."  So this was that movement that when, when there was no more segregation and we were allowed to live in other neighborhoods.  And there were African American families, professionals, who had enough resources to be able to afford to buy homes in these other communities, there began an exodus from the inner city.  And we now know that that had pluses and minuses, there was something really powerful about the leaders and people who weren't leaders being in the community together and growing in the community together, it was very nice.
Story_ID: 102992
Speaker 1: So do you have any other memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: I do.  When--every year for New Year's Eve, my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] would throw a big party, my father's birthday is January first, so he would bring the New Year with his friends at a black tie party at our house.  And he would decorate for weeks, beforehand and often have a live band and it would be catered or else my mother would cook so much food, but soon after it became catered.  But I remembered that the job that my sisters' and I had was to greet the guest.  We would dress up, we would greet the guest as they came to the door and take their coats and hang them up, and we would have so much fun trying on the ladies' fur coats, after they went downtown--downstairs.  We also would be invited at a certain point to come down for a while and we would dance with daddy.  So and sometimes you know and there were three of us so we would dance a couple of daddy's friends and then we would hear the music all night and wish that we were there for the whole party because you could hear it from upstairs.  But you know it was a black tie party so we got to see how beautiful people can look when they get dressed up.  And it was invitation only, my father explained that people don't just come to your house, you invite them, they have to RSVP, and you don't have to invite everybody to everything.  Which was a really good lesson, and not always an easy one, because there would be people, "Why didn't you invite me?"  But he invited--they invited certain people at certain times, and we learned that.  And I also remember--great memory of my mother is her in front of her dressing table, and just--she never has worn a lot of makeup but we would see her applying makeup and doing her hair and getting dressed and really showing how she appreciated herself and the preparation for the day.  And it's something that is carried over that we do too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102993
Speaker 1: Your elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Dickey Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Dickey Hill Elementary School [now Dickey Hill Elementary/Middle School in Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Dickey Hill Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your, your school days there, are there any teachers that you can remember that was special to you, treated you good, treated you bad (laughing)?
Speaker 2: You know I wish I could remember the teachers in elementary school.  I remember the elementary school, and I remember that I liked the teachers, I don't recall having issues with teachers, but honestly I can't remember who they were.  There was one teacher actually, Mrs. Cosma [ph.], when I think of it in the fourth grade.  And why do I remember her, because she was a gruff lady (laughing) it's always the ones who get on your nerves, right?  But it was the fourth grade and in the fourth grade, I, I--in my early years, I had several operations and this time I had a needle in my foot, who knows how?  And so it was removed and I was on crutches for a while, so I was out of school for a while.  And I remember that grouchy Mrs. Cosma [ph.] had to make allowances for my being out of school for a while, and she did, but I'm sure that there were wonderful teachers who are probably in Baltimore right now and I can't remember their names.  You know the trauma, the trauma stories are the one you often (laughing) remember the most.  She was fine, but she was grouchy (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I do remember that it was a really pretty school and near the school, one of my girlfriends, Billie Cox, lived around the corner.  We used to go play at her house sometimes; my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] was very active in the PTA [Parent-Teachers Association], so she was always present, and, and I, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: And this was about 1966.
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: Through the sixth grade, then you went to junior high school [Greenspring Junior High School in Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: And I went to Junior High School.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your Junior High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mr. Patterson's going to be so mad, but I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a new school, it had just been built and it--and we were bused to the school.  It was public school, but it far away, and just the experience of busing was, it was an insane experience.  Like everybody's on this bus and there were all kinds of you know children from all different backgrounds.  The boys trying to be bad boys, the bad boys trying to pester the good boys, and just drama.  I felt like I was part of a drama everyday (laughing) being on the bus.  Which was kind of exciting, but also scary (laughing) and it was in junior high school where I got involved in the choir and in playing the violin and I, I just remember it was a beautiful school and even as socially I did not care for it. I excelled academically, I was, I was always good in school and in junior high school it was not an exception.
Story_ID: 102994
Speaker 1: In high school, I went to Western High School, which is, I believe the oldest all girls public high school in the United States.  I believe it's still all girls, I'm not sure legally they were able to keep it, but I think so, and I was in A Course, they have an A Course, a B Course, and a C Course.  I was in the A Course and so that was an international group of students, which--actually Baltimore [Maryland] really didn't have a big international group, but in this case, I remember there was an Asian student, a Jamaican student maybe there were five at most African American students.  Most of the students were white, and I was one of them, and the teacher I remember from high school the most is Mr. Ray.  He was my English teacher, and he still teaches at Western.  He was an amazing English teacher and really helped me to love literature, love reading and writing about literature.  I always loved writing and reading, but he took it to a new level, and helped me to realize that this could be my passion.  And it turned that English was my major in college, and I began to perfect the art of writing, being in his class.  Not the art of handwriting, though, I'm told that I have the worst handwriting that could possibly exist (laughing).  Because I scribble scrabble you know trying to write as quickly as I'm thinking, which never quite works, so (laughing) thank goodness for computers.  But I definitely appreciated him a lot and just encouraging me to pursue writing and reading all the different masters that exist.  I, I don't remember my art teacher's name at Western but I loved art.  You know I really thought I was gonna be an artist, and trust me that is not my calling (laughing).  But I love to paint, and I love to draw, I really love to draw fashion, I was always interested in fashion.  And you know my older sister, Susan [Cole], was a model when--by the time we were in high school, but I was the tall one.  And so I was like well maybe I can do this too, and in high school I joined the modeling club that was in the school.  And this really became a great outlet for me, and shy as I was, somehow I could perform.  And I was in all the runway shows and then later, when I went to college and beyond, I discovered that the clothes that would fit me were the designer samples.  Because they were really small, so my, my great revenge for all the kids who used to, to taunt me was that I was able for many years to wear you know some of the best designers that exist.  Their samples, and half the time, they would let me borrow them, and I didn't even have to pay for them, I could just wear them and give them back.  And I loved the idea that you could wear something once and not wear it again (laughing) so it was perfect, it was my divine revenge.  And it began in high school that I was in the modeling troop, and I also joined a little sorority that was called The Xinos [ph.], when I was in high school.  I later became a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] when I was in college.
Speaker 2: What, what year are--you in high school?
Speaker 1: I graduated in '79 [1979] so '75 [1975] to '79 [1979].
Story_ID: 102995
Speaker 1: And I graduated [from Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland], remember I wanted to be the valedictorian, I didn't quite get there, but there were about 800 students in the whole class.  Meaning that A, B and C Courses together, and I graduated fourteen.  I became a Peabody Fellow something that, I think they give fifteen of these awards.  So I got one, which is really exciting you know, so I did achieve very high academic honors and I was proud and my parents were really proud too.  And high school was fun, it--high school was next to Western is next to a school at the time it was a boys' school which is called Poly [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute] and so we would go out in the courtyard during lunch hour.  And that's how we would see boys (laughing) so my first boyfriend I met at Poly and we actually are still friends; we've remained friends all these years.  And I met my husband [HM George Chinsee] working on a project that this fellow, his name is Eric Easter that he developed when we were adults.  So it's true that you can remain friends with people, and we've been friends--we I think we dated when we were sixteen (chuckling) and are still friends today.
Speaker 2: Did you go to the prom?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, went to the prom, my mother--every prom I went to, my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] made my dress.  And it's really funny so this point I thought that I was very fashionable, I remember one prom that Eric and I went to I had these glasses, so this is in the '70s [1970s], you know these big kind of rock star looking glasses, a glass--plastic frame glasses that were blue with a kind of speckled design in them.  And with my initials in the corner of the lens because that what was popular (laughing) then and my mother--we found a chiffon fabric that was a blue tiny floral that matched my glasses.  And so I had this gown made by my mom, and I, I saw the picture again recently and it's so funny (laughing).  The '70s [1970s] were not known for the best of fashion but I thought that I was the most fashionable girl.  I also just regarding glasses, one of my girlfriends from my neighborhood her, her mom was the younger mom in the group, and she was definitely the hip mom, like she smoked cigarettes and cursed and wore glasses.   And they were fashionable, so we thought she was the coolest person (laughing) and Aunt Sarah is her name, she had a wardrobe of glasses, and I swore that I was gonna be like Aunt Sarah when I grew up.  That I was gonna get these kids back for teasing me, I was gonna have the most fabulous glasses, and I in fact do have a collection of eyewear just like her.  And I was able to tell her because you know she's, she's still close to my family, and one of the books that I wrote, I even acknowledge her in the book for telling me that four eyes could be fabulous (laughing).
Story_ID: 102996
Speaker 1: Before we go further than your high school [Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland], because your father [Harry Augustus Cole] was who he was in the community [Baltimore, Maryland], do you remember your family talking about any of the things that were going on in the climate of the country as [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated or [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: So I actually remember, I have a vivid memory of when King was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was very young, I was--this was way before high school [Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland], it was '68 [1968] right when, was it '68 [1968] when he, right.  So I was a little girl, and my father was at work and my grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland] was at work.  And my grandmother was coming to our house so she was leaving a very affluent white neighborhood to come through, and she came on the bus.  So to come through the ghetto to our neighborhood, which was in the suburbs, and my father was a judge at this point, he was in a--a judge in the criminal courts.  He was putting a lot of people in jail for crimes, and the riots had just broken out in Baltimore.  And what had been said was that you put a black flag on your doorstep or like a black piece of cloth if you're African American and, like Passover, the rioters would pass over your house, so we put it on our house, but I was so worried as a little girl, I was pacing my house the entire day.  Because I knew my grandmother, who looked white, was gonna be coming into a black neighborhood on the bus, so she was unprotected and she was a tiny little person.  And my father who was responsible for putting so many black people in jail, people might be mad at him too.  And I thought the both of them were gonna get killed, I had heard you know on the news you saw King had been killed.  I don't even know if I knew killed was, really, but I knew it was really violent and bad.  And I thought my, my grandmother and my father were gonna get killed.  And I was pacing the whole day and praying that as a little girl that my family would come home safely, and they did.  And that was, that was how I was affected you know because it was, it was such a weird thing and it's true about riots, always you know the people, the people you don't really want to hurt, are the people who get hurt.  I think with the, the intensity of the rage that happens during a riot, you end up with the wrong people being affected.  And I was afraid that the wrong people would be my family.
Story_ID: 102997
Speaker 1: So now we're in 1979.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're in your senior year of high school [Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland], and you talk about being in the modeling club.  So tell me about the modeling club did it influence you to decide to be a model or did you think about something else to go to college to become?
Speaker 2: Well, so the modeling club helped me to gain confidence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was really good for building self-confidence.  As I said, I was very shy, I was considered the egghead I was the one who would kind of hide in the corner a little bit.  As I got older, not as a little girl but as I got older and you know you feel kind of clumsy and awkward, and modeling became sort of my performance escape.  And I became good at it because my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] always had "us sit up straight girls" you know "walk, you know walk with pride, walk with elegance" you know all these things that we learned that were really good tools for being a model.  So I put those into practice and it was fun and it was also a way of gaining a bit of popularity, that suddenly I wasn't a source of ridicule anymore.  But "Oh, she's cute," you know because as a model, the thing is the, the funny odd thing is as a model, it's great if you're thin, you look better in the clothes.  It's easier to, to do whatever it is that is asked of you when you are the size that I was.  And so I began to realize it wasn't a negative, how I looked wasn't a negative.  Now my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] had been told--telling me the whole while that, but you know you need to hear it from somebody else.  So I gained confidence and discovered that this was something that I wanted to do more.  I also met a fashion designer, the first real fashion designer that I ever met, is a man named Lenny York, he's actually younger than I am, so he was a young teenager designing clothes in Baltimore [Maryland] at the time, and I started doing fashion shows for him.  So outside of school, I began doing other little fashion shows and they would be in different churches.  You know the churches at that time, really had a lot of fashion shows and they loved to celebrate young people in whatever we were doing.  So I don't know whether we were good, but we were having fun and the adults were celebrating us, and we loved that.
Story_ID: 102998
Speaker 1: So I knew before I graduated from high school [Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland] that I wanted to pursue fashion as a model in some way, but it absolutely never was a consideration that I would do that instead of going to college.  From birth, I think, we understood, you go to college, and you get good grades all the way leading up and then you go to college and you do well college.  And somehow figure out what it is you going to do, we never--in growing up, we didn't have discussions about you have to do this or that.  But you were gonna go to college and be successful, and also my father [Harry Augustus Cole] firmly believed that you go to public schools and that you go to State College.  My mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] had gone to Coppin State Teachers College [now Coppin state University in Baltimore, Maryland] and my father to Morgan [Morgan State College, now Morgan State University, in Baltimore, Maryland], and he wanted his girls to live at home, he probably wanted us to live at home for the rest of our lives, so he could protect us from all the bad boys in the world (laughing).  So my first year of college, I went to Towson State University [now Towson University in Baltimore, Maryland], where my older sister [Susan Cole] went and graduated.  And Towson is a fine school but I absolutely hated it, I was still in my sister's [Susan Cole] shadow, and you know you don't wanna be in your big sister's shadow (chuckling).  But what I remember about Towson is that this was in 1980, or guess it was '79 [1979], '80 [1980], there was--I can't remember what it was called, there was a name for it.  But there was an international crisis with Iran and there were many Iranian students at my school, and that's what I--that's my biggest memory of Towson that I was in the midst of a political firestorm.  And it was the beginning of my paying attention to international politics and being in the company of students who were really affected by an international crisis being on our soil and being ostracized, but they had--there enough of them on campus that they gathered up their resources, their human resources and they had rallies.  And I observed, and I remember not being afraid, but just really interested that yeah, things go on in other parts of the world (laughing) that affect us.  And I don't really recall talking about international issues that much growing up, we talked about local political issues and other and, and Civil Rights issues, but not Civil Rights for other people in the world, and this opened my eyes to that.  I did have great English teachers at Towson, I remember I always hated math, and was never really good at it, but I got A's anyway, and so I said, "Well I'll just take calculus just so that I can have done it."  Well I didn't get to calculus, I took pre-calculus and 'cause that's the first thing you take, and I did fine in it.  But I--not only did I hate it, but it was kind of like music, like I never learned how to read music, and I never grasped, like it never went into my soul how to do mathematical equations and-- So I, I, learned by this exercise of taking calculus that getting an A doesn't really mean understand anything (laughing), it means you study hard and you apply yourself.  But thank goodness for calculators and thank goodness there other careers (laughing) other than careers that involve math, because I really wasn't good at it.
Story_ID: 102999
Speaker 1: But I decided, I just didn't care for school there [Towson State University, now Towson University, in Baltimore, Maryland] and, you'd asked me something about high school [Western High School in Baltimore, Maryland].  The one negative that I will say that happened in high school, is that I really didn't feel that I had good guidance counselors.  And you know those, those ladies are still alive, I'm not gonna say their names, but they know who they are.  I was told not to even apply outside of the state, "Don't even apply to Ivy League schools," I graduated fourteen in my class, I'm sure I would've gotten into Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] if I'd applied.  I'm--now knowing what I know, because I did a lot of service, I did all kinds of things outside of school, so I was angry for a long time that I didn't even find out if I would get accepted.  Perhaps my father [Harry Augustus Cole] had told them, well my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] told them for my father, that they're not sending me there, but they would've let me go if I got a full scholarship.  And I believe I would've I got an academic scholarship, so I didn't have any support from anywhere saying, "It's okay to go to another school."  Whereas all of my friends were making these choices to--nobody in my core group went to a local school.  And I had the best grades, I was the best student, so it really made me mad, and I, and I now tell young people, "Find allies, there's somebody--if you have a good dream, a good goal, there is somebody in a position of power who can support you, don't give up, if the people who are supposed to support you aren't willing to have the conversation."  And as a young person, you don't know that you can have that conversation, now, I really think everything worked for the best.
Story_ID: 103000
Speaker 1: I ended up going to the Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] of the black academic world.  I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And how did I get to go?  Now I was--I, I went to Towson [Towson State University, now Towson University, in Baltimore, Maryland] my first year, I knew I didn't wanna go back and I told my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole], "Please."  And we had the, the Dean, I think he was either the Dean or the Associate Dean of the School of Liberal Arts was somebody we called Uncle Winny [ph.], I can't even remember what his real name is, but we called him Uncle Winny, he's from Baltimore.  And he worked at Howard and he was always telling my mother, "You better get that girl over here."  So she called him, can you, "Can you get her an interview?"  "Of course, I'm sure they would accept--they will be happy to have her," we, we snuck over to Washington, D.C., it was late.  Late in the process, met with whoever we had to meet with, I was accepted, not only was I accepted I was accepted into the Honors Program in the School of Liberal Arts.  And it was so late that there was no housing for me, so not only did I get to go to Howard, I had to get an apartment (laughing) off campus.  We found the apartment, I had to pay too, because see I would've had a free ride in academic scholarship if I'd gone the first year; you get nothing academically if you go the second year.  So now we had to convince my father [Harry Augustus Cole] that I was going because he was not for this at all.  He didn't even know we had done it; my mother came out of retirement and got a job so she could pay for me to go to Howard University.  And we got a small loan that my father paid for, she forced him (laughing) to do this and I went to Howard University.  And absolutely excelled, I graduated with a 3.889, you know almost a 4.0, I got two B's and it was because of a boy, those boys.  But I was in the A Course, I, you know, really excelled, I beca--and when we came time to figure out what my major was, I didn't know.  And this is the interesting thing about being an A student, I--because they ask you, "Well what's your best class?"  I got A's in everything, so I didn't have a best class.  And that's a really interesting tricky thing, and I've talked to a lot of other students along the way who been in that situation.  So it's like, "What do you love to do?"  I love to write and I love to read, so I decided, when, when I had to declare something, I decided I would be an English major because I knew by the way from when I was twelve that I wanted to be a writer.  I mean in my heart of hearts, I knew that I wanted to be a writer and I knew I was interested in fashion.  At Howard, I tried out for the fashion show the first year I was there and Howard does huge fashion productions.  Where hundreds of people come, people fly in from New York [New York City, New York] to come to the fashion shows and I became one of the primo models at Howard.  I did all the fashion shows, and I mean hundreds of students would tryout; it was really scary to do it.  I became a model there and then I auditioned for the Congressional Black Caucus Fashion Shows.  And I participated in all of the Congressional Black Caucus Fashion Shows while I was in Washington, D.C.  And from those shows, there were scouts and I was scouted to come to Europe to be a couture model in Europe.  And now you can imagine, I didn't even tell my parents all that stuff.  I, I was doing my schoolwork, I--at this point was not shy anymore, I now you know thought I was fashion girl (laughing) and I promoted that more than academics to other people.  Because you know I still really good student, but I didn't let people know, how I was, how I did with my academics was I always helped other students, I got tutored students--I tutored the ball players in English, like the football players and the basketball players and I was very active with teachers helping in whatever way I could kind of behind the scenes.
Story_ID: 103001
Speaker 1: And I was invited by one of my teachers to participate in a school assembly where you have to sit on the stage.  Now I was kind of shy about that, but I was asked to do something that was service, and my grandmother Carrie [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland] had told me that service is the best thing you can ever do and you don't say no when you can offer yourself in service.  So like "Okay I will," she wanted me to give a teacher an award on stage, and she's "All you gonna have to do is say thank you to the teacher and hand the teacher an award and sit on stage and be quiet."  Okay, so--and this is a huge assembly that all the students are required to attend, some academic award ceremony.  She lied, I was given an award, I was given an Academic Achievement Award because I had a straight A average in whatever semester or year this was.  You can imagine how horrified I was when they say my name, and I'm on stage and have to stand up and receive this award.  It's--I mean I'm really grateful, but I like it to be a secret, and so I very timidly accepted the award.  And I'll never forget, before I was off the stage, you know it was over, one of the young ladies who had been like my hang out buddy in the Punchout.  Which is the, the like, what is it, it's a snack bar in--at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] where all the kids hang out.  You know you go, it's called the Punchout, you know you go and you can have a soda or you can get lunch if you pay for lunch, you don't eat lunch in the cafeteria.  And people kind of hang out there; I think it's called Punchout, because the people hang out there too much punch out of school (laughing).  But you know I hung out with them I was a cool girl, this girl, came up to me, angry "How could you have an A average and you hang out with me and the other kids all the time?"  I said because I go back to my room, and I do my homework.  She was so mad, I said "You can do it too; it's not that hard, you can do it."  So anyway, I always had this balance between academics and fashion and when I was invited to--encouraged to go to Paris [France] to be a couture model, I decided that I didn't really want to do it.  I really enjoyed being a model, but I did not enjoy the constant critique of how you look.  You go on go sees and really you are selected by how you look, it has nothing to do with how intelligent you are, it has nothing to do with anything, but how you look.  And so as a result, the make-up artist, the designers, the models themselves are all criticizing each other all the time.  Well I had grown up being criticized for how I looked and I didn't think I had the endurance you know the, the emotional fortitude to do it.  Nor did I believe that I had to.  When there were conversations among the models, you know I know that there are a lot of smart people who are models, but there are also a lot of people who weren't very smart or chose not to demonstrate that.  And I didn't want to talk about the things they were talking about; I wanted to talk about the issues.  I wanted to talk about the business of fashion; I wanted to talk about other things.  And I remember one of my dearest friends became my friend because he was a model, he's much older than me.  During this time, he came down to do the Congressional Black Caucus Show and apart from being a beautiful man, he's smart, his name is [HM] Rashid Silvera. He's--he was a model for many years, he did the Courvoisier ads back then, he was quite famous at the time, but a really smart man.  And we would be backstage just talking about interesting things, from books to history to whatever.  I said "Oh, not everybody talks about how you look," and we have stayed friends for a long time, but I decided that knowing that the career of fashion as a model takes as much effort as anything else, I decided that I wanted to write more.  Now I'll tell you, it took me years to make the amount of money that I made being a model (laughing) because you make a lot of money.  You walk a runway, you know it could be thousands of dollars even back then, but I know that it was the right choice for me.  What I didn't realize, because nobody told me as an English major you are prepared to go to graduate school, I don't wanna go to graduate school.  I also didn't want to move back home, I had worked in--like I worked at The Limited the first year that The Limited was made.  I worked for retail for years, selling clothes and also modeling, those were my jobs outside of being in school.  And I basically had no preparation for a job when I graduated.
Story_ID: 103002
Speaker 1: So I graduated [from Howard University in Washington, D.C.] Phi Beta Kappa, summa cum laude and didn't know what kind of job I was gonna have.  My boyfriend at the time, worked on Capitol Hill and he suggested that I come work there.  He found--there was a job available, it was actually for Barbara Boxer, it was her first term as a Member of the House of Representatives.  And I had the job essentially as a secretary, well trust me, a young cocky, smart child who just through--who was a model, this is in the mid '80s [1980s], '83 [1983], is now going to go to Capitol Hill be a secretary and wear blue suits, white shirt, white tie, sheer hose and blue pumps, I was mortified.  So I accepted the job, 'cause I didn't wanna go home, I was to answer the phone and type.  And I wanted to write, there was all kinds of writing that they were doing, so at-I, I would always wear something that was slightly inappropriate, like I wear dangling earring or I'd have some crazy fashion hairstyle with my blue suit.  And the woman who ran the office, I will never forget 'cause I used this, her name was Claudette, I remember her.  She came to me on time, I had dangling earrings on, and this is the '80s [1980s] I mean trust me nobody did it back then.  She said "Those earring are beautiful Harriette, they are so--" I think they might've been marcasite, they were sparkling, "and they're really nice for an evening affair."  And that--you know I was mad at her for saying anything, it took me a while to decide that I would change.  I remember my father's [Harry Augustus Cole] story, with the judge [HM Robert Mack Bell], and I also remember my father, I was way too afraid to get fired.  I could not get fired from a job, so I had been begging them to let me write, they wouldn't--no there's too much typing.  So I--and we were typing on typewriters, I had taken typing in seventh grade; I do remember that about junior high school [Greenspring Junior High School in Baltimore, Maryland].  I secretly learned how to type 90 minute--90 words a minute on a typewriter, so I would, with a smile on my face finish all of my work by noon.  And then what were they gonna have me do, so with a smile I'd go, "May I help you now?"  And so I was allowed to write letters to the constituents about arts and entertainment issues.  And that perfected my ability to write a professional letter, because I hadn't learned how to write a professional letter.  At the same time, I was still modeling on the weekends in fashion shows, at churches or at different you know for different women's organizations that had fashion shows.  Like The Links or the Smart Set, my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] was in all these clubs, and I would--with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and by the way at Howard I pledged Deltas so I'm an Alpha Chapter Delta, now I'm on the National Arts and Letters Commission of Delta.  So that gave me a social network too, being part of the Delta Sorority, and they would have events and I would be, be a model in some of those things.  Also I knew shortly after I was in the job, that I would hated it and could not stay there, so the people that I knew who had moved to--who worked in fashion were in New York.
Story_ID: 103003
Speaker 1: So I said, "I need to move to New York [New York City, New York]," now nobody in my family moved from Baltimore [Maryland], I'd already moved to [Washington] D.C. who in the world did I think I was?  Now I want to move to New York, I decided that I wanted to be a writer, a fashion writer.  But the only thing--and the reason I chose fashion writing, is that the only thing I knew write about people would pay to read about was fashion, it was very practical.  The--my love was writing, my love was fashion, put those together, but I had no clips.  I'd written fashion for the Hilltop, the Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] newspaper, that wasn't enough, so, yeah I did write the fashion column there.  So I convinced two small newspapers in Washington D.C. that were free papers, Washington had a lot of free newspapers, to let me write fashion for them for free.  So I created my own internships, so now I had a full-time job, I was modeling and I wrote two fashion columns, and I had to spend money.  And I made, I think I made like eleven thousand dollars a year, I don't know it was such a little bit of money even in 1983.  I could hardly pay the bus fare to get to the job to write these columns.  But I built a body of clips over the course of the year, with the intention of moving to New York and year--in a year to be a fashion writer.  And I called all people I know who, who lived in New York because my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] had told me treat people nicely, always be kind to people and the ones who you really care about, the ones that there's some spark, stay in touch with them.  Leave a good impression and stay in touch with them.  Well there was a woman who produced the fashion shows at Howard that I was in, and her name is [HM] Monique Greenwood, she's a year older than me, I believe.  And she had moved to New York and she was working for Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Fashion Media], which is the company that does all, like W Magazine, Women's Wear Daily, DNR which is the men's version of "Women's Wear Daily", they had the fashion bible.  So I called her to ask her if she could get me an interview, 'cause I knew nobody could get you a job, but could you get me an interview?  And I called another woman who's my soror, Katia James [ph.] who worked at Essence; "Can you get me an interview?"  I got both interviews and I was offered a job at both places, not in fashion, in lifestyle in both places, there were no jobs in fashion available.  And the job at Essence just seemed more suited to me and I tell you, everybody I talk to, told me I was crazy to go to Essence rather than to go to the company that was the bible of the fashion industry.  But the job that was available, it was at HFD, which was the Home Furnishings Daily, it was business writing job.  I had been writing poetry and short stores and fashion articles like about designers, I don't wanna be a business writer.  So I trusted my gut instinct and said let me go work for Essence, and, and let me back up and say, when I was making the decision to go to Howard, almost everybody I know said "Don't go there.  If you go to a black school, you'll never get a job," then I was told "If you go work for a black publication, you'll never be able to work anywhere else."  So these are bad dead ends, and I'm so glad that I made my gut choice anyway.  I did my research but Essence, even back then was the preeminent black woman's magazine.
Story_ID: 103004
Speaker 1: Well, I accepted a job in the lifestyle department [of Essence] as an assistant editor, what a great decision, it wasn't in fashion but because I had a fashion background, we did a lot of photo shoots.  I brought my knowledge of doing makeup and my knowledge putting outfits together to the shoots.  So we were dressing real people, not models, but I would go in their closet and say "Well maybe we can pull out this outfit."  And so I used all of my talents in this job, but the best thing is six months there, I found myself in the wet--in the Ivory Coast in West Africa.  I had always wanted to travel from a little girl, and my father [Harry Augustus Cole] didn't like to travel, so we didn't do it.  I spent the next eleven years traveling all over the world, documenting the culture of people of African descent.  In that trip, we went to a small village and we saw young boys weaving on these really long looms, their version of Kente cloth.  And then we went to the village, to the city, you know the big village, and we saw people with denim on and African cloth.  And got to see what contemporary Africa looked like, it was so different from what National Geographic said; it was so different from anything that I knew.  And Essence was helping to tell the story of how it was different, and I was promoted every year until I ran that department.  And so I was able to produce twelve-page sections about how people who look like me live all over the world.  Leaders of Government, we went to the Ivory Coast; to Zimbabwe; Bahia, Brazil; all over the Caribbean and all over the United States, documenting our culture.
Story_ID: 103005
Speaker 1: And then, at a certain point, [HM] Susan Taylor called me into her office and said "Do you want to be fashion editor?"  I had moved New York to be fashion editor, seven years had passed I was like I know you have to be patient, but I'd really given up.  And I said yes, and I helped Essence to take the magazine into the '90s [1990s] from '90 [1990] to '95 [1995], I ran the fashion department and helped Essence to establish a presence in the fashion industry.  Because believe it or not, even though Essence had over a million readers then, it had very little respect in the fashion community.  It was kind of like the same old story again you know "Do black people really matter?"  We had to prove how much money black people spend on fashion and that we buy designers.  And I helped to, to get good footing for Essence in that area.  Now years before that, I had a dream that I had a business, nobody in my family had a business, but you know, its itching at a certain point to do my own thing.  Now I must--in the midst of that, I had received just randomly it felt, a call from a British woman one day, "Are you Harriette Cole," "Yes," this is right before I moved into the fashion department.  "Well, I'm working with a publisher who wants to do a wedding book, and we have identified you as the person we would like to write this book."  I'm like, "Who are you?"  But I knew from my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] rather than to feel arrogant about something, really figure out why, why would this be--why would they be calling upon me.  And you know the, the side note is, shortly after I moved to New York [New York City, New York], I had gotten married to a really lovely man, but it wasn't the marriage for me.  So I was--when I got this call, I had just gotten divorced, I think.  And here I was being asked to write a book about weddings, it seemed like, like torture, but then I realized--and I really didn't talk about that much and didn't talk about it in the book.  But I realized two things: I had produced wedding stories for Essence for at that point, seven years.  Essence at that point was the only magazine that produced stories that were showing how we can celebrate our heritage and culture through the wedding ritual.  You know its things that are unique to us, and I had spearheaded most of those stories, that's why they were calling me, duh.  And also because I had been married before, I knew things that you should think about before you get married.  You know some of the hard questions to ask yourself to try to the best of your ability to prepare to make a union that will really last.  So these were blessings, again like the worst things that can happen to you, you can turn them into blessings.  And turn them into something that will be an advantage.
Story_ID: 103271
Speaker 1: So we were talking about you getting a call about writing this wedding book.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went home and really thought about it and said you know, "I've wanted to write a book since I was twelve" you know that "don't look a gift horse in your mouth?"  I know people aren't usually invited to write books, I said let me figure out what it is.  And I told you that story earlier about typing ninety words a minute, which I never told anybody because I did not want to be a secretary, that skill made it possible for me to produce a book in a year.  And it was in a year that I transitioned from editor of the lifestyle section to fashion editor, which is a more than a full-time job.  I produced a books worth of photo shoots, I invited designers from all over the country and even other parts of the world to submit dress designs for this book.  We--I mean it was huge project that was produced not on Essence time in my spare time, and written because I could type fast.  So that skill, you know I tell young people don't--you could be mad about it, but learn it.  Learn whatever it is that you don't want to learn, because it will serve you later.  That book [Jumping the Broom: The African American Wedding Planner] became a best seller, it is still selling, that was--it was published in 1993, and the funny thing is it was published a month before my husband George [HM George Chinsee] and I got married.  So I was traveling all over the country, we went to twenty-one cities, with trunks of bridal dresses.  I produced fashion shows all over the country, on TV, in local markets, promoting this book, came back and got married (laughing).  And my husband said, "You will not do everything that's in that book for our wedding, we have to make choices."
Story_ID: 103272
Speaker 1: But-- and actually I, I have to go back for a second, I met George [HM George Chinsee] working on the first book I ever worked on which was called "Songs of My People" which is--it was during those day in the life books, they had "Day in Life in Australia" and whatever.  This was "A Week in the Life of African Americans", and one of the editors, Eric Easter, who was my first boyfriend, invited me to work on this book.  George Chinsee, is his name, was a photographer who was invited to work on the book.  And you know as a very arrogant young editor I was like, "Who's this George Chinsee, I don't know who he is, he's a black photographer in New York?"  And he had an idea to do one picture with one model and a fashion designer, and me the editor; I wanted to do five pictures.  So I asked Eric if I could call him to talk to him about expanding his idea, and I had never had a lovelier conversation with a photographer.  We became friends on the phone, and collaborating on these shoots, we didn't meet for a month.  We produced the shoots after they were all done, he invited me to go out with him on a date I was in the middle of a divorce, that the last thing I wanted was a date.  I mean you know my first husband and I were completely separated, but still, my father [Harry Augustus Cole] like, like he was all knowing, called me from Baltimore [Maryland].  "In case you were thinking about dating, until the papers are signed, you can't go on a date unchaperoned," I was a grown woman (chuckling).  But I listened to my Daddy, my cousin (chuckling) went with us on a date, George is like "Are you kidding me?"  George is six years older than me, he's old--and grown, you know, what are you talking about?  My cousin went with us on our first few dates (laughing) anyhow we've been together now for sixteen years.  And I credit my first book and my first boyfriend for, for bringing us together  (laughing) anyway, so George--we, we got married, we're jumping the broom.
Story_ID: 103273
Speaker 1: But I want to tell you something about Essence too.  Because Essence was a great environment for me to just know celebrating the me of me.  You know [HM] Susan Taylor is very inspirational you know everybody knows this about her, but she really does believe in celebrating black women, all shapes and sizes and hair textures, and just in all the ways that we come.  She celebrates us, and Essence was that place you know it was an environment where you saw every black woman.  And there were men too, but really seeing every black woman and, and cele--celebrating us as we are, was a huge thing.  And the biggest thing for me I believe, that I recall now is just a celebration of us and our hair.  I had been interested in hair for a long time and being a model, you know I was given lots of different hair styles.  But not, I didn't have that great of an appreciation for natural hair, and while I was at Essence I grew to have a greater appreciation of natural hair.  And I had every kind of hairstyle, I had little twist--I never had locks or braids, but with my own natural hair, I had all kinds of organic hairstyles for a long time.  And I remember going home one time with twists and you know my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] called those "pickaninny twists", you were not gonna have those things.  You know this is during, this was during the '80s [1980s] when there was resurging in interest in Afro centric hairstyles.  My father's like--I remember him telling me, "You will not come to my table looking like that, would you like for me to go to the store and buy you a comb?"  And it, it hurt because it was a time when I was kind of exploring my ethnicity and my how I looked culturally.  But I grew up when you know you, you blew the hair out, you did something to make it straight.  And my mother had straight hair, so you know my hair is not like hers, so it needed something to do to it to make it straighter.  And I chose not to do that for a long--many years and it was only when I was writing "How To Be", which is more than an etiquette book, it's really a book about embracing your cultural heritage and knowing what's expected where you're going.  So it--kind of an amalgam of what I learned from my parents, and what I learned traveling all over the world, and doing a lot of research on expectations and social graces.  I started thinking about my father's opinions about most of my hairstyles over the years and he doesn't know the one I have now you know.  It's straight but it's spiky, it's still like not conforming because I think I discovered this one after he had passed.  But I realized what parents want is to protect their children and to help provide them with whatever opportunity is possible.  And for him, having a conservative hairstyle was very important; he grew up in a time when you needed to look conservative to even have a chance.  And I think he really believed that we still lived in that--those times, and what I realize is that I have transcended--we are so lucky.  My generation and the generation beyond me, we didn't have to go through that, maybe in some parts of the country, but for the most part you have choices.  You can choose a profession where you can look the way you wanna look for the most part, you can choose--it may not--you can't necessarily bring something avant-garde or particularly ethnic to certain professions.  But there's another one that you can be in because the doors have opened that wide that was not something my father understood.  But Susan Taylor and the beauty team, and, and just the gift, being at Essence, of traveling around the world and seeing how we live and how we honor beauty in different ways, really opened my eyes to different options.  And I will always be indebted to her for that.
Story_ID: 103274
Speaker 1: Another thing is, as fashion editor [at Essence], I wanted to do high fashion.  And she [HM Susan Taylor] says well come on now, our readers--we can do some high fashion but high fashion is really on a size four-six model, she said, "That's not our reader.  Or its part of our reader, but it's not just our reader."  I had to learn how dress models from size six to size 24, literally we dress women who were size 24, not often, a lot of 16's and 18's.  I was so mad because I wanted to just do fashion, but you know, I could get fired or I could do what my boss wanted me to do, which meant cultivating different relationships in the industry.  Because you don't get samples in a size 18, so we developed a relationships with designers and stores, and I learned how do that.  Well, when I left Essence, a huge part of my bread and butter was actually on television and in workshops and one on one with clients dressing women who were over size 12.  And I, I told Susan recently, I said, "You know I was mad at you, but I thank you, because I learned."  And now as I've become a grown woman and I'm no longer a size six, I understand, you know when I was a size six, it didn't matter I could put on anything.  When you're bigger than a size six, it changes, when you become a mature woman, it changes, and there different things you have to know about the body.  And I'm glad that I know that now, I didn't know it then so I had to take people's word for it, now I know (laughing).
Story_ID: 103275
Speaker 1: So my dream, I had a dream years before I left Essence, that I had a business.  The name of the business was "Profundities," [now Harriette Cole Media, Inc.] I look up that word, I didn't know what profundities was, a little profound thing.  In my dream, my business was that I was going to explore the little things in everyday life that can be profound based on our choices.  And I was gonna do this through a variety of means, and I wrote them all down, I was gonna have a newspaper column, I was going to write books, I was gonna have a radio show, I was gonna have a television show, I was going to produce magazines.  It was a grand vision that literally came in a dream; I got up and wrote it down and it yellowed on my refrigerator.  And then after a while, I realize I'd done all of the things that I could do, I grew up at Essence and it wasn't an--another place for me to go, there wasn't upward mobility, and so it was time to go.  And I left in 1995, with a book deal, and I incorporated my business a couple years earlier, just--I said let me incorporate this business.  And I left, everybody in the world thought I had lost my mind; I started shopping a television project and a magazine project and ran into a man named [HM] Roy Johnson.  Actually I had worked with a lot of people in the music industry, through Essence and had been at a, some event and [HM] Russell Simmons was there and I told him that I wanted to develop this lifestyle TV show, positive TV show.  He said well you--"You should start a magazine and then make a TV show."  I said "But I wanna do a TV show," "Well you know really, this is how you can get to it."  Then another person told me about Roy Johnson who was over at Time, Inc. who was developing a magazine  It's actually [HM] Keith Clinkscales told me this, and Keith created Vanguarde Media [Inc.] and, and a number of other magazines.  And he said go talk--"If you don't mind working with someone--Roy Johnson has Time Inc. money and he's developed a magazine that sells like what you wanna develop," which is essentially like the black Vanity Fair.  So I left my business splitting my time between working at Time, Inc. and developing my projects and I had a book deal for "How to Be."  I set up an office; I got commercial space in New York [New York City, New York] and split my time, and worked with worth for about a year in a half.  The interesting thing is when you have deep pockets; you can develop something and not even take it to press.  Time Inc. decided they didn't want to do it; the magazine was Savoy.  We started developing it and then it went on pause so I just went back full-time doing a range of things in my business, and later, came back and helped to launch Savoy which was published for a number of years.
Story_ID: 103276
Speaker 1: In my business [Profundities, Inc., now Harriette Cole Media, Inc.] I, I was talking to Andre Harrell, who at the time was the president of Uptown Records, where Mary J. Blige came out, where Puffy [Sean Combs] got his start.  This is again right before I started my business and I was telling him, he said "What are you doing now?"  And I told him I was working on this book, and he says "'How to Be', do you think you can teach my artists how to be?"  And I said "Sure," I always tell young people, "affirm the positive," sure I can, I had a client before I left Essence.  Because he brought artists to me, "can you teach them how to walk into a room, how to engage the media." I had at this point done for Essence done tons of television interviews and also for myself through "Jumping the Broom."  I'd done fashion shows and product demonstrations, all kinds of things, so I had a lot of television experience.  So I began teaching artists how to present themselves in the public, how to dress, how to talk, how to walk, how to eat, and making a lot of money doing it, because I was courageous enough to say "yes" to this question.  And so I started out with these great clients.  I ended up working with Mary J. Blige, I end up working with Erykah Badu, working with Carl Thomas, work--I mean many of the big R and B artists.  I even worked with that artist Shyne [Moses Michael Levi] who had the altercation with Puffy and who is now in jail, he had an album coming out, was when he was on trial.  When he was about to be on trail, his album was coming out, and the wonderful thing is they wanted to protect him and make sure that when he talked to the media promoting his album, that he did not say anything that would be harmful to himself and his family.  And that he would speak with dignity, and it's really interesting talking--first of all, I was a little bit scared (laughing) I gonna work--and I didn't know how I was gonna tell my father [Harry Augustus Cole].  My client is on trial for shooting someone (laughing) but then I realized it's okay, I knew Puffy from when he was sitting at Russell [HM Russell Simmons] and Andre's feet learning the business.  And I knew that he wouldn't put me in harm's way intentionally, and it was just great talking to this young man who is really troubled but wanted to do the best for his family.  So I--I mean, because I was courageous enough to say I wanna have a business, I'm gonna do this , I've been able to do it.  I tell young people all the time "Dream big and state your dreams."
Story_ID: 103277
Speaker 1: One of my dreams in this thing that I'd written down for my business, was that I would write a newspaper column.  Because of "How to Be" which in the back has questions and answers, I was invited by the [New York] Daily News to write an advice column in the paper.  I said "Are you, really?  Yes, definitely wanna do that."  And I started once a week with--and it was so hard because I'd been in magazines, mostly magazines, you have months to work it out.  Once a week, 500 words was the hardest thing I could do, it now runs six days a week, and is nationally syndicated.  It replaced "[Ask] Ann Landers" and "Dear Abby" in New York and in a bunch of markets around the country, who knew?  You know who knew, that little voice inside knew and I learned from my mother [Doris Irene Freeland Cole] and my grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland] and my father [Harry Augustus Cole], you, you prepare yourself and you trust the voice.
Speaker 2: Who gave the name, who came up with the title of "Sense and Sensitivity?"
Speaker 1: With my editor, we came up with-I-- my intention is to be compassionate and thoughtful, and to help people to make sense of things for themselves.  And I learned that my way, my, my brand of giving advice is to be kind, it can be strong, but you know some people who write advice columns make fun of people.  They, they make jokes, but I take it very seriously that if people--people been asking me for advice for years.  I don't know why, they believe that I know something that you know; it's just something about your personality.  And people have grown to trust me, because I do like my mother, like my grandmother, I speak lovingly and honestly.  And I wanted to make sure that that came through, so I wanted to be kind and, and in working with my editor, we came up with that title.
Story_ID: 103278
Speaker 1: Now you said--of course you've had a lot of television experience, and I know you were on Oprah ["The Oprah Winfrey Show"], what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I've been a guest on Oprah many times, actually, the first with "Jumping the Broom" in '93 [1993] and many times since.  And she's great, I mean obviously the reach is amazing, I was on, on a shoot in St. Croix with Essence and somebody recognized me from having been on Oprah.  And that was like wow, Oprah, Oprah I believe was the first person doing positive TV.  You know, I remember the first time that I was on there, I was talking about weddings, and there, there was a panel of people, Diane von Furstenberg was on there with me and some other folks.  And we were talking about rituals and I wanted to say something about invoking God's grace, and we were off camera at the time, and I said this to the other people on the panel.  And the man said "You can't say God on TV," I said, "Yes, I can," and I knew that it would be okay with her, I didn't ask, but it was.  And, and in context, this is when what's his name Stringer, was probably was at--Springer.
Speaker 1: Springer, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  When Jerry Springer--
Speaker 1: Jerry Springer.
Speaker 2: --was super popular, when television that debased people was what was popular, and Oprah has really turned the tide.  But back in the early '80s [1980s] it just wasn't possible, in the early '90s [1990s] it wasn't possible to--other than on her show to say things that were positive--to, to say "God" was almost like a bad--it was almost like a four letter word, and she embraced it.
Speaker 1: There was a question, I guess they had asked you as an expert about giving advice and accepting it advice on the show, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I do remember the show, what I'm not sure what you want, wanted me to share.  What was it, or what did we talk about?  I don't remember exactly what I talked about but I know that there--in that question, it was "As a person who gives advice, how well do you receive it and what kind of great advice have you received?"  And the great advice I have received is what I told you from the beginning, "See God in each other." It's the same--that is the most powerful thing that I've ever heard, because if you practice it, especially during the tough times, the moment becomes instantly better.  It doesn't mean that the other person steps up to where you are, but it means--you know just like if you yawn, somebody else yawns, it's sort of a knee jerk reaction.  If you look for that divinity in another person then chances are that person will soften toward you, I've seen it work a million times.  That is the best advice I've gotten, and I was so grateful that she asked me for it.  And that she aired it, because again, it's, it's invoking God's grace and Wisdom and the thing is, the one thing for sure in the African American community, is that faith has been something that has fortified us forever.  Whether it is our going to church, our activity within our spiritual community and I, I grew up in a great church, in a United Methodist Church in Baltimore [Maryland].  And I had period of time when I really didn't have faith, and my life pretty much fell apart, spiritually, emotionally, I looked happy, but I wasn't.  And I realize no, that doesn't really work and living the faith that we learn is what works.  You--your parents tell you, it's not just on Sunday's, everyday, and I do my best to live it everyday, and to share it.  So there's undercurrent, like one of the most popular cities where my column is available is Salt Lake City, Utah, who knew?  I think it's because it's a place where many people who are people of faith, differ--a variety of faiths, it's not just Mormon, but a variety of faiths are there.  And there's an undercurrent of faith in my column, not of a particular religion, but just an undercurrent of faith.
Story_ID: 103279
Speaker 1: So you have now developed to what point, where are you in your business [Profundities, Inc., now Harriette Cole Media, Inc], magazine?
Speaker 2: So four years ago, I helped American Legacy magazine launch a magazine supplement called American Legacy Woman which is a history and culture magazine for African American Women and it comes out twice a year and I edit that.  I helped to launch a quarterly national magazine called Uptown in 2003, and I remember because my daughter [Carrie Emmanuelle Cole Chinsee] was born in 2003, so maybe it was in 2004, 'cause my daughter was born Thanksgiving 2003.  And when I was just doing a lot of work again, I ran into Len Burnett [HM Leonard Burnett, Jr.] who is--was partner in Vanguarde [Inc.] and who is now publisher of Vibe.  But he and Brett Wright the owner of Nu America Agency, which is now advertising agency decided to launch this magazine.  And I was gonna help write an article and I am the editorial director (laughing) you know if you have a lot of experience in magazines you end up offering, again, my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole], my grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland], you offer all that you have.  You do your best for everything.  And we've created what is like the black Vanity Fair it's a really beautiful magazine, it's very new but people really like it, it's--it has--it shifts out of a lot of copy in Chicago [Illinois]; Washington, D.C.; and Atlanta [Georgia].  And it's, it's going very well.  I hosted a television series in 2003, actually while I was pregnant, called Perfect Match New York, which is a relationship show.  I have--we, we have television projects and development I work with a large talent agency, working on positive TV.  So I'm not quite sure what the project will be, I had to kind of slow down.  I've written six books, "Jumping the Broom," "Jumping the Broom: Wedding Workbook", "Vows" which is a wedding book designed to help people create a sacred wedding ceremony.  And that book I created because we make a lot of beautiful weddings, but you really need to figure out what are you committing to do, and when you do that perhaps you stay married longer.  "How to Be", "Choosing Truth", which is about the journey within.  You can't just look good, you have to be good, and be authentically you.  And that's what that--it's a book that helps people to take that hard journey inside to realize what your truth is, and to live that.  And also a book that I collaborated on with a photographer John Pinderhughes, it's called "Coming Together."  It's a family rituals book that encourages African American families to have meaningful moments across the generations.  So I believe I walk my talk, I want to do everything I can possibly do to help people have a quality life.  To make the little things in life count, to-- to be kind and loving and beautiful, and I still work in the world of fashion and image.  I do a lot of trainings one on one, many workshops for corporations, for educational institutions, for individuals.  Helping them to present themselves effectively in whatever their field is, and it really, the, the skills and knowledge that I'm offering, work whether you're six or whether you're sixty.  Whether you're transitioning back into the workplace or you are really just trying to fine-tune your life.  And, and the one other significant thing that I'm developing now is a school.  It does not yet exist, but I'm developing a--like the Harriette Cole Institute of Etiquette Training for kids and older people that I'm looking to create as a franchise that would go around the country, that will be available around the country.  So if people are looking to refine the ways that they communicate with one another.  And the basic art of living well, there'll be a place where they can go for that.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Story_ID: 103280
Speaker 1: You have done so many things (laughter) so many things.  When you think back over your life, is there anything that you would change.  I mean do you have any regrets about anything?
Speaker 2: No, because the thing is there things I wish didn't happen (laughing) you know if I had been smarter, I might not have done extra why.  You know there definitely are choices that I have made that weren't smart choices that I wouldn't do today, that I wouldn't do tomorrow, but because of those choices I am who I am.  Because of those choices, I've more compassion for people who make those kinds of mistakes.  I think--you know I, I've also learned that we are all perfect and it's-- how can you stand in that perfection?  And it's acknowledging what you've done well, what you haven't, what there is left to, to let go, you know what you can give back to the universe that doesn't serve you anymore.  So I believe every opportunity that comes my way is an opportunity to be better at being the best person I can be and being thoughtful and helpful.  And also in offering my talents in service to the world, and I feel really fortunate that I knew as a child what I wanted to do.  You know the core of what I wanted to do, and also in the power of dreams, and I still dream.  I figure as long as I'm on the planet, I wanna have big dreams and make them manifest and that people respect what I offer.  You know there's a wonderful writer called Sobonfu Some, she's from Burkina Faso, West Africa and she wrote a book called "The Spirit of Intimacy."
Story_ID: 102894
Speaker 1: Sobonfu Some is a wonderful writer from Burkina Faso, West Africa and she wrote a book called "The Spirit of Intimacy."  And one of the things that she said in that book that I feel so strongly about is that we know, we know from the Bible, we know from our parents that we all are born with, at least one talent.  And she describes that it is the responsibility of your community to support you in offering your talent in cultivating your talent and offering the talent.  And that when the community is there to support you, and we see this so often with children, you know when, it doesn't what the art looks like, what the dance looks like, we are so proud of them because they're doing it.  Well as you grow up, that the community remains there to say, "We love you, we support you, we're so proud of you, please give us more, be better." When that community is there, everybody thrives.  She also says that her observation in the West, meaning here, is that very often there is no community.  So people have their talents, but they're offering them to dry earth, and she believes that consumerism actually is the result of people not having a way to fill that hole.  The spiritual hole, that hole of your spiritual offering of your life, and so you--we end up filling it with other things.  Well, I feel so fortunate and so grateful that I have many talents and I'm exploring those many talents.  And I had been able to find a community, a broad community of people who support my talents.  And I think that it's a blessing, it's a gift and it is a responsibility for me to continue to offer all that I have in the spirit of my grandmother [Carrie Elizabeth Alsup Freeland] and my parents [Doris Irene Freeland Cole and Harry Augustus Cole] who said you must always offer your talents in service.  Doesn't mean you don't get paid for them, but that it's the spirit of service that the spirit of giving to others.  And for young people I think it's essential to know that whatever you're doing, whether like me it's typing on a typewriter, you don't want to, you do your best.  And consider it, this is your service to that moment, that when there's a person standing next to you, that you think how can I be of support to that person.  You remember those little things about just being a kind human being make such a difference in your life and it can open so many doors.  And if it's one talent, find the one talent cultivate the one talent, if it's a talent that your family says that's not what you should do because it's not the safe thing, find somebody who will support you and help you to make it manifest.  We live at a time when there's so many opportunities, if it is an honorable that you want to do and you have the ability to do it, there should be no reason that you can't make it manifest.
Story_ID: 102895
Speaker 1: What other values are important to you?
Speaker 2: Integrity, living with integrity, is at the top of the list, honesty and, and thoughtful honesty.  I don't mean just telling somebody "I don't like your hairstyle," but being honest with yourself and living to the best of your ability with honest at the forefront of your mind and your heart.  Kindness, I don't mean nice, I mean being kind and thoughtful.  And values, I mean just, just loving and supporting your family, and not taking your family for granted.  Choosing to, to communicate with your blood family and the people that you call family, so that you don't have the regret of somebody leaving your life and you didn't say "I love you."
Story_ID: 102896
Speaker 1: You talk about the things that you have done or will continue to do so that people will remember you in a certain light.  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: What a great question.  I remember my father's [Harry Augustus Cole] funeral and there were twenty-seven motorcycles leading this incredible funeral procession, and it, it made me feel so proud that my father was so well loved.  And, and the great things that they said about him living with integrity and being a man of honor.  He had the title, "The Honorable Harry Cole," that's what judges are called, "Honorable."  I would, I would like to be considered as honorable as gracious, as, as a person who worked to make a difference to help people to unlock the door to happiness and many different ways.  And I'd like for people to consider me as a good writer, but more, less, less the craft of it and more the message.  You know my message is a positive one: we deserve to live a great life, and I am devoting my life to finding ways for me to live a great life and for others to live a great life.  And I guess also now that I have a child [Carrie Emmanuelle Cole Chinsee], the greatest honor would be that I would be remembered as a good mother.  And that I'm showing my daughter that any choice is possible, you can be who you are; there should be no reason for the greatness of you not to manifest.  And I'm showing her that the options are before you and I believe that I'm showing other people that too.
Story_ID: 102897
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the community?
Speaker 2: I see the African American community as becoming more and more divided based on economics.  You know and it's interesting 'cause that's what [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] started talking a lot more before he was assassinated.  Just the economics of racism, and within our community, they used to be you know I mentioned before just poor people.  Poor people just, it was just that they didn't have money, but they still lived with values and integrity no matter where they were.  And I feel like we are running the risk of having the opposites so extreme, that we see young people believing that the only options before them are illegal businesses.  And violence is so predominant and you know when I was growing up, if you got mad--the boys might have fist fight, but they didn't try to kill each other.  They did not pull out a weapon, hardly ever, and I see violence really destroying our community.  There more black men in prison than anybody wants to know.  I want us to reinforce the values that many of us grew up with and, and for those of us who have children or children are around us, say something.  Be the eyes in the back of mama's head, and that's by the way is a very brave thing to do.  You have to figure out--you pick your moments, but be the one to say: "there's a better way to do that.  It's, it would be much kinder if you celebrated something good about that person, rather than something negative." We're all responsible for our community and when we walk out of our doors remembering that, you know we can all choose one thing to do each day that helps another person to see how to live well and to treat other people well.  Imagine what the world would be like if we did that, just one good thing each day.  So if we do that, and I, I'm the one that sees the glass three-quarters full.  When we do that, as we do that, I think we can see a turnabout, and it also requires that we spend money in our communities, helping the people who are entrepreneurs by buying their products.  Helping the people who can't afford education, to create a scholarship believing that even if we have just a little bit more resources than somebody else, we can give a little bit of it to some worthy cause that can help other people to have a better life.  'Cause I don't wanna be in the better life and see people who look like me struggling without my helping in some way.
Story_ID: 102898
Speaker 1: You said you wrote an article or were writing an article about legacy, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I--a friend of mine passed recently, who is a man who really--he spent twenty-five years as a meditator, healthy eater, just a really good man, always looking to help other people.  And I thought about my legacy like if I were to die tomorrow 'cause it happens.  You know the only moment we have is promised is the moment that were in, and I--my legacy I would like to be that I haven't squandered many moments.  That I have offered my best to nearly every moment, you know that it is my intention to offer my best to every moment.  And that, that I am offering my talents and my experience and expertise to help other people, to inspire other people to live great moments.  And to be happy, I want us all to be happy, that's--I'm about living a happy life and it doesn't mean that you're joyful all the time, but on the inside there's joy, no matter what.
Story_ID: 102899
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about.  Or is there anything you'd like to say as we come to a close?
Speaker 2: You know I, I look forward to the future I look forward to each year that I get older.  And we live in a culture that celebrates youth.  I grew up in a family where almost everybody had white hair (laughing) and learned to respect that.  That with, with the years comes great wisdom and I want to remind others to respect the wisdom around you.  To for--as we grow older, like it's a blessing to grow older, because what's the alternative?  That it--to, to know the blessing of aging gracefully, to have-- practice good eating and taking care of our bodies and living our beauty.  You know that's what I, I would like for other people to do that is what I do.  Because I think you, you extract the joy from a moment when you do that, and to embrace the things that hard to embrace.  You know I-- sometimes we go to school and study for the hardest class at the very last minute.  Tackle the hardest thing first and then have more time for play 'cause play is important too.  Live a great life, we deserve it, why not?
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you so much for your interview.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: It's so important that we have your story and we're glad to have it now and we can share it with the future generations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
