Story_ID: 131230
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Monica Diane Cost, M-O-N-I-C-A, D-I-A-N-E, C-O-S-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is Cost your maiden name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My maiden name is Hairston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: H-A-I-R-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 18, 1971, in Atmore, Alabama.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Atmore?
Speaker 2: A-T-M-O-R-E.
Story_ID: 131231
Speaker 1: You were born in Atmore--
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Alabama, okay.  Now what is that near?
Speaker 2: Florida--
Speaker 1: Near Florida?
Speaker 2: --actually, Pensacola.  Yeah, you can run to Florida literally from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm a commercial real estate broker--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April 10--Tuesday April 10, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At Cushman and Wakefield, a commercial real estate firm at 125 Summer Street in Boston, Mass.
Story_ID: 131232
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they compel me to ask everyone and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Salmon and mashed potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do.  Burgundy.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Aruba.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite saying or phrase, paraphrasing and I probably won't say it exactly right, but that failure is no indication of your ability but just a need to adjust your strategy.
Story_ID: 131233
Speaker 1: Right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Veronica Hairston, V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A, H-A-I-R-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Mason.
Speaker 1: Mason.
Speaker 2: M-A-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 8/22/1947 [August 22, 1947] in Atmore, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace it?
Speaker 2: Right now, I think to my great-great-grandfather [sic, great-grandfather], Henry Watson [ph.], who we believe was a Jewish man who was married to Ilya [ph.] Mason who was half African and half Blackfeet Indian [sic, Blackfoot].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Blackfeet Indian, that's the--that--that's the family story?  That's--
Speaker 2: Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I have not verified any of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I've seen pictures of Henry, so I can verify that he was a white man but that was--that's pretty much it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story connected to that?
Speaker 2: There isn't.  You know, interestingly enough, we didn't talk about it much.  It just sorta was and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother and my grandfather passed away over the last seven years and I don't think we got enough information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered if it was hard for them being married in those days or--
Speaker 2: Maybe.
Speaker 1: --being together?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They--again, it, it wasn't--I know she was a very strong woman and he was a very stubborn man, but it worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What about your--now that's your great-great-grandfather, right?
Speaker 2: That's my--
Speaker 1: Henry Watson.
Speaker 2: --great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's my mother's mother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he's my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandparents--
Speaker 1: Yeah, on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: --on my mother's side, Addie Mason [ph.] and Jewel Mason [ph.], and my grandmother's maiden name was Watson, and I don't--I assume--I think my grandmother was born and raised in Alabama.  You know, I realized how much I didn't know when I started looking into this project, which caused me to do a little bit more digging, but my grandfather was a brick mason for most of his life.  He built the house that my mother actually grew up in with his two hands and, and then later in life, he was always an artist and he actually had some formal training, and later in his life had art shows in Alabama.  My grandmother was a cosmetologist, a homemaker, and she worked at the--at the middle school for many years, or the elementary school in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now, what were their names again?
Speaker 2: Addie Mason or Addie Watson Mason and Jewel Mason.
Speaker 1: And your, your grandfather was which one?
Speaker 2: My grandfather is Jewel Mason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause with Addie and Jewel, it's hard to--
Speaker 2: It's true, yes--
Speaker 1: --figure out which is--
Speaker 2: --because my--actually my grandfather's--he had a daughter prior to marrying my grandmother and her name is Jewel Louise and they call her Jewel.
Story_ID: 131234
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Veronica Hairston] have any stories of growing up in Atmore [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: She did.  She, she mostly talked about just, you know, the camaraderie or lack thereof between her and her siblings at any given time.  You know, my grandfather [Jewel Mason] was a great provider for his family.  He was your sort of typical man back then.  The man went to work, the woman stayed home.  My grandmother [Addie Mason] took care of the cooking and the cleaning.  And my mother tells funny stories.  Every so often, my grandfather would take over the helm in the kitchen and it would just--you know, he'd make up names of foods like, you know, Hawaiian King, 'cause he served in one of the wars.
Speaker 1: Like World War--I don't know that.
Speaker 2: He was born in 19--
Speaker 1: World War II, I would guess.
Speaker 2: '28 [1928]--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, around there.  And his--most of his duty was in Hawaii, so he talked a lot about Hawaii and he'd make up these meals, Hawaii a la King, but no matter what it was called, it was gross I hear, so (laughter) she talked about that, just how loving my grandmother was.  And, you know, we'd visit every summer almost growing up until about the seventh or eighth grade, and then we'd go every couple of summers or we'd try to make it out for a holiday or something.  And she'd put us to work every time we got out there, hanging clothes and cleaning the house in between hugs and kisses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother, like, have any stories about the Civil Rights Movement days in that part of Alabama?
Speaker 2: She didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not--that's not to say that she doesn't have them, but just that they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Just never talked about it.
Speaker 2: --haven't been passed on yet.  Yeah, no, she talked about the death of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and JFK [John F. Kennedy], and just how, you know, what a sad time it was and just kind of an unsure time, and--
Speaker 1: Now, now did she grow up in Atmore or was she just born there?
Speaker 2: She did.  She grew up there and moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when my father [Chalmers Hairston III], I think, must've been stationed.  He was a [U.S.] Coast Guardsman, so I think he was stationed there or--I can't remember how they got to Philadelphia.  My father was actually from New York [Brooklyn, New York], but he was going to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at the same time she was, and I don't think he--I don't think--I'm pretty sure he didn't graduate.  She graduated and then they got married and moved, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so is Atmore on a coast?  On a--on a gulf?
Speaker 2: I believe so [sic].  I should know that probably, but--
Speaker 1: Is it near Mobile [Alabama] or?  I guess--
Speaker 2: It's about a hour and a half from Mobile, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably forty-five minutes from Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--all right.
Speaker 2: So close, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so your mother--so she finished school at--in Atmore?
Speaker 2: She finished school and then she and my father were married, came to Philadelphia.  Well, they had me, stayed in Atmore for another three years, I think, and then we moved to Philadelphia where my mom was a teacher and has been for the last, I don't know, maybe thirty years.
Speaker 1: So she went to college, too, and she went to college in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: No, she graduated from Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Oh, Tuskegee, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, graduated from Tuskegee.  She did a year at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and then came back, so I think she did her junior year at University of Michigan and then came back and graduated from, from Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 131235
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't remember it at the moment.  My father [Chalmers Hairston III] left when I was five years old and it--so it just sort of--it's not that we didn't talk about him.  We would ask about him from time to time.  And his sister was in our lives, but for some reason, we kinda never explored fully, you know, that side and, I don't know, a normal family became me, my mom [Veronica Hairston], and my sister [Tiffany Hairston Lindsey], so I think we were kind of in this nucleus and most of the--most of the energy was focused on my mom's side of the family.  Although he has a sister, Ruth, who we were very--you know, in touch with and came over for holidays.  But even she never talked about her parents much.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  What, what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Chalmers Hairston, the third, C-H-A-L-M-E-R-S, H-A-I-R-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that, that has an aristocratic ring to it.  Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: I don't know about his first name.  Hairston I believe was derived in--it's, it's origin is Scottish, but that's sort of about as much as I know.  I have pictures and history in terms of occupation of his grandparents on down, but that's where the path runs cold.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does he have a middle name?
Speaker 2: He doesn't have a middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: His date of birth--
Speaker 1: --place of birth, I guess.
Speaker 2: 2/14/46 [February 14, 1946], and he was born in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that one?
Speaker 2: I know that his grandfather [Chalmers Hairston I] was a dentist.  I'm not sure what his wife did.  His father [Chalmers Hairston II] played the--he majored in music and I don't remember what school he went to.  He majored in music.  His goal was to be a concert pianist.  I don't know how much he actually played, and his wife [Mary Riley Hairston] was a nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's about all I have of them.
Speaker 1: Now, did they--were, were they New Yorkers, too?
Speaker 2: They were from Maryland--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I'm not sure how they ended up in New York to have my father and his sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when I came in, you showed me an article about the Hairstons from North Carolina.  Is there a connection?  Is there--
Speaker 2: It appears so.  The, the more research that I do and the more I start picking through, I actually touched base with the Hairston clan; there's actually an organization.  I think, you know, they're deemed the largest family in the United States.  They talk about how they went from North Carolina to Texas to the Maryland, Baltimore, area, so I suspect that my lineage probably picks up somewhere around there, and I touched base with them yesterday to start to try to put together those pieces.  But it's an interesting story about slave owners and how they, you know, very often had relationships with the slaves, and out of that came the black Hairstons.  And there's this--you know, and they have a family reunion every two years maybe, usually in the Washington, D.C., area, and everybody shows up, the white Hairstons, the black Hairstons, and they just sort of connect.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're, you're really not sure if there's, there's a real connection or?  But you--it's possible?  It's--
Speaker 2: Yes.  They claim that all Hairstons are related.  I'm not sure how certain they are in making that claim, but--
Speaker 1: You know, it seem like a name like Chalmers Hairston would be--you know, three of 'em in a row, there'd be a historic kinda link there that you might, you know, find a handle on.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm definitely--I'm gonna touch base with my, my father's sister, Ruth Graves [ph.], who's--Ruth Hairston Graves, to try to get some more history from her.
Story_ID: 131236
Speaker 1: Now is your father [Chalmers Hairston III] still alive?  Is he--
Speaker 2: We don't know actually.  In maybe 1983 or '4 [1984] after he'd been gone for so long, we decided to--my mother [Veronica Hairston] wanted to move all the assets into her name, so we hired an attorney and they did this worldwide search of his social security number and what other, other information they had of him to see if they could--to see if they could find out where he was and they couldn't find him, so we claimed him legally dead, but we never had a service and a funeral.  We don't--he, he could be homeless somewhere or--don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there a story behind his--how they broke up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: My dad, I guess, when he was in the [U.S.] Coast Guard had a--I don't know I guess for a lack of a better word, a nervous breakdown.  So in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he was in the Veterans Hospital [Philadelphia VA Medical Center] for a while, but then got out and was our dad, so I have a few memories of him.  He--I know he rode a motorcycle.  He loved to ride motorcycles and he loved to play golf, which was interesting to me.  But one day, literally, he--my mother came downstairs and there was a note on the table with his wedding ring and a picture of his family that said, I think you'll be better off without me, and that was it.  That's the extent of the story.
Speaker 1: It's tragic kinda story.  And he, he never--he's never surfaced since?
Speaker 2: Maybe about--I'll have to ask my mother how long after, it might've been a year or two after, we were driving home from school and my mother swore that she saw him walking down the sidewalk.  It was pouring raining--pouring rain.  I have no idea if that was actually him or not, but she was distraught.  So the next day, she poured Kool-Aid in our Rice Krispies; I distinctly remember that, so she was really upset about it.  But she--you know, to talk to her, you wouldn't know it, which is very much like my mother, to sorta carry the load and figure it out internally.
Story_ID: 131237
Speaker 1: Well, describe your, your mother's [Veronica Hairston's] personality--well, your parents' personalities, as far as you know about your father [Chalmers Hairston III].  I know you didn't know him that, that well, but--and who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother and I have her mannerisms for sure.  I look more like my father, so if you looked at a side by side, you know, people say twins.  But if you've never seen my father and you see me with my mother, then because I behave like her and we have the same handwriting, and I think the same strength, but I think my sister [Tiffany Hairston Lindsey] has that also.  I think that's just because of--you know, children do what you do and not what you say.  So she as a single mother put herself through school.  You know, she had her, her undergrad degree from Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and then she put herself through Beaver College [now Arcadia University, Glenside, Pennsylvania], got her master's degree in early childhood education, and then she went on further to get something called a Plus 60, which I believe is an additional certificate qualifying her to do more on the administrative side in the school district.  She sent us to private school for several years, to a Quaker school called Abington Friends [School, Jenkintown, Pennsylvania] through working two or three jobs, you know, getting grants or whatever she could get from the school.  She just refused to settle for the neighborhood education because she didn't think that it was enough--good enough quality for what we needed to prepare for.  And she very rarely asked for help.  I mean, she, she didn't appear to be drowning and we sorta always kept our head above water.  At one point, my father used to get checks that would come from the government when he was ill, and once he disappeared, I guess he couldn't come in for his physicals, so they cut the money off, and it was when we were mid private school.  So I remember that being a really hard time, so I--maybe for six months, we had to get on food stamps and I'm assuming she was collecting from somewhere else, and it really took her over the top.  But we always laughed.  There was always something funny in our house.  My mother is--she can be extremely silly.  When we were younger, and she--she's gonna kill me for putting this on tape, but if you've ever seen Flavor Flav--have you ever seen him?  She would imitate him only in front of us, so our friends would come over and they would think my mother was very serious and very stern and, you know, oh, Ms. Hairston, and, you know they'd button up and my sister and I were kinda like, are you kidding me?  And, you know, no sooner than they walk out the door, she's behaving, you know, in such a way to just have us on the floor.  So I remember one time the hot water was off and she would, you know, boil hot water, run the cold water, put it in the tub, but we never really felt it, I guess, because something was always funny, you know.  There was always a lot of laughter.  We played hide-and-seek in the house, and sometimes she'd like to hide--it would be really mean.  She'd like to hide and then not come out for a really long time until she heard the tremor in our voices (laughter).  When we were scared enough, then she'd finally come out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like--so you had a lot of fun growin' up?
Speaker 2: A--yeah, tons of laughs.  Even still.  Even still.  She's a--she's a good mom.  She also--and I don't know if this is from being a teacher or just having high standards, but something that she was really good at was helping you to get to the next level.  So for instance, she created a love of school, for school some kinda way.  And I have to talk to her even more about that today in terms of how she did it or if she thought that it was a personality type, but if we came home, let's say, with a B in science, and a B is a good grade, I think.  But she'd say, oh, that's, that's great, you got a B.  What do you think you could do to get that to an A?  So she'd pose this question and we'd rise to the challenge because she sort of--it's kinda like a dare, like, I betcha can't get that to an A.  So we'd start this strategy, you know, well if I study a little bit more, if I do this, if I do that, you know, I really didn't study for this test, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, and then I'd--you know, and then sometimes you'd make the A, sometimes you'd get the B plus.  But either way, it was that challenge to sort of--how can you--how can you move that one step up?
Story_ID: 131238
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do, of splattering grits on my grandfather's [Jewel Mason's] face.  And I think--because he told me--when I told him about that memory, he couldn't believe that I remembered it because he said that I was three, which is odd, 'cause I don't think I remember anything else from when I was three.  But I distinctly remember having this handful of grits on my hands, and when he picked me up, I just sorta put 'em on his cheek, and he laughed and laughed and laughed.
Story_ID: 131239
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or was it the same one?  Or did you move around a lot or?
Speaker 2: We, we grew up in the same one.  We moved--when we first moved to Philadelphia, we moved to an apartment in a place called Mount Airy and then maybe a year later, my mom [Veronica Hairston] and dad [Chalmers Hairston III] bought a house on Sharpnack Street, and she still lives there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's, it's on what, what street?
Speaker 2: Sharpnack, S-H-A-R-P-N-A-C-K Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--that's in what part of Philadelphia would you say?
Speaker 2: Mount Airy.
Speaker 1: Mount Airy?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that, that--that's in Mount Airy too.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Can you describe I guess your neighborhood and, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights and smell I guess was the Good Humor truck, for sure; I remember that.  And just tons of hide-and-seek and dodgeball, and--we had three boys that lived next door to us, Shaun [ph.]--Michael, Shaun, and Tony, and they became like our brothers.  We lived in, in Philadelphia what's called a twin, so it's connected to another house and then you share a driveway and you have your separate garages, and they lived across the driveway.  So, you know, when our parents weren't home and weren't listening, we could yell to each other, that's how close we were.  So we'd yell to the boys to come kill spiders and bugs and things like that.  But they became our big brothers and they kinda sheltered us from any of the nonsense that might've been going on in the neighborhood.  He--you know, he said, she said type of stuff.  Because everyone knew that if Tiffany and I got involved, then Shaun, who was the middle child, who was the toughest of the three was gonna get involved, and nobody wanted that.  A lot of girls on our street, a lot of Double Dutch, a lot of "eenie, meenie, miney, mo," tag.  In terms of smell, we'd walk down to Stenton Avenue a lot.  There was a cheesesteak place on Stenton Avenue called--there was one called Young's--I can't believe I can't remember the name of this.  It'll come to me.  But we'd walk down Stenton Avenue and get a cheesesteak and walk home, but we'd always have to ask, you know, if we could walk down Stenton Avenue, get some potato chips or (unclear).  We had a corner store, which was nice, which was run by an older gentleman named Mr. Chuck who had a son named Chuckie who was--you know, depending on his mood, he was either really, really nice to you or really, really mean to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mr. Chuck and Chuckie?
Speaker 2: Mr. Chuck and Chuckie, yes.  And every once in a while, he'd give you a couple of free Now and Laters or somethin' like that.  But if he was in a bad mood, then you just get your stuff and you get outta the store.
Speaker 1: So you all would go down and get the--on Stenton Avenue the famous Philly cheesesteak sandwiches everybody talks about?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cheesesteaks and mozzarella fries, super fattening, but very, very good (laughter). Worth every calorie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 131240
Speaker 1: Now, now was music a big part of growin' up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more in the house, I think.  My mother [Veronica Hairston] listened to a lot of Sister Sledge and Donny Hathaway and Luther Vandross a little bit later on, a lot of Temptations.  And she actually used to--I think she dated this guy since this is goin' in the--in the archives--who worked--some kinda way, he was related to Motown Records.  So we ended up meeting Teddy Pendergrass at one point and--I don't--it was kind of a blur.
Speaker 1: I think maybe it's Philadelphia International Records [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I don't know with--
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --[HM] Kenny Gamble and--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, yep.
Speaker 1: --and--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And I'm not sure what he did there or how he was related, but some kinda way, he was in the industry, so we had a lot of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was church a big part of your life at all?
Speaker 2: Huge, yes.  Actually, that was--yeah.  We had to participate in everything whether we wanted to or not.  We participated in Easter plays, Christmas plays.  You know, they'd have children's Sunday, so we'd have to get up, do the announcements.  We had to be on the choir.  Any opportunity for public speaking, my mother put us front and center.
Speaker 1: Now, now when did--what, what, what church and what denomination?
Speaker 2: It was Bethel A.M.E. [Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church], a Methodist church on Germantown Avenue in Germantown, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Bethel A.M.E. in Germantown--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --as opposed to Mother Bethel [African Methodist Episcopal Church] in Philadelphia itself.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mother Bethel was our mother church, so we'd go there for some of the major events of the year, which of course I can't recall right now.  But we'd go--we'd go there quite often or sometimes we would be a guest choir there, but it was affiliated with Mother Bethel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your neighborhood more--was it close to the sorta outskirts of Philadelphia rather than--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was in a suburb of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Mount, Mount, Mount Airy is really a suburb, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right next to Chestnut Hill and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not too far.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So--yeah.  I'm surprised they let another church be, be Bethel--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --right next to the big one, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't too far.  Mother Bethel was downtown, you know, so--but it was like a ten or fifteen minute ride and I guess the bishop had to have someone to preside over.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to--you, you participated in a lot of the church activities and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  A lot of the church activities, pretty much everything.  You know, if there was an opportunity to volunteer, to be a leader, to speak, my mother pushed us forward, they'll do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we would either begrudgingly go or submit.
Story_ID: 131241
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your personality in those days?  You know, what would people say you were like when you were growin' up?
Speaker 2: Fun, stubborn.  I've always been pretty stubborn.  If I can't get to the answer, and I'm watching this play out in my oldest son, Christopher [Cost], so it's very interesting to watch, but if you couldn't prove it, it wasn't true, so--and if I couldn't prove it to myself, it wasn't true.  So I, I wanted to always understand how something was.  It doesn't take much to make me laugh, didn't take much to make me laugh then.  And that--I'm trying to think of sorta the dynamics of my friendship.  I was always the level-headed one, so there's always different groups of friends.  And we had those that were the super risk-takers, you know, tried lots of different things growing up, and I was kinda the bystander just sitting close enough to be considered cool, but not actually participating (laughter) in all of the things that were going on.  Safe, when I was younger, calculate--lots of calculated risks.
Story_ID: 131242
Speaker 1: Now tell us about school.  Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: As a child?  My mother [Veronica Hairston] was actually a director of a daycare center called Samson Freedman [Pre-School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I think I did preschool there and maybe kindergarten.  I'm getting fuzzy--okay, and kindergarten.  And then I went to A.B. Day [Anna Blakiston Day School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I think the A.B. stands for Anna Blankinston [sic] Day School up until the fourth grade, and then I went to Abington Friends [School, Jenkintown, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: That's A-B--
Speaker 2: B-I-N-G--
Speaker 1: --I-N-G, okay.
Speaker 2: --T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Abington Friends, and that's a Quaker school.
Speaker 2: It's a Quaker school in Jenkintown, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I--and then for eighth grade--so that was fifth through seventh, and then eighth grade I went to Baldi Middle School [C.C.A. Baldi Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: B-A-L-D--
Speaker 2: D-I.
Speaker 1: --DI?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a public school in the northeast that my mother fought like crazy to get me into 'cause, again, she didn't want me in the neighborhood school.  And then I went to a college prep high school called Lankenau [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], L-A-N-K-E-N-A-U.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's, that's called a prep school, Lankenau?
Speaker 2: A college prep school--
Speaker 1: College prep.
Speaker 2: --is what they called it, yeah, that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--so I know your mother pushed you to get good grades in school, but did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked it a lot.  I actually loved school, yeah.  It's interesting because I was always very good a math, didn't like science but did well in it, and didn't really like writing, didn't like writing.  But, again, Cs weren't acceptable in our house, so it was always a B or a B plus, and on, you know, reading assignments and comprehension, I'd get good grades on that, but just, you know, writing reports and writing, I found that I had a hard time starting.  And I've since been enlightened, but in high school and coming up, I thought maybe, you know, I'm just not a good writer and that, that it is what it is and that's okay.  And then got to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], continued to do well in math, and then had a teacher, and I can't recall her name, but she gave us this speech about how, you know, we were all--had this potential to write and be great, and dah-dah-dah-dah-dah.  And so I started to actually believe it and got good grades, you know, on my papers and honor roll I think every--pretty much every--throughout high school I was on the honor roll, graduated fifth in a class of ninety-seven.  And then I got to Hampton and I think I had probably a little too much freedom, so I still loved school, but because I was in such a structured environment growing up and somewhat sheltered, it was--it was harder for me to establish a discipline to do things, you know, to take time out if I had--no one said you have to study from three to five and maybe I wouldn't study from three to five.  You know, I'd cram and I'm sure a lot of college students do it.  But I think had I had a little bit more freedom in terms of maybe my mother taking a couple, couple of times to say I'm not gonna tell you when, you decide and see how it works out, you know, to give us that, that latitude to figure out our own system.
Story_ID: 131243
Speaker 1: --For me to figure out a system--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now in, in, in high school, were, were you involved in a lot of activities in high school [Lankenau High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: We didn't--it was a college prep school, deemed college prep, so there weren't any extracurricular activities, believe it or not.  It was strictly academic.  We didn't gym until I think when I was in the eleventh grade where we had it not that often.  But again, between the church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Germantown, Pennsylvania] and, you know, my mother was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta sorority] and some of her friends were AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority], so I had a debutante ball.  We were always in swim or camp or Girl Scouts, we were Girl Scouts.  So we did have a lot of extracurricular activities that weren't related to school.  In terms of school, I think when I turned fifteen, I got a job at a place called Seafood America in Chestnut Hill [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is no longer open, but it was the most fun job aside from this one that I've ever had.  I mean, just from--everyone was young, even the manager I think was twenty years old, and we just--it, you know, was a waitressing job.  It was such a good time and I always had a lot of money in high school because of it.
Speaker 2: Seafood America.
Speaker 1: Seafood America.  And I don't even think they exist anymore.  And then one day, the manager, this guy named Joe Haas [ph.] who we really liked, just--we came to work one day and there were padlocks on the door, and that was the end of our employment.
Speaker 2: So did you get another job later on?  Or did you--
Speaker 1: I went for a few minutes to--for, for a few minutes--for a little while, I went to the other Seafood America that his brother owned or something.  It was just a different atmosphere, a different vibe, so I didn't, didn't work there anymore.  I'm getting confused in terms of--oh, yes I did.  I actually had a telemarketing job for a while, which I loathed, because what I know about myself now is I don't like routine.  That was a very routine job, literally reading the same script over and over and over again, didn't enjoy that, left there.  And I think those were--those weren't the only two jobs I had, but I can't recall where else I worked.
Story_ID: 131244
Speaker 1: Now when you were--when you were in high school [Lankenau High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], did you think about business at all as a--as a occupation or did you read books about business or any of those, those, like Og Mandino's books or any of the, the self-improvement kinda, you know, the, those kinds of things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't read them and I don't think I knew to read them, but I knew that I wanted to be a deal maker, if that makes sense.  When my sister [Tiffany Hairston Lindsey] and I--I think maybe when I was twelve, you know how they used to have the carbon copies at the bank?  You fill out your deposit form, you keep one and give one to the teller.  We would take a stack of those, you know, home, and we'd use our [Coleco] Quiz Wiz as our computer and we'd use those as our paperwork, and our closet in our bedroom was the elevator, and we were business women.  And we--you know, we'd type up on the Quiz Wiz and make it beep and do all this stuff, and we'd fill out the paperwork and we'd hand it to each other and say, can you take this to accounting?  Can you take this here?  Can you take this there?  It was--it was the funniest thing.  And I always had a--I always had a vision of wearing a suit.  I don't know what I was doing.  And then there was also on the way to my grand aunt's house, there was a public accounting firm on the East River Parkway [East River Drive, now Kelly Drive, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I don't remember the name of it, but it's a very neat, stuccoed building, and it said something, something, CPA, something else.  And every time I rode by that building, because once I saw women and men coming out of that building in suits, and I said, that's what I wanna do.  So I thought I wanted to be an accountant because it felt like it was--felt like the business and the paperwork that I--and the suit-wearing that I dreamed of, of having.
Story_ID: 131245
Speaker 1: And so I majored in accounting and then realized that accounting is a very routine job, you know.  It's the same debits and credits, things have to equal, and things have to be neat, nice, and buttoned up.  And I got the concept and I did fairly well, got out of school, worked as an analyst for Prudential [Insurance Company], then worked as an auditor, more routine.  Again, did well, but it was a--something was definitely missing.  And it was interesting because a lot of people would say to me, what are you doing in finance?  You know, you're so much of a people person, you're too nice to be in finance, you're too this, you're too that, and I stayed in finance for about twelve years, and--
Speaker 2: I mean, this is after, after college?
Speaker 1: After college, yeah.  I was an auditor, then I was a financial analyst, and then got promoted.  I mean, I did well at it, but then when I got to the senior level and I'd look up in the higher ranks, and I said, you know, I had this feeling of, you know, doing deals and, and being this power player in some corporate setting, but it didn't feel like finance and that wasn't it.  But I--it was what I knew.  So I stayed in it for a while, did a stint in HR [Human Resources], got recruited out for the people skill stuff.  Someone said, well maybe you'd do well--maybe you'll like it over here, and I said sure, I'll give it a try.  Love the people, not necessarily muddling in people's lives, you know, investigation, sexual harassment, who said what, who offended whom, you know, so on and so on and so on, a bit depressing.  So I left there, went--ran back to finance, and then stayed--went from Prudential to finance to TJX Companies to Reebok to finance, to Cushman & Wakefield in operations and then started watching the brokers, and it clicked.  I said, wow, if I had to--I did this analysis of pros and cons.  If I had to--had the ideal job, what would it look like?  What would my environment look like?  What would I be able to do during the day?  What would my hours look like?  How would I behave?  Who would I meet?  And it hit on almost every cylinder.  I mean, the hours are tough because it's, you know, I'm ramping up, but they're still very flexible.  You know, if I need to be at my son's [Christopher Cost's] school at noon to see a play or take him on a field trip, I can certainly do that without someone saying, well what time do you think you'll be back?
Story_ID: 131246
Speaker 1: Let me go back and just kinda pick up a chronology.  Now you, you graduated from high school in--
Speaker 2: 1988.
Speaker 1: 1988, okay.
Speaker 2: From Lankenau [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And started Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] in '88 [1988] I assume, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Fall of '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--okay.  Now were there any teachers that--in high school or at Hampton that you remember as pivotal to your growth or development or any other mentors, actually?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mr. Boles [ph.] in high school, he was our social studies teacher, and he definitely had a life philosophy kind of like my mother's [Veronica Hairston's] and, you know, sort of like if, if, if better is possible, than good is not enough.  And he would always explore the world that way and he'd always tell us about things that were in the pipeline way in the future that were gonna happen.  We'd never believe him, and sure enough--you know, unbeknownst to us, I'm sure he was reading the Wall Street Journal and different publications, and relaying the message, and we're like, wow, what?  No, no way, that couldn't happen.  But Mr. Boles wouldn't accept anything but excellence from me, and I assume he was like that with the rest of his class; I don't remember, but he, he never let me off the hook.  And also Ms. Johnson, the English teacher, who also told me that I could be a good writer, but I think more from a--how to carry yourself as a woman.  She wore suits to school every day, she didn't have to, hair was always very neat.  She was always very professional with the students no matter how silly they behaved.  She always just sorta had a posture that was very appealing and definitely looked up to her.  At Hampton, I pledged Delta Sigma Theta [sorority] while I was at Hampton, and I think probably the big sisters of the, the Deltas that came before me were very influential.  There were quite a few of them that just seemed to have it all together.  You know, they were smart, they did community service, just very well put together, you know, very logical, so that's, that's through college.
Story_ID: 131247
Speaker 1: Now you, you finished college at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right?  Now tell us the story.  Now how did that happen?  How did that--
Speaker 2: My freshman year of college, I interned--well, I interned first at Mellon Bank [Mellon Financial Corporation].  My sophomore year, I interned at Prudential Insurance Company and, and I'm not sure who I had the conversation with, but I ended up doing a--sort of a full-time but flexible schedule at Prudential, and they paid for school for the last year of college--well, they had a tuition program.  And so, you know, I talked to my manager about what if I can't do forty hours a week and they said we'll, we'll pay for it.  We want you to finish here and we want you to come work for us, so it was kind of a no-brainer for my single mom who was paying for Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  That was, you know, over probably two and a half times what Temple would've cost for us living in-state.  And so I was so sad about it.  I felt like I cried all summer, although I know I didn't, but it felt like it was a long time.  It was very sad leaving Hampton.  You know, I pledged and then I had a full year of sort of being an upper classman, and made lots of friends there, still friends that I keep in touch with today.  And then went to Temple, which was--you know, I went from, I don't know, maybe nine thousand students to thirty-three thousand students.  Classes at Hampton were 20 or 15 or--and then at Temple were 100, 150, much larger class sizes.  But in hindsight, I--I don't think I'd trade the experience because I felt like--and my husband and I talk about this a lot--Hampton--I feel like going to a historically black university [HBCU] gave me a perspective about black people doing well that I'm not sure I could've gotten anywhere else.  So going to Abington Friends [School, Jenkintown, Pennsylvania], going to Baldi [Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] gave me this perspective that this is how they live, and so if they live like that, then how do we live?  Well, I knew how my family lived and we were middle-class and we weren't wealthy, but we weren't poor, so I couldn't--I hadn't quite figured that out yet.  And then I went to Lankenau [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where there was a good mix.  There were middle class and then there was some that weren't so well off.  And so, again, I couldn't figure out because I didn't know what a lot of the kids' parents did for a living.  Went to Hampton--president of Pepsi's daughter was there, Will Smith's brother, Harry, went to Hampton, so all these elite.  I mean, people--some of my classmates owned the condos they lived in, so they lived in a three-story condo where they rented out the bottom two and they kept the, the rent for their spending money, and they had cars and, and I think I got a, a sense of, of self-awareness at Hampton that my mother had instilled in me but I actually saw play out at a historically black university.  And so I think when I came out, the possibilities were endless 'cause I'd already seen it.  I'd already seen intelligent black college students as well as super successful black parents, and so I had a sense that they could do it and so could I, and that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 131248
Speaker 1: But at, at--so at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], now, were there any, any special teachers at Temple or?
Speaker 2: My African American studies teacher, and I'm sorry that I can't remember her name.  She was from Nigeria and she was very hard on us in a loving way.  She had come from Africa and she had a lot of traditions and customs, and she was a very strong woman, very smart.  You just--you couldn't get in front of her.  You couldn't get in front of her.  She would always be there first, whether it be sarcasm or you being lazy and not wanting--whatever it was, she would always get there first and figure out how to redirect you.  And I remember an incident once where this--one of the guys in my class, I guess she wanted to show us a video and the VCR was broken, so she asked him to come up and use his thumb to hold down the rewind button or the fast forward button.  And so he's holding the button and then he goes, ah (shakes hand), and puts his other thumb up and she goes, oh, no, no.  Okay, sit down, I don't want you to hurt your thumb, you know, treating him like a baby like you spoiled American, you know, you come from--and then she would tell us these stories of, you know, she's like this is what you come from so--you know, but I know you're pampered and you're spoiled and I don't want you to, you know, callus your thumb, so sit down.  And, you know, so she clowned him about it and the class got a good laugh out of it.  But she, she instilled I think in a very short period of time a lot of strength and confidence and more self-awareness, so it sort of really leveraged what I experienced at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] even greater.
Speaker 1: Now did--was this your first African American history class?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I didn't take one at Hampton.  I didn't.  At Hampton, I took a lot of public speaking and extra math and statistics.  I don't--I was--I think I was just trying to immerse myself in what I knew, you know.  And then for the English and the writing that I had to take, I, I did that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Was [HM] Charles Blockson at, at Temple when you were there?  Was--I, I guess--was he in charge of African American studies?
Speaker 2: I think so.  The name totally rings a bell.
Speaker 1: There's a Blockson collection there in, in the big long library (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--now--so, so you graduated from Temple in, in what year?
Speaker 2: I had--I did an extra semester, so I graduated in January of 1994, so I finished in December of '93 [1993].
Story_ID: 131249
Speaker 1: And so, were you still working at Prudential [Insurance Company] then or?
Speaker 2: Not for the last semester, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So what happened when you graduated?  What were your prospects?  Were you gonna continue at Prudential?
Speaker 2: That's what I did.  I wanted to be--
Speaker 1: And you're doing accounting--
Speaker 2: --an auditor.
Speaker 1: Right?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted to be an auditor, but interesting--it, it was an interesting process that happened at Prudential.  They had an opening for a healthcare benefits analyst, and this was a person that basically helped companies understand the product and services that we offered and how that--how those products could help them leverage their cost or decrease their costs for healthcare, but I wanted to be an auditor.  So I interviewed for the healthcare benefits analyst position and I received--I got that position.  Actually, that's not true; I take that back for one second.  The woman that I'd worked for during my internships had talked me up to the auditing department, but when I was--when I graduated from school [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they were not hiring any other auditors straight out of school, but this woman, Suzanne Manganiello, who was in charge of the audit department at the time said we're not hiring, but I have to meet this woman because I've now had five people come and say, if you're hiring, you should hire her.  So I met with her, and she said we're not hiring right now, but this is what I'd like to do.  I'd like to put you on a fifteen-month rotation, so you'll go to other business units because you can get--gain the business unit experience; that way, when you come here, you'll kind of have the foundation that we need you to have in order for you to be effective.  And sure enough, she cut a deal with Randy [ph.]--I can't think of his last name right now--that he would have me for fifteen months, I'd get all this different experience within the analyst role, and then cut, I'd move over to audit, and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the healthcare benefits analyst and then you moved over as a--as an auditor.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I did that for four and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that takes us to about 1999 or so, I guess?
Speaker 2: 19--Let's see, graduated in '93 [1993], started working for Prudential right away--I mean '94 [1994], in January of '94 [1994], so I started working for them right away, '94 [1994]--oh, you know what?  I'm including in that four and a half years is because as the time that I worked for them over the summers, so that actually puts us to '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I ended in '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  Well, did, did you enjoy working for Prudential?
Speaker 2: Loved working for Prudential.  It was such a great company.  They don't have the healthcare arm anymore.  They were at a time where diversity wasn't really being pushed, you know, like it is today.  They were ahead of the game.  They had something called the minority interchange, and I forget who started it.  I think some of the executives of color that were there while I was there actually started this organization, and they--you know, Prudential spent a lot of money on training for employees, and they even encouraged you, so they'd have this best practices sorta thing.  If you suggested something that saved the company money, they'd give you ten percent of whatever you saved, and you could make a lot of money if you changed a process.  They eventually had to exclude the auditors because that was our job.  But they also--sometimes we'd have to do these company-wide audits, so we'd have to spend a month in different places.  So we spent a month in Houston [Texas], a month in Jacksonville [Florida], a month in Chicago [Illinois].  And while there, you know, if you loop in a Saturday night stay, your airfare is cheaper.  But you had the option to come home.  They wouldn't keep you away from your family.  So if you went to Texas and opted not to come home, and say you saved them a thousand dollars, they'd give you half so you could stay over.  It was just--it was a great company.  You could work from home.  It was--it was a good company.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, what, what, what happened that you left Prudential?
Speaker 2: In 1995, while vacationing on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], I met my then boyfriend, now husband [Donald M. Cost], on the beach and--for the second time, actually.  I met him in 1994, but I guess it wasn't our time.  We didn't click.  We went our separate ways.  I forgot about him, he forgot about me, and then a mutual friend introduced us on July 2, I think.  And then while I was in audit, I was traveling, but I'd loop--the Saturday night stay that I'd loop in would be Boston [Massachusetts], which would still make the trip cheaper, or I'd--less expensive or I'd bring him, fly him out to wherever I was.  And we dated long-distance for a year, and then Prudential decided to centralize their audit function, so there used to be five and they were going to three.  You could move to [New] Jersey, Atlanta [Georgia], or California.  And so I probably would've moved to Atlanta, but given that we were dating, you know, and I'm up for a challenge, a change, I decided to move here, and that's when I started working for the TJX companies as an auditor.
Story_ID: 131250
Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what company is this?
Speaker 2: TJX Companies.
Speaker 1: TJX, okay.
Speaker 2: They own T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, HomeGoods.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately been in the news a lot for credit card fraud.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this is in 1995 or '96 [1996]?
Speaker 2: I moved here [Boston, Massachusetts] in '96 [1996]--
Speaker 1: Okay, '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: --in the summer of '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, is, is TJX associated with Filene's [Basment] or, or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Are they?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  They are a company unto themselves.  They now own Bob's Stores also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--well, how was that experience?
Speaker 2: For the most part, good.  TJX had a, a lot of challenges.  The other interesting thing is, before I moved to Massachusetts when I told people that I was moving here, by their reaction, literally I thought I might be lynched walking down the street.  Like, that's how--that's what a negative image Boston has outside of Boston--
Speaker 1: In terms of--
Speaker 2: --particularly for people of color.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Race relations.
Speaker 1: Race--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and I don't know if that comes from their parents who knew about the bussing episodes here, I'm not sure.  And then one week before or a couple weeks before I moved here, there was a, a woman who happened to be in my sorority [Delta Sigma Theta] who moved from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to a rough part of Boston who was murdered in her apartment, and it wasn't race related, but it just sorta added on to this stress of moving, but I did it.  And I came and I moved to Framingham [Massachusetts], and things were fine.  TJX--it was--it was interesting.  I think, you know, how I describe it is I never much thought about being a black person on a daily basis until I worked there.  There were a lot of people who had never worked with, socialized with people of color, like they grew up in very homogenous neighborhoods.  And that was just--it was puzzling to me.  I didn't--I couldn't even--I can't--I couldn't fathom it, I couldn't fathom it.  You went all your life, your whole life, you made it until today, 1997, '-8 [1998], whenever I figured this out.
Speaker 1: So you--your experience in school was in integrated settings usually, right?
Speaker 2: For the most part.  I mean, A.B. Day [Anna Blakiston Day School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], probably not as much.  But I was--it was one through four, fourth grade.  And then my--a lot of my relatives, we have a lot of mixing in my relatives, so being around people who were not of color was not a--and my, my street was mixed; we had everybody on my street.  And then Abington Friends [School, Jenkintown, Pennsylvania] was mostly white, but there were enough people of color that it didn't register, and then Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and then Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so I think I kept going in between and seeing such a variety of people that I was clear that a variety of people existed in every race, color, socioeconomic, you know, it just--people are people.  They're different, you just don't know what you're gonna get so you can't assume, you can't make assumptions.  So people were just people.  And also my mother [Veronica Hairston] made sure that we had exposure so she signed us up for different clubs and things, and, and sometimes we'd go over the homes of some of the wealthy, really wealthy students, so we were comfortable functioning in all these different areas, and so I couldn't fathom that there'd be a person who would feel funny communicating with another human being.
Story_ID: 131251
Speaker 1: So we had you at T--at TJX [Companies, Boston, Massachusetts], right?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: TJX, I was an auditor for maybe two years, got recruited out of auditing to human resources to be an associate relation specialist, in particular, to help out with the company's diversity issues, which is sort of what I was eluding to, is why it was such an interesting place.  Again, it was--it was just an interesting behavior at every turn because of the lack of exposure of the individuals who worked there.  So I got to know a lot of the people in senior management fairly quickly and felt comfortable about my career there, but knew that in other parts of the company, people were having issues around race.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we, we were saying I think before we broke how--what--how Boston is different in terms of race relations and many--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people that had no exposure to any other group.
Speaker 2: And it showed up.  I mean, in these different areas of--you know, finance is for some, whatever reason, gets put on a pedestal, so, you know, if you're in finance and you're doing a good job, people don't really question you or there's less mess, I guess.  I don't know how else to describe it whereas in other parts of the company where a lot of your--that's what it is.  Finance is black and white, so either your product is wrong or it's right, it makes sense, or it doesn't, it's logical or it's not.  In say merchandising, which is a different part of the company, a lot of your development is placed on social skills, and if you as a young black woman can't come in and socialize effectively with the young, your younger white counterparts, the upper management sees that as a--as a click, you know, a check that you can't really function out--because they wanna be able to see you as buyers.  Merchandising, they're training you to be a buyer, and if they don't feel like you can get along with all sorts of people and, you know, so on and so forth, that's sort of a ding on your development.  So that was interesting.  So I went to associate relations and again had a few kind of race-related issues, one sexual harassment investigation, just, you know, anybody--who's right, who's wrong, who's telling the truth, where is it, and for me to have that, you know, these people's careers sitting here on me to make that judgment based upon some investigation.  I'm sure there are people who are so good at investigating that at the end of the day, they are confident.  But after hearing all the stories, I wasn't sure where I stood on it.  So I stayed there.  We started a, a diversity group at TJX called--they're the--they're affinity groups.  So there's one for women, one for people of color, started that and maybe three months later left the department and went back to finance, this time as a financial analyst.  Loved that job just because even though it was black and white, there was a--there were a lot of different aspects to the job in terms of what we were analyzing.  I got to do--analyze our advertising agencies, got to go to Puerto Rico to, to analyze our--no, that was an audit actually, but looked at our turnover rate and attrition and all these different analyses we got to do, so that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So, so this is about 1999 or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in 2000, got promoted to accounting supervisor, and in grooming you at TJX, they want you to hit--there's eight different finance departments and you have to sorta hit some of the major ones in order to get promoted.  So accounting supervisor as much as I didn't want the job, I kinda felt like I had to take it to move on and I just--I was just miserable in the job.
Story_ID: 131252
Speaker 1: And then looked for another job with--and got a job with Reebok [Canton, Massachusetts] in retail for the outlet stores.  This was in two thousand--
Speaker 2: So--well, how, how did that take place?  How did you make a transition from--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: --TJX to Reebok.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to get more of a well-rounded experience faster and TJX [Companies] is a very big company.  You know, as I mentioned, they have eight finance departments, so there was somebody responsible for receivables, somebody responsible for payables, somebody responsible for accounting, somebody responsible for analysis, and so on and so forth, cash management, and I wanted a smaller environment where I could be all of those and sort of--I wanted to be thrust into the fire, you know.  I--because I got bored very quickly, too.  Once you learn payables, you sort of know it; once you learn accounting, you know it; once you--so I wanted to--I wanted to just get all of it and then be able to decide what I wanted to do with the knowledge of how the inner workings of finance worked.  So I interviewed at Reebok.  I don't even know if--I can't--I don't think I interviewed anywhere else.  Interviewed at Reebok, had a great interview, got the job as a financial analyst, shortly after got promoted to senior, and did a lot of sales forecasting, expense control, creating the budgets, the five-year plan.  And then once again because that and knowing what I know now, I understand it perfectly, but there was something missing.  Learned it, did it, and it became very routine, so this--you know, the analysis was due on this day, the budget was on this day, expense control report due on this day, come in the morning, make sure that the assistant balanced, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, became very routine.  So I had a mentor there named Jimmie Jones who was the head of human resources.  He was a--I think Jimmie must be six-four [six feet four inches], big man, used to play in the NFL, actually won a Super Bowl [Super Bowl III, Miami, Florida, 1969] while he was there with the [New York] Jets (laughter).  He was the chief human resources officer for Reebok.  And a more senior guy in my department named Anurup Pruthi [ph.] suggested that I go speak to him, and I just sorta told him about what I was thinking, and he told me that he had a project, which he wanted to start looking at how HR can become a business partner; long story short, he recruited me into human resources as a--as an analyst, a human resources analyst.  And then a year later, I think, year after that, he decided to retire, and I didn't feel like I'd really gotten my footing.  You know, Reebok was another very political, interesting place, not as much race issues there, not as many race issues.  And he promoted me into compensation.  So I was a compensation analyst for a little while and again, once--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: What, what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is 2003--'2 [2002], '2--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002] because I was a compensation analyst for maybe six months.
Story_ID: 131253
Speaker 1: There's an organization that I'd, I'd like to talk about in a minute called The Partnership [Inc.].  I don't know if you've ever heard of them.  They're an organization unique to Boston [Massachusetts].  They are twenty years old this year and they were started by some corporate heads in Boston, Mass., to figure out how to stop the, the bleeding in terms of people of color, coming to school here, and then getting on the first thing smoking to get out.  And there were two separate organizations that came together, and that's why they called it The Partnership.  And they were both leaders of color and leaders who were not of color who said how can we--why are they leaving and what can we provide them to help them create a life here?  And they started the leadership program, and it's a year-long program that you go through and you, you, you have a different forum every month, and the forums range from what it's like to live and work in Boston, to preparing yourself to be mentored, to what your leadership style is, to effective networking, so there's all these leadership forums.  You become very close with this class of other young professionals of color who are trying to make a life here, and so you get the sense of community along with some real skills on how to navigate your cultures so that you can be successful.  And so Bennie Wiley [HM Benaree P. Wiley] who was the former CEO of--who should also be interviewed for this--Bennie Wiley who is a former CEO of The Partnership who's also the sister of Sharon Pratt Kelly [HM Sharon Pratt] out of [Washington] D.C., former mayor, right?  She called me and--she and Phil Page [ph.] called me and said there's an opportunity at a commercial real estate firm.  They're looking for someone with human resources and finance background; we don't know anybody else with this mix.  Take the call.  And I said, I'm kinda happy here at Reebok, I think things are going well and they said you should at least take the call.  So I took the call and they described this position that where every--you know, no two days were the same, you were responsible for a million different things, you could pave your own way, work from home at times, a lot of autonomy; it sounded too good to be true.  So it coincided with Jimmie [Jones] retiring and I kinda felt like it was meant to be.  So I became the operations manager for the New England area of Cushman & Wakefield, running the operations, budgets, hiring, firing, accounts receivable, accounts payable, expense tracking, everything you can name.
Story_ID: 131254
Speaker 1: And then maybe about--that was in 2--that was February of 2004 'cause my second son [Cameron Cost] was gonna--I was pregnant when I actually took the job.  So I came in, took the job, maybe--after Cameron was born, a year later, kinda bored just doing the routine stuff.  No two days were alike, but it was really more of the same.  And at the end of the day, I didn't really feel like I was really contributing anything.  You know, finance was a little bit different because people are depending on your reports, they're depending on your analysis, and here, it's--you know, as an operations manager, you have to really be comfortable behind the scenes and sort of out of the way and thankless job and, like, that is great for the right personality type, wasn't for me.  So I started watching the brokers and had a couple brokers come and sit with me and tell me all about what they did, why they got into it, what they like, what they don't like, what do you do literally?  How does--how does a deal come to pass, what, what do you do?  And I went in on a couple pitches, went on a couple tours, and I said this is absolutely for me, this is for me.  So I talked to executive management about it and they weren't really buying it at first, and they kinda tried to pacify me and said, well why don't you take a finance real estate course.  That'll, you know--that's what you can do in the meantime.  And I don't have--I'm not a very patient person either and so that didn't sit well with me and particularly because I was getting in this industry later than most.  Most come in twenty-two, twenty-three years old and grow up in the industry.  So I went out and interviewed with a couple other agencies, got two other job offers, let the word leak out, and all of the sudden, voila, you know, we want you to stay.  If you wanna be a broker here, we're gonna make it happen for you.  And in April of last year, of 2006, I transitioned into commercial brokerage.  Interestingly enough, and Marty Nee, our PR [public relations] person here--some--or our marketing guy walked into his office and said, you know she's the first black broker at a major firm and he said, no.  And he said, I don't know, I could be wrong, but I'm pretty sure that's true.  So Marty brought it up to me and I said, I'm pretty sure that's the case.  I don't know who's been--who's come and gone, but I'm pretty sure that's the case.  And so they called NEWiRE, which is the New England Women in Real Estate, they called the Commercial Brokers Association, they called all these organizations saying who do you have of color?  And nobody.  So they called the Boston Globe and they thought it was a story, so I interviewed with the Boston Globe, and on April---I don't know what date it was, 21st or so, whatever, I appear on the front page of the business section (laughter), which was very funny.  Cushman [& Wakefield] hires black broker or something like that, it said black female broker.  And, and I think there's one--there was one other gentleman but I'm not sure how he identifies himself, so I think they left it at female, black female broker, so I'm the first black female broker at a major firm and the only one still in Boston [Massachusetts], which is sad on both sides.  I don't blame the real estate industry totally.  It's partly an exposure issue too, I think.
Speaker 2: Now, it's, it's--from what I read, it's, it's not an easy field to get into because of some of the race relations problems in Boston.
Speaker 1: It's--I think it's--there's so many different facets to this I think.  You'll, you'll probably never see a want ad for a broker or a classified because brokers hire brokers.  They don't interview, they don't go through a process.  A broker hires, you know--they hire the kid that kept calling them fifty times.  They hire the kid they keep running into that--so there's a network, and if you're not in it, then you don't show up on the radar.  But also, it's a team sport, so if your team doesn't see you or--yeah, if they don't see you, if you're not someone they can see on their team, trusting, trusting you with splits and fees and information, and hard--being a hard worker, so that's where I think some of the race relations 'cause I think there's some stereotypes that come with certain people of color that they're kinda like, not really sure, maybe operations, maybe human resources, maybe admin, not sure about broker.  So it was kind of fun I think coming in and just blowing everyone's expectations out of the water in terms of, you know, hours that I would work and they were like, oh, you have two children, how will you ever, you know all this--there's no way and you're older, and we don't know if--you know, coming from your background, will you work as hard?  And this is stuff that kind of bubbled up.  It's nothing that anyone said to me.  I have one person in particular on the team that is a true, true mentor and he gives it to me straight, and I so appreciate him for that because he keeps me knowing--he, he has to--he decodes for me, right--in an all-white-male universe, he decodes, which is nice.
Story_ID: 131255
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So what, what are the--some of the things that you have had to learn, I guess, to be able to operate in this all-white-male universe?
Speaker 2: Definitely connecting the dots.  You know, Massachusetts in and of itself is a very tightly knit community.  Now, it's segregated and all of these networks operate by themselves, sort of.  So it doesn't really matter, I think, if you're black, white or other.  If you're not from here, you're an outsider.  And if you can't--if your point of reference isn't where you went to high school, where you went to grade school, if you coached so-and-so's kid in hockey, if you--Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts] is a huge one--if you can't touch one of those personally, you have to find another way in or you won't get in.  So I think getting to know people that they know, right?  So that I can drop names.  For instance, when I worked at Reebok, Paul Fireman was the CEO and two years ago when Reebok was sold to Adidas or Ahh-dee-das  if anyone from there picks this up, he retired and, and was going out on his own.  He had his--he already had a, a real estate development company that developed golf courses.  His son ran or runs an organization called the One Family Campaign, and their goal is to end family homelessness in Massachusetts, so I knew that I had to reconnect with all the named players that I knew so that I could drop names and participate on the same level.  Even though I was a junior broker, I had something different to prove.  So I sent out emails to everyone that I knew saying this is what I'm doing, got an email back from Dan Fireman, Paul's son; long story short, my first deal was with Paul Fireman, the former CEO of Reebok.  So doing those sorts of things and attending fundraisers and being able to touch people at high levels.  And, and I think it's a benefit actually that I've been working as long as I have because I do know people who make decisions.  You know, I think I would have a tougher time if I were thirty-six years old coming in with no contacts, no initiative, no poise, no understanding of corporate culture; all of that has groomed me, I think, and made me ripe to be able to enter brand new and to hit the ground running.
Story_ID: 131256
Speaker 1: Walk us through how, how a deal is made and is (laughter)--okay.
Speaker 2: The amazing thing is that I didn't believe when I heard, a deal can come from anywhere at any time.  It could fall out of the sky, meaning, you could go to Starbucks and overhear someone talking about outgrowing space, or you can sit on a board at a nonprofit and--I don't know, just every person you touch has the ability to create a deal.  But basically, it could come from a lot of different ways.  We represent landlords and we represent tenants, so on the landlord side, for instance, myself and two other team members represent the John Hancock Tower, which is the tallest building in Boston [Massachusetts], and for our landlords, we leased a building.  So we go out and we find tenants to lease the building and we negotiate on the best terms for the landlord, helping them to make their underwriting, and to maximize their value on the building so that when they actually sell the building, they can get the most money for it; so that's on the landlord side.  On the tenant side, we take every day nonprofits, financial institutions, anybody you can name.  Let's say a financial institution, we--if someone came to me--if you were the head of a financial institution and you said, hey listen, I'm starting in--I'm based in Chicago [Illinois], I'm starting a new branch in Boston, we're gonna have about twenty people, I need ten offices, five cubes, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, ten thousand square feet.  You basically take them out on a tour, so--our, our value is really in our knowledge of the market, so being able to help them be strategic about their real estate decisions.  What do you need?  Do you need public transportation?  Do you need amenities?  Who do you need to be close to?  Where do you wanna be?  So you go through this process of understanding who they are and what makes sense for them, take 'em out on a tour.  They find a couple buildings they love, you submit a request for proposal.  They come back, you evaluate your best option, negotiate the best terms, sign the lease, off they go.
Speaker 1: Okay. But--
Speaker 2: To put it simply.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now does this match the--your vision of deal-making when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: On every level.  My sister [Tiffany Hairston Lindsey] and I laugh about it.  From the fundraising events that I go to, to sitting on boards, to talking the market with people in private equity firms, like--it, it absolutely hits on every cylinder.  I think I've arrived (laughter) for this phase of my life anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 131257
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about a, a big deal you made or?
Speaker 2: I haven't made any huge deals.  In, in commercial real estate, it takes three to five years to ramp up.  I did close my first deal within six months, which is unheard of.  I work on an agency deal, the John Hancock Tower.  So normally brokers starting out would not work on a deal, a agency like the John Hancock, so that's been quite an experience.  But mostly right now, I'm just building the pipeline and, again, breaking through in the networks.  I think the most challenge part and interesting for me is figuring out how to get in because it is a very tightly knit networked city and industry.  So everybody knows everybody.  They have the--you know, I don't get invited for drinks and that could be because I'm a mother of two, because I'm older--I'm not sure what that is.  But trying to figure out those social networks and find my place without being something that I'm not, which is twenty-three.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, for instance, what would you do to, I guess to--what, what things do you do that make up for, you know, that lack of--those lack of connections?  Now--I mean, you, you do have connections--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I understand--yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, but what would you typically talk about or, or raise?
Speaker 2: I think mostly I try to stick to market knowledge or personal things.  So a lot of the people that I touch are parents.  A lot of them played golf, they like sports, they--some of them into--are into sailing.  It's interesting, once you get to know people and you take them out of the box that you put them in, sometimes you find that they're as silly as you, that they like a show that you never thought they would've watched, so just different commonalities, I think, that I try to make a connection on a human level and find some commonalities.  And then, oh by the way, I know the market, too, so it's kind of a benefit.  A lot of times, they're not expecting it, which is kind of a nice--I like when that aha moment happens, like, I think she might actually know what she's talking about.  So, I think, just getting out as much as I can.  I got to lots of fundraisers.  I try to participate in a lot of community activities.  I sit on a couple boards.  I have lots of lunches and dinners.  I have--I invite people to lunch all the time no matter what level they are.  They worst they can say is no.  And I think just, I'm gonna be successful, and so it's just a matter of the strategy to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do, do you think that--are, are there other--now, you're one of like two?  Two black women or two, two blacks?
Speaker 2: There's no other black women.
Speaker 1: There, there, there are no other black women at all?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  There's, there's a gentleman of color, I just--I'm not sure.  He's French and he's something.  I don't--I don't think he identifies himself as a black man, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--I'm one of one or one of two.
Story_ID: 131258
Speaker 1: Now at your age, you're, you're fairly young.  Now, do you--what, what do you see yourself doing in the future?  I mean, beyond this.  Not, not, not that you have reached the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --height of this yet, but you're--you said it's gonna take about five years to really get where you wanna be here, right?
Speaker 2: I'm on the three-year program.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They say five, I say three, so I think I'm well on my way to three.  But I suspect that--I mean, I don't know, maybe after fifteen years of doing this if I had to guess, I wanna definitely go on the public speaking circuit.  I think I have a higher calling, if you will, to motivate--motivate is such a overused word, but motivate women.  I actually on the side run a company called Evidently Assured and it's a image development company that I started to--because what I noticed was and particularly for people of color, but not always, sometimes people get hindered or derailed in their careers based on image and not because of their technical abilities.  You know, Dale Carnegie I think did something said 85 percent of succeeding are people skills and only 20 percent are technical skills.  And so sometimes it could be someone that's abrasive or someone that doesn't communicate very well, someone who doesn't understand the social fabric of being in corporate America, so all these different things--someone who promises things and doesn't do what they say they're gonna do, so then their character is questioned, integrity.  And so I looked at this whole picture and I said, what, what makes up your image?  And I thought it was your appearance, the way you communicate, and your character, and so based on those three things, I developed this workshop that I deliver primarily to young professionals who are coming up to say this is--this is how these things are perceived.  Now, I don't tell--I don't give you a right or wrong.  At the end of the day, it's your choice how you behave, how you come across, but I provide experiences and perspectives on how certain things might come across and what you can do to level the playing field, so to speak, as much as you can without painting yourself a different color, but level the playing field so that when you walk in the door, you're already--you're already just dismissing ten different stereotypes before you open your mouth.  And then when you open your mouth, they're even more--you know, you sort of keep going until they actually wanna get to know you and they trust the work that you do because they see--they see what you can do.  There's a reason I started talking about Evidently Assured.  So, ultimately, I'd love to continue that work on the public speaking circuit.  I do it now from time to time as time permits.  I've spoken at Boston College High School [Boston, Massachusetts], The Partnership, done some stuff for the Boston Public Schools, just spoke at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts].  I'll be speaking at Suffolk University Law School [Boston, Massachusetts] at the end of the month.
Story_ID: 131259
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: So that's what I wanna do fifteen--ten, fifteen years from now.  I'd like to write a book and be on the speaker circuit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do that exclusively you think?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I don't know.  Now, another thing that I enjoy is helping--I guess it's all related to the image, helping startups get connected, so networking, letting them touch the right people.  This is who you need to know, this is--you know, if you've ever read 'The Tipping Point' [Malcolm Gladwell] I think I have a little connector in me where I just--you know, if I think two people should meet, I make the introduction and hope that they find a way to, to work together, kinda like a broker of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Okay.
Story_ID: 131260
Speaker 1: I guess what advice would you give the--to somebody young who wants to get involved at, at the level that you're, you're at right now as a broker or as a--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I definitely say get a mentor, you know, someone who's doing it well and who's highly respected, and be open to change 'cause I think you're not always gonna wanna hear where you're getting it wrong, but it's really the only way that you can redirect yourself and start heading in the right direction.  And don't be afraid to take risks.  I mean, if it's something that you wanna do and you don't get it right the first time, just try it again and do it little bit differently until you get there.  I, I can't even stress, like--there's a program during The Partnership program, it's a three-day workshop called efficacy, and in that program, they dismantle all the beliefs you have about learning and about what you're capable of, and about your inabilities and how smart you think you are or you aren't, and once, once you have this moment--there's fifteen hundred of us that have gone through The Partnership, and I'd probably say fourteen hundred had a aha moment.  Then, I'd probably say five hundred of us were changed forever, where no is not really an option.  You can't do it, not really an option.  It's almost like--I like the analogy in 'Memoirs of a Geisha' [Arthur Golden] where the woman said--the young woman said that an older woman had referred to her as water because water, once it gets someplace and it can't get through, it'll just keep going around and down and through the crevices until it finds a way to get there.  And I think--I think you have to be like water.  You know, you come to the brick.  You just got--sometimes you have to go through it, over it, under it, around it, but if, if your destination is where you wanna go, what's the alternative?  To stay where you are? (Shakes head no).
Story_ID: 131261
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: That's a big question.  Concerns I have?  I think--and I'm, I'm gonna have to speak in generalities because I think there's obviously, again, all types of people.  But for the majority, and maybe they're not the majority but they appear to be because they're so, so visible, are the teenagers coming up, and even up through maybe some of the uneducated, not necessarily formal education, but just unaware black people who just don't get it.  And it's, it's--this is always a difficult subject for me.  My husband [Donald M. Cost] and I come from different backgrounds.  So my mom [Veronica Hairston]--we lived in a middle-class neighborhood.  She worked two jobs.  We got a taste of private school.  My mother always corrected our English.  We always had public speaking opportunities.  We grew up in the church, so we had all these opportunities.  We had people who, you know--that's how I got into Baldi [Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know.  My mother did her network, worked her network to get us in.  And my husband grew up very differently, so his perspective on why people behave the way they do, he has a higher tolerance for it than I do.  So it's not acceptable to him, but he sort of understands it because he feels like he--you know, he and his twin sister just made it out.  And, you know, they went on to college.  His sister has her master's degree; she's doing very well.  He's doing very well.  But they're pretty much it out of their--even the ones that are younger than them.  And so I understand, I think that the behavior comes from wanting to be noticed and finding a way to exert power where you feel like you're powerless in a world, but we just--the problem is so overwhelming.  We just have to figure out how to help them to find their place and to--and to find a place where they feel powerful and empowered to make decisions, to change the direction of their lives, to behave differently, to know that education is for them, so this efficacy thing that I'm talking about--you know, maybe one day I'd like to head the Efficacy Institute.  I'm a huge, huge believer in the efficacy principle and they're actually doing a lot of work throughout the country where they're seeing results where they're changing the, the behavior and the understanding of these children in terms of what they can learn, and these children are having these--the same aha moments we had as adults going through the program, they're having as children in a math class.  That's--they're proving to themselves that black people can learn math.  All black people are not good at--but, you know, they bought that.  Society bought it.  Even, even some black parents have bought it.  You know, I've heard--I have a friend whose son is a C student in math.  He's just not applying himself.  And she said that she had a conversation, which this just gave me a ball in the pit of my stomach.  She had a conversation with his teacher and his teacher said to her, some students just aren't good in math.  He's a C student and it's okay.  And she said, whew, thank goodness.  Now I don't have to worry.  He's just a C student; that explains it, drove me insane.  And, you know, that math and science are easy to target, but it could be behavior, you know.  Black people aren't expected to know how to talk, the whole articulate comment that happens all the time.  It happens to me on a regular, regular--it's, it's funny at this point.  You speak so well.  You're so articulate.  You speak so well.  You're so articulate.  And it's unfortunate because they--their experience has been the news or maybe the kids that hang out in Downtown Crossing who just have--they have a clue, but this is what they're choosing.  So we have--you know, we have to figure out how to help them choose something different and find that tipping point that makes it cool to be smart.  So I'm, I'm deeply concerned.  I'm deeply concerned that we won't be able to compete on a global basis, the United States generally speaking and then trickling down to people of color.  And--yeah, I think we have to stop making some stuff acceptable and some stuff--you know, it's like we define it based on our circumstance.  You know, a friend of mine said that her pastor once told--said to the congregation, you adjust your values based on your actions, so you make it--for whatever you're doing, you make it okay.  You change your value to make your action okay.  And it, it just can't be.  You know, I'm all for diversity and, and expressing yourself as an individual, but I, I still think on--there have to be some standards.  When I was in operations and I would watch some of the people come through the door and how they would speak in their interviews, and what they'd be wearing, and I'm just confused, I guess.  You know, we're missing--we're missing something, and I think part of it is my generation has been criticized, and I don't know that I disagree for being very individualistic, very me-focused, so where it's sort of resting on the laws of our parents who fought in the Civil Rights Movement and gained us access or so we feel to corporate jobs, to different ways of living.  And, and now we're not sharing as much, we're not providing.  So now we're taking that access and that wealth and we're just giving our children stuff.  So we're not creating good character, you know.  We're not making good contributors to society.  We're just sort of making these people who have this sense of entitlement.  And I'm--we're trying.  My husband and I are trying, you know, to do it the Bill Cosby way.  Remembering the Huxtables, you know, he kept a lot of the traditional values in place, but there--yeah, there's definitely a lot of symptoms.
Story_ID: 131262
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to go back to something you said earlier, and I was--I was wondering if you could give me an example of a time where you had to be water and get through to where you wanted to go despite the obstacles.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd say a couple times.  Most recent, the Evidently Assured was a--I'd never done any major public speaking before that, and my husband and I weren't in a position where I could just quit my job and do it.  So as loving and as wonderful as he is, we're completely different in that I'm the risk-taker.  You know, I sort of have that belief that I'm gonna land on my feet no matter what.  I might screw it up along the way, but I'll learn from it, I'll do it again, I'll find out it's not for me.  What's the worst that can happen?  And so he says, you know, how do you know you can do it?  You're just gonna get up in front of those people and talk?  And--you know, and then when I went to a couple people to offer the workshop, you know, they said, oh, you know, no thank you, we don't really see image as a problem.  So it was sort of just navigating, adjusting the workshop, finally getting The Partnership to allow me--and I think because I changed pitch.  I wasn't getting my message across properly, so I had to just continue to kinda mold it and shape it until it was palatable, and it was something that people said, right, yeah, that's, that's exactly what's happening and I see it with my young associates.  And can you, by the way, come talk to them?  And I think the, the biggest example in my life has been brokerage, just getting into commercial brokerage.  I was--even from my most supportive mentors, told me don't do it.  They said, oh, it's an all-white-male world, you're--you know, you're on a good track.  You--you know, you're comfortable, you have 401K, and life is good, you have two kids to provide for, don't do it, don't do it.  And some people said it's gonna--you know, it's a tough business and it's relationship-driven, and you're not from Boston [Massachusetts], and you're--you know, every, every negative--every negative piece of advice that I could've been given I was given, but I'd already decided.  I'd already decided that I was gonna get there.  So my goal at that point was just to figure out how.  And my husband says that all the time, so if he comes across something, you know, any situation.  If he say I wanna buy a new house next year, but we can't--today, financially, we couldn't afford to get the new house.  If I--he'll say I really, really want a house because he knows that I'm gonna make it possible for us to get a house.  And not that--I don't wanna make him seem like a slacker but, again, he is--he's the steady one.  So he's at--you know, he's been at his job for fifteen years, he really likes it.  We have some rental properties that he manages.  He picks up and--picks up and drops off the boys for these three years that I'm in this kind of time of working long hours, but also I'm always working on the next level, how to get to the next thing, how do you get to the next thing.  So I think--I think I probably exhibit that on a--just any regular basis.  Any time there's something that I wanna get done, even if it's a deal that I can't get done.  Granted, some deals won't get done, but if it's a person that I really wanna get to, a piece of business I think that I really deserve, I'm gonna get it.
Story_ID: 131263
Speaker 1: Now, is--when you look back on the things you've done to this point, is there any major decision that you would do differently if you had to do it over again?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I might have--I might've gone straight through to grad school because I wanna go back to grad school but it's more for my own edification.  I don't think--it's--I don't need it in my job.  It doesn't give you any--it gives you nothing in commercial real estate because unless you--you can have an MBA, but if you don't know who sold 200 State [Street, Boston, Massachusetts], who bought it for how much, what the rents are going up to, you can be a twice over MBA at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and no one would care.  But it--I think it's just gonna take me a little bit.  I'm gonna have to do that a little bit later in life.  And I'm--see, I, I don't know if I would've gotten into brokerage had I not started in operations 'cause I was gonna say I would've given myself a two-year head start, but brokerage really wasn't really an option when I left Reebok.  I probably wouldn't have stayed in finance for so long.  You know, it's helpful because I understand the P and L's and the balance sheets, and that the occupancy costs are second--the second largest line item but, you know, brokers can learn and understand that stuff.  But I bring a different perspective that I appreciate, so I wouldn't wipe it all away, but I think I might've gotten out a little bit earlier.  But it's all about timing, 'cause the operations job wouldn't have been available at that time.  Hence, I wouldn't have had the opportunity to slide into brokerage.  If I had just walked in one day at Cushman & Wakefield and said I wanna be a broker, I would not be a broker today.
Story_ID: 131264
Speaker 1: Also, if--when you look at everything you've done at this point, what, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Aside from my children [Christopher and Cameron Cost]?
Speaker 1: Oh, your children, yeah, that's--that's certainly--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for sure.  I--for all the wonderful things that my mother [Veronica Hairston] did right, you know, there's some things that I'd like them to have that I got later.  But my legacy, I guess--I think, one, that I pushed the envelope, two, the efficacy principle, you know.  I wanna change the outcome of the education system in the United States so that every teacher, every adult believes that every child is capable unless they have a valid learning disability.  ADD [ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder] is not an excuse, sugar, color, age, background--we, we have--yeah, we have to expect more of the children and they have to feel it because they'll behave the way we expect them to.
Story_ID: 131265
Speaker 1: Now, you've talked about your husband [Donald M. Cost] and your, your two--you got two, two sons, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  I married--as I mentioned earlier in the interview, I met Donald on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] on vacation.  The Fourth of July [July 4] was a popular time for young black folks on Martha's Vineyard, so every year, there'd be this young, between college and early professional crowd that would congregate there and just enjoy life.  So I met Donald there, got married, was married for two years and then had our first son, Christopher Mason Cost, so he has my mother's maiden name, and he was born July 10, 2002, and Christopher is probably more like me at this point.  He doesn't believe anything unless you prove it to the point where if he asks for--if he says, mom can I have a cookie?  And I'll say, Christopher, we don't have any more cookies.  He'll say, can you open that cabinet so that I can see?  And then there's no more cookies, right?  Or if he sees something on Animal Planet and he knows it to be true, you know, he got a snippet or whatever it is, so that proved to him that blue whales migrate in, I don't know, whatever month, August.  And I say, I think blue whales migrate in November.  He goes, no, blue, blue whales migrate in August.  Dad, can you turn on the Discovery Channel so mom can--so he--he's very adamant and he--and if you prove him wrong, he'll go, sorry, you know, he'll back off.  But it has to be proven, so I just--he was two and a half weeks early, he's hasty, he's impatient, he's me as a child.  I'm hoping with age, much like myself, he won't--you know, I don't know if patience will ever be our strong suit, but that we'll understand that you need it to get ahead and to--and to not be stressed all the time.  And the confidence, I think he has--he has a lot of confidence, probably a surplus, you know.  He could probably scale back on it a little bit for now.  And then two years later on July 16, 2004, I had my son, Cameron McKeithan Cost, and that's my husband's mother's maiden name.  So they both ended up being CMC's.  Cameron came two days late, which is very--his personality is very laid back.  He's always happy.  He's not very patient, but he's--he defers to Christopher and it could be--a lot of it could be the second child syndrome, sort of.  And they're--you know, they're very close, and Donald's a great dad.  He's a super, super supportive dad.  And he didn't have a relationship with his father.  His father is still around, but he wasn't really in his life.  So I think he's really making sure that he gives a double dose of TLC [tender loving care] to his boys.
Story_ID: 131266
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm so sure I'm gonna regret this moment when I can't think of anything.  No, I guess we covered all of it.  I didn't talk about friendships at all.  I don't know how important they are in this interview, but--
Speaker 1: Well, they're important, so--
Speaker 2: --I have--yeah, well I, I just have a few--well, one friend in particular that I went to college with.  I met her at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and she was such a huge influence.  She was two weeks younger than me, but just a lot older in terms of how wise she was.  And when she was twenty-seven, she got breast cancer, and she was a very spiritual woman, had a strong relationship with the Lord, and she was in my wedding, and just a ray of sunshine.  And the interesting thing is, my mother [Veronica Hairston] always likened--and ultimately, she--the breast cancer came back after she was in remission and she passed away at twenty-nine.  But my, my mom likens her to like--she calls her this ball of light that ultimately exploded, and that was sort of her passing.  But she used to be a really sort of rough, neighborhood--but always smart, always As in school, really, really smart, but she wore the big earrings and the sweat suits, and braids in her hair, and that was--that was--I met her freshman year of college.  And then the next year, she was a little bit more refined, and the next year, she was a little bit more refined.  She just started shedding this kinda child-like look.  And then--and her name was Daynese Jimerson [Daynese Jimerson-Forsey], and she--
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell Daynese?
Speaker 2: D-A-Y-N-E-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she graduated--you know, she had a job before she graduated at PricewaterhouseCoopers [PwC], so she had her business cards at graduation.  She was a pistol, passed her CPA [Certified Public Accountant] exam first, first try.  And she got married and--but she, she just--every year, she just became more refined, more gentle, more loving, more encouraging, more of a rock, more of a sounding board.  She just--I don't know, it was just--you know, my mother said it and just sort of thinking back, it's exactly what happened and so she was at her height.  I mean, I don't know how much better she could've gotten, how many lives she could've impacted.  I think at her going home service, there must've been easily a thousand people.  And for every segment of her life when somebody got up and spoke about her, you would've thought that they were the only person in her life.  So she was able to make every person feel like they were the only person in, in their lives, and she was just--she was a good person to talk to and she was also, again, very wise, so she helped me make a lot of--a lot of decisions.  You know, when things didn't feel quite right, I'd run 'em by her, and she'd usually send me on the right--in the right direction, but I would say that's it.
Story_ID: 131267
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think as someone who was there for people, and I know that's cliche-ish-ist, but I'd like to think that when, when I see that people have a need that I show up and I would like to think that when people call upon me that I answer the call.  Definitely someone who pushed the envelope, pushed the limits, and enjoyed all the different and various opportunities that life had to offer.  Yeah.  Someone who refused not to be content.  So someone said to me, if you can't change your environment, change your environment.
Story_ID: 131268
Speaker 1: This is me, Monica Diane Cost, and my husband, Donald Mandel [ph.] Cost, on our wedding day, getting married at the Old South Union Church in Weymouth, Massachusetts, on October 8, 1999.
Speaker 2: This is me and my sister, Tiffany Hairston, and my Aunt Marion McCord [ph.], on my graduation day [from Temple University] in June of 1988, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother on my father's side, Mary Elma Riley Hairston, and I'm not sure exactly when this picture was taken, probably in the 19--can't be '40s [1940s], 1920s maybe?  Or 1930s?
Speaker 1: This is me and my Aunt Ruth, Ruth Graves [ph.].  She is my dad's sister, and I suspect this was taken in 1993.
Speaker 2: This is me at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] with two of my nearest and dearest friends in 1990.  Daynese Jimerson [Daynese Jimserson-Forsey] is the woman in the middle.  Unfortunately, she passed away of breast cancer at age twenty-nine, and Kimberly Shells [ph.].  All of us were also in the same sorority, Delta Sigma Theta.
Speaker 1: This is my wonderful and loving family in nine--no, in 2003, in Aruba on vacation.  I'm holding my son, Christopher Mason Cost, and my husband, Donald Mandel Cost, is next to me in the orange shirt, and my son, Cameron McKeithan Cost, is in the yellow shirt, and their godfather, Kevin Joyner [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is my wonderful and talented mother, Veronica Hairston, Veronica Mason Hairston.  This picture is her high school graduation, and I believe it was taken in 1966 or 1965.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  Um-hum.  This teeny, tiny baby is me, I suspect a couple hours old or probably no more than a day old in nine--January of 1971.
Speaker 1: This is my sister, Tiffany Hairston Lindsey [ph.], and her husband, Marlon Lindsey, on their wedding day, March 29, 1999.
Speaker 2: This is my grandfather, Chalmers Hairston II, and I'm not exactly sure when this picture was taken.  If I had to guess, I'd probably say in the 19--late 1920s or early nine--no, 1940s.
Story_ID: 131269
Speaker 1: This is me at age four, 1975 in [Samson Freedman] Pre-School, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my great-grandfather, Chalmers Hairston I.  He was a dentist and I am not sure what year this picture was taken.
Speaker 2: This is me and my line sisters pledging Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority] at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] in the spring of 1990.  I am the top one, two, three, four, five, the sixth one from the left at the top.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother and grandfather.  Addie Mason [ph.] is my grandmother on the left and Jewel Mason [ph.] is on the right.  This picture I think was taken in 1983 or four [1984] possibly in Alabama.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the 2001 article in the Boston Herald for the 20--the 2001 class of Boston [Massachusetts] future leaders, those that are making black history right now.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Second from the left in the back.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My husband likes that one better.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: He likes anything with more hair.
